Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-7]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.11) of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation
for the Township of Newtown, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 172, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Newtown,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Newtown," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-5 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-7 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-17 below.
§ 1-3. Interpretation.
In the construction of the Code of the Township of Newtown, the following
rules shall control, except those inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Board of Supervisors as disclosed in a particular provision, section or code:
A. CALENDAR — COMPUTATION OF TIME — The terms "month" and
"year" mean the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days
within which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except if the
last be Sunday it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours the
whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
B. CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Newtown
Township, Pennsylvania.
1. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66601.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
C. CONJUNCTIONS — "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the
sense so requires.
D. COUNTY — Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
E. GENDER — Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied
to the feminine and neuter genders.
F. GENERAL RULE:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and phrases
shall be construed according to the common usage of language.
However, technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a special meaning in the law, shall be construed according
to such technical or special meaning.
(2) Whenever, in the Code of the Township of Newtown, authority is
given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such
authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at the
instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate unless contrary
to law or to the clear intent of such particular provision.
G. NUMBER — Words in the plural include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural number.
H. OWNER — When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner or tenant-in-common of the whole or any part of such property.
I. PERSON — Extends to and applied to associations, clubs, corporations,
firms and partnerships, as well as to individuals.
J. PREMISES — When used as applicable to property, extends to and
includes land and buildings.
K. PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Extends to and includes the Marple-Newtown
School Board, the Township, the county, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the United States of America and any duly authorized
public official.
L. PROPERTY — Includes real and personal, and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. The words "personal property" include
every kind of property except real property. The words "real property"
include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
M. REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where provision is made for an act
to be done or notice to be given within a reasonable time, it shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such act or giving of such notice.
N. STATE and COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
O. STREET and ROAD — Includes avenues, alleys, courts, boulevards,
lanes, roads, streets and other public ways and squares in the
Township.
§ 1-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 1-3
1:4
§ 1-4. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Newtown and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-17 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-5. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-4 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-4 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
P. BOARD OF SUPERVISORS or SUPERVISORS — The Board of
Supervisors of Newtown Township, Pennsylvania.
Q. TENANT or OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, shall extend
and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who
occupies the whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with
others.
R. TENSES — The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future
tense.
S. TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — Newtown Township, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 12, 1995.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
§ 1-6. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-5A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-7. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for the construction or reconstruction or
opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
§ 1-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 1-7
1:6
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-8. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-9. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-10. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-12. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties.
Whenever in the Code of the Township of Newtown or in any ordinance of
the Township any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense, or whenever in the Code or any ordinance the doing of any act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is otherwise provided for, the violator of any such provision
or ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days.
§ 1-11 NEWTOWN CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-16. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-17. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 26, 1995.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 1-17
1:10
ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 139 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 5-1. Intent to organize.
The Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township, constituting the
"Municipal Authority" of the Township as defined in the Municipality
Authorities Act of 19452 (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented), hereby signifies its intention to organize an Authority under
the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945.
§ 5-2. Name; Articles of Incorporation.
The name of the proposed Authority shall be "Newtown Township, Delaware
County, Sewer Authority." In pursuance of such intention, the Articles of
Incorporation of the Authority are hereby approved and adopted by the
Board of Supervisors in the form attached to Ordinance No. 1961-3.
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
NEWTOWN TOWNSHIP, DELAWARE COUNTY, SEWER AUTHORITY
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945"3 (the Act
of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented), the Township
of Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to an ordinance
duly enacted by its Board of Supervisors authorizing and directing the
formation of an Authority under said Act, DOES HEREBY CERTIFY:
(a) The name of the Authority shall be "Newtown Township, Delaware
County, Municipal Authority." [Amended 12-1-1986 by Res. No.
1986-24]
2. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:11
(b) The said Authority is formed under the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945" (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented), and said Authority shall be for the purpose of
acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and
operating, owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee,
for the Township of Newtown (the "Township"): (i) land, buildings and
structures for the conduct of Township meetings, the administration
of municipal government, the operation of the police and other
departments of the Township government, and the housing, operation
and repair of municipal vehicles, equipment and other property, parks
and recreation facilities, or any other use as authorized by the
Township; (ii) equipment to be leased to the Township; and (iii) sewers,
sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including
works for treating and disposing of industrial waste, for the Township
and for such other territory as it may be authorized to serve.
[Amended 12-1-1986 by Res. No. 1986-24; 2-13-1989 by Res.
No. 1989-4]
(c) No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L.
463, or is in existence in or for the said Township of Newtown.
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of
Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania; and the names and
addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
John I. Gable 8 Reese Avenue
Newtown Square, PA
Irvin H. Niemeyer 3700 Gradyville Road
Newtown Square, PA
George W. Reed 3117 Green Valley Road
Newtown Square, PA
(e) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority are as follows:
NAME ADDRESS TERM OF OFFICE
Warren A Hunter 3752 School Lane
Newtown Square, PA
5 years
Vram Nedurian, Jr. Fourth and Malley
Roads
Newtown Square, PA
4 years
Ralph B. Johansen 150 Beechwood Road
Newtown Square, PA
3 years
§ 5-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 5-2
1:12
NAME ADDRESS TERM OF OFFICE
C. Edward Weaver 3416 Horton Road
Newtown Square, PA
2 years
Marius M. Nelson, Jr. 29 Delmont Road
Newtown Square, PA
1 year
The terms of office of the first members of said Authority shall commence
on the date of appointment and shall be computed from the first day of
January 1962.
(f) The term of existence of the Newtown Township, Delaware County,
Municipal Authority shall expire June 30, 2026, unless sooner
terminated by operation of law. [Added 12-1-1986 by Res. No.
1986-24]
In WITNESS WHEREOF, the Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, has caused these Articles of Incorporation to be duly
executed on behalf of said Township by its proper officers hereunto duly
authorized and under its municipal seal, this 24th day of July 1961.
SEAL TOWNSHIP OF NEWTOWN
ATTEST:
Secretary
By:
Chairman
Supervisor
Supervisor
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA :
: SS.
COUNTY OF DELAWARE :
On this 25th day of July 1961, before me, a notary public in and for
the said commonwealth and county, personally appeared the above-named
IRVIN H. NIEMEYER, JOHN I. GABLE, GEORGE W. REED and DANIEL
W. LLEWELLYN, whose official position in the Township of Newtown,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, are respectively Chairman and members
of the Board of Supervisors of said Township and the Secretary of said
Township, and who, in due form of law, acknowledged the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation to be the act and deed of the Township of
Newtown for the purposes therein specified.
Notary Public
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:13
Approved and filed in the Department of State on the 7th day of August
1961 A.D.
Secretary of the Commonwealth
§ 5-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 5-2
1:14
Chapter 8
BARTRAM BRIDGE JOINT PRESERVATION BOARD
§ 8-1. Approval.
The following intergovernmental agreement with Willistown Township,
Chester County, is approved.
§ 8-2. Creation.
There is hereby created the Bartram Bridge Joint Preservation Board. This
Board shall have the organization, powers and duties set out in this
agreement.
§ 8-3. Powers and duties.
The Joint Preservation Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 8-4. Membership and organization.
The membership and organization of the Joint Board shall be as follows:
A. The Board shall formulate, advise, recommend and promote to the
respective governing bodies of Newtown and Willistown policies for the
management, use and preservation of the Bartram Covered Bridge.
B. The Board shall identify problems and recommend plans and programs
to the respective governing bodies of Newtown and Willistown for the
repair, supervision, operation and maintenance of the Bartram Covered
Bridge.
C. The Board shall endeavor to take advantage of such federal, state,
county and local programs of assistance for the establishment,
administration, maintenance and operation of sites of established
historical, architectural or aesthetic value, including education
services, exchange of information, assignment of technical personnel,
planning assistance and coordination and any other program of
assistance as may seem to the Board and the respective governing
bodies of Newtown and Willistown to be advantageous.
A. The Board shall consist of five members. Two members shall be
appointed by the governing body of Willistown Township and two
members shall be appointed by the governing body of Newtown
Township. The fifth member shall be appointed by the other four
members. The fifth member shall be a resident of Newtown or
Willistown Township, and the position will alternate between said
townships every two years. Members shall serve for terms of two years
each, provided that the first members selected shall draw lots so that
two shall serve for one year and three shall serve for two years.
Thereafter, members shall serve for two-year staggered terms. At least
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:15
§ 8-5. Budget; funds.
The Joint Board shall prepare an annual budget, listing anticipated money
to be received and anticipated costs to be paid out. The Joint Board shall
have such funds as are provided to it from time to time by Newtown and
Willistown, such funds as it can raise by providing charges for its services
and programs and such funds as may be donated to the Board. The Joint
Board shall submit a detailed written itemized budget proposal to the
governing bodies of Newtown and Willistown no later than October 1 of
each calender year.
§ 8-6. Records; annual review.
The Joint Board shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual written report to the governing bodies of Newtown and
Willistown and generally make the report known and available.
one member from each municipality shall serve a one-year term. All
terms shall expire December 31 of each calendar year. [Amended
2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-1]
B. Vacancies. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner
that original appointments are made for the four members appointed by
the governing bodies. If a vacancy exists with the fifth member, the
Township in which the fifth member resides will present two names to
the Board for consideration for the membership for the balance of the
unexpired term of office. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-1]
C. Meetings. The Joint Board shall hold regular meetings, open to the
public and held in the Municipal Building. Special meetings may be
called by the Chairman or by any two members, by written notice, at
least five days before the meeting. Notice of all regular and special
meetings shall be provided in the same manner as notices of meetings
of the governing bodies of the respective townships. The Joint Board
shall provide notice of any such meetings to the respective Township
Secretaries at least five days before the meeting.
D. Compensation. Members of the Joint Board shall serve without pay,
provided that they may be reimbursed for actual out-of-pocket expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their
duties.
E. Officers. The members of the Joint Board shall select one of their
members as Chairman, one as Vice Chairman and one of their members
as Secretary. Officers will serve for a one-year term of office, such term
to expire the first Monday of January of each calendar year. [Amended
2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-1]
F. Quorum and voting. An affirmative vote of at least three members shall
be required to pass any measure. Three members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum.
§ 8-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 8-7
1:16
§ 8-7. Withdrawal of participation.
The Joint Board shall continue in existence until either Newtown or
Willistown passes an ordinance withdrawing its participation in the Joint
Board. Participation may be canceled only by giving notice at least 90 days
before the end of any fiscal year of the Board, to be effective no earlier than
the end of the fiscal year. No such notice shall relieve any municipality from
an obligation of providing funds previously agreed to be paid to the Joint
Board. The fiscal year of the Board shall be January 1 to December 31.
§ 8-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as abolishing or limiting any
existing municipal agency, board, authority or commission, even though
such agency, board, authority or commission may have a responsibility
related to the responsibilities delegated to the Joint Board hereunder.
§ 8-9. Exercise of powers.
The parties understand that their respective powers to enter into this
agreement may be exercised only by the adoption of ordinances by the
governing bodies of both of them in the manner mandated by law. Both
parties either represent that all such procedures and actions have been
taken for the adoption of such an ordinance or agree that all procedures or
actions necessary or advisable in order to adopt such ordinances shall be
taken as promptly as possible.
Chapter 12
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-9
1:17

ARTICLE I
Crum and Ridley Creeks Council of Governments
[Adopted 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-3]
§ 12-1. Membership.
§ 12-2. Bylaws.
The conditions of the agreement, the manner and extent of financing the
agreement, the duration of the term of the agreement and the
organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement are as
specified within the bylaws of the Crum and Ridley Creeks Council of
Governments, which are set forth in Appendix A and made a part hereof.4
§ 12-3. Appropriation of funds.
There is hereby appropriated from the general fund an amount sufficient
to pay the 1988 annual dues as determined for the Township of Newtown
under the terms of the above-mentioned agreement.
A. Newtown Township elects to become a member of the Crum and Ridley
Creeks Council of Governments.
B. The Township Manager is hereby authorized and directed to take the
necessary actions for the Township of Newtown to become a member of
the Crum and Ridley Creeks Council of Governments.
4. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Bylaws of the Crum and Ridley Creeks Council of Governments,
is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:19

ARTICLE II
Delaware County Consortium of Governments
[Adopted 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02]
§ 12-4. Statutory authority.
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Title 53, §§ 2301 through 2315,
commonly known and referred to as "Act 180, Intergovernmental
Cooperation Law," is the law governing intergovernmental cooperation
within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 12-5. Membership.
Each of the municipalities of Bethel, Concord, Edgmont, Haverford, Marple,
Middletown, Nether Providence, Radnor, Ridley, Springfield, Thornbury,
Upper Chichester, Upper Darby, Upper Providence Township, and Folcroft,
Glenolden, Marcus Hook, Media, Norwood, Ridley Park, Rose Valley,
Rutledge, Sharon Hill, Swarthmore Borough and Newtown Township have
agreed to cooperate with the other governmental or quasi-governmental
units in the execution of those municipal functions deemed by the
aforementioned municipalities to be accomplished best through cooperation
with the other governments or quasi-governmental units.
§ 12-6. Recognition by commonwealth.
The Intergovernmental Cooperation Law5 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania intends that full recognition by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of an agent of intergovernmental cooperation requires said
agent to be established by ordinance by all cooperating units of
governments.
§ 12-7. Objectives.
The aforementioned municipalities desire the Delaware County Consortium
of Governments to be as useful as possible to those municipalities and the
residents thereof.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:21
Chapter 15
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 15-1. Establishment.
The Environmental Advisory Council of Newtown Township is hereby
established.
§ 15-2. Composition; appointment.
The Council shall consist of no fewer than three and no more than seven
members, to be appointed by the Board of Supervisors from time to time, or
at the annual meeting.
§ 15-3. Terms of office; Chairman.
Members shall serve terms of three years, unless otherwise determined
by the Supervisors. The Supervisors shall annually appoint a Chairman to
serve at the pleasure of the Supervisors.
§ 15-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Council shall be those as established by the
authorizing statute, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2324, as it may be amended from time
to time by the commonwealth, unless otherwise determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 15-5. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
shall make an annual report to the Township, which shall be published.
Chapter 21
RECREATION BOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 112.
§ 12-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 15-5
1:22
ARTICLE I
Leisure Services Commission
[Adopted 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 21-1. Establishment.
The Township of Marple and the Township of Newtown hereby establish a
joint recreation commission which shall be known as the "Marple-Newtown
Leisure Services Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission").
§ 21-2. Composition; membership.
§ 21-3. General regulations.
The Leisure Services Commission herein established will be subject to the
following rules and regulations:
A. Said Commission shall consist of nine members, with three to be
appointed by the Commissioners of Marple Township, three to be
appointed by the Supervisors of the Township of Newtown and three to
be appointed by the Board of Directors of the Marple-Newtown School
District. The Township of Marple shall appoint to the Commission one of
the Township Commissioners, and two persons shall be selected at
large. The Township of Newtown shall appoint to the Commission one of
the members of the Board of Supervisors of the Township and shall
appoint two persons at large. The Marple-Newtown School District
shall appoint to the Commission one of its members and one person
each from the Township of Marple and the Township of Newtown.
Initially each of the parties hereto and the Marple-Newtown School
District will each appoint one member to serve on the Commission for
one year, one member to serve for two years and one member to serve
three years, with all successive appointments to be made for a threeyear
term.
B. No compensation shall be paid to the appointed members of the
Recreation Commission, but such members shall be entitled to receive
traveling and other necessary expenses actually incurred in the
performance of their duties.
A. The members of the Commission shall annually elect their own
Chairman and select all other necessary officers, who shall serve for a
period of one year from January 1 to December 31.
B. The Commission shall meet monthly at a time and place established by
it and at such other times as the Chairman may elect to call a meeting.
C. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and all
records kept shall be public records.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3
1:23
§ 21-4. Scope of activities.
The nature and scope of activities of the Commission hereby established
is the planning, administration, supervision, regulation and operation of
cooperative recreation service and programs within the Townships of
Marple and Newtown for the use and benefit of the residents thereof of all
ages.
§ 21-5. Annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Commission and its Director to submit an annual
report to the Commissioners and Supervisors of the participating
townships, including an analysis of the community recreation areas,
facilities and leadership, with particular reference to the extent and
adequacy of the program and its effectiveness in view of the public
expenditure involved and the public needs to be met.
§ 21-6. Recreation employees.
The Commission shall establish standards, qualifications, classifications and
salary schedules of recreation employees.
§ 21-7. Powers and duties.
The Leisure Services Commission, subject to the conditions herein
expressed, shall have jurisdiction and power to:
§ 21-8. Annual budget.
The Recreation Commission shall, no later than October 15 of each and
every year, recommend an annual budget governing expenditures for the
D. The Commission shall have the power and authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the conduct of all business within its jurisdiction.
E. Any Recreation Director employed by the Commission shall
automatically serve as the Secretary thereof.
F. All decisions of the Commission shall be by a majority vote of those
present. A quorum shall exist when six members are present.
A. Select, employ and discharge a Recreation Director, whose
appointment and discharge shall further be subject to the approval of
the Commissioners of the Township of Marple and the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Newtown.
B. Select, employ and discharge recreation personnel and such other
personnel as may be required for its operation.
C. Purchase personal property and materials, subject to applicable public
bidding requirements, as may be required for the efficient functioning
of its activities.
§ 21-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 21-8
1:24
following fiscal year for salaries of personnel, materials, supplies, insurance
and purchased services, for submission to and approval by each of the
parties hereto. Thereafter, no budget item may be exceeded by the
Commission without approval of both parties hereto.
§ 21-9. Fee charges to Commission.
The use of land, buildings and/or other facilities owned by a party to the
agreement creating the joint Commission for a program approved by it shall
not result in a fee charge to the Commission except for an agreed upon
rental or service charge which has been agreed to by both parties to the
agreement.
§ 21-10. Payroll and bookkeeping services.
Either Marple or Newtown may provide payroll and bookkeeping services
for the Commission and may maintain all funds of said Commission, which
shall be subject to the control of the Treasurer of the Township of Marple.
Either Township may, in its discretion, charge a reasonable sum of money
for such payroll and bookkeeping services as may be agreed by both
townships, which charge shall be set forth in the annual budget of the
Leisure Services Commission.
§ 21-11. Sharing of expenses.
All expenses of the Commission incurred by the administration, supervision,
regulation and operation of parks, recreation areas and facilities and for the
programs thereof shall be shared by the Townships of Marple and Newtown
each calendar year on the basis of the ratio of assessed valuation of real
property of each municipality to the combined total of both.
§ 21-12. Gifts and contributions.
The Leisure Services Commission shall be eligible to receive, on behalf
of the participating townships, any gifts or contributions and will be
responsible for carrying out the terms of any agreement between the
participating townships and the Marple-Newtown School District that may
be in effect from time to time with regard to contribution of its funds and
use of school property.
§ 21-13. Insurance.
The Commission will recommend insurance necessary to protect the
participating townships and owners of any property not owned by the
townships from liability for personal injury or property damage or
vandalism and malicious mischief to such property arising out of use of
property by the Commission.
§ 21-14. through § 21-19. (Reserved)
§ 21-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-14
1:25

ARTICLE II
Parks and Recreation Board
[Adopted 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
§ 21-20. Establishment.
Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 67204,
there is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Board for the Township of
Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 21-21. Composition.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of seven members, to be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors as hereinafter provided, all of whom
shall be residents of The Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 21-22. Terms.
Members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall serve a term of five years
or until their successors are appointed; provided, however, that members of
the Parks and Recreation Board first appointed shall be appointed such that
the terms of not more than two members shall expire annually thereafter
in accordance with the following appointment schedule. Each term of each
appointment listed below shall be effective January 1, 2012, and each
member shall remain on the Board until his/her successor is appointed.
§ 21-23. Compensation.
All members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall serve without pay but
shall be eligible for reimbursement of any necessary expenses incurred with
the prior approval of the Township Manager.
§ 21-24. Vacancies.
All members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall serve their full terms
except in the event of death, voluntary resignation or removal by the Board
of Supervisors for dereliction or neglect of duty. Vacancies occurring in the
membership of the Parks and Recreation Board other than by expiration
of the term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments.
A. Two members shall be initially appointed for a term of two years; and
B. Two members shall be initially appointed for a term of three years; and
C. Two members shall be initially appointed for a term of four years; and
D. One member shall be initially appointed for a term of five years.
§ 21-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-25
1:27
§ 21-25. Scope of activities.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall regularly evaluate all parks and
recreation programs and facilities within the Township and make
recommendations to the Township Manager and Board of Supervisors
regarding regulating, equipping, operating and maintaining the parks,
recreation areas and facilities of the Township as well as the purchase of
land for parks and recreation use.
§ 21-26. Organization.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall elect their own
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary, and they shall select all other
necessary officers to serve for a period of one year. The annual
reorganization of the Parks and Recreation Board shall occur promptly after
the annual reorganization of the Township Board of Supervisors. The Parks
and Recreation Board may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its
own business within its jurisdiction.
§ 21-27. Annual report.
The Parks and Recreation Board shall submit an annual report to the
Township Board of Supervisors annually, including an analysis of community
recreation programs, areas, facilities and leadership, with particular
reference to the extent and adequacy of programs and their effectiveness in
view of the public expenditures involved and the public needs to be met.
§ 21-28. Powers.
The Parks and Recreation Board is not be authorized to make purchases or
otherwise expend money to implement the provisions of this article and any
other applicable laws and regulations unless expressly authorized by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 21-25 NEWTOWN CODE § 21-28
1:28
Chapter 24
MANAGER
§ 24-1. Creation; appointment; compensation. [Amended 2-28-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-1]
The position of Township Manager is hereby created. The Manager shall
be appointed by a majority of all members of the Board of Supervisors and
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors. The Board shall fix the
amount of compensation of the Manager, and an employment agreement
shall be entered into with the Manager setting forth the amount of
compensation as well as the terms and condition of employment.
§ 24-2. Qualifications; residency requirements.
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications, with special reference to training and
experience in municipal government. The Manager need not be a resident
of the Township or state at the time of appointment and may reside outside
of the Township while in office.
§ 24-3. Powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township and shall:
A. Be responsible to the Board of Supervisors for carrying out all policies
and programs established by the Board.
B. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
functions of the Township except as otherwise provided by ordinance or
law.
C. Recommend the appointment and, when deemed necessary,
recommend the suspension, removal or other discipline of all Township
employees on the basis of merit system principles. This subsection shall
not apply to the Township Solicitor or Township Engineer. [Amended
2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1]
D. Make such recommendations to the Board concerning policy
formulation as deemed desirable.
E. Prepare and submit the annual budget to the Board, together with such
explanatory comment as deemed desirable, and administer the
approved budget.
F. Keep the Board and public informed as to the conduct of Township
affairs.
§ 21-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:29
§ 24-4. Removal from office.
Whenever the Manager declines to resign at the request of the Board, the
Manager may be removed from office in accordance with the following
procedure:
§ 24-5. Designation of Acting Manager.
The Manager may designate, in writing, a qualified employee to serve as
Acting Township Manager during the temporary absence or disability of
the Manager. The Board, by a majority vote, may at any time revoke such
designation and may appoint a qualified person to serve as Acting Manager.
Chapter 30
PENSIONS
G. See that all laws and acts of the Board, subject to enforcement by the
Manager or by officers subject to the Manager's supervision, are
faithfully observed.
H. Prepare the agenda and attend all meetings of the Board with the right
to take part in the discussion but not to vote.
I. Negotiate and sign contracts for the Township subject to approval by
the Board.
J. Perform the duties of Township Secretary/Treasurer.
K. Perform such other duties as are designated by the Board.
A. At least 30 days before such removal shall become effective, the Board
shall, by a majority vote of all its members, adopt a preliminary
resolution stating the specific reasons for removal.
B. The Manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing,
which shall be held not earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after
the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one is requested,
and after full consideration, the Board by a majority vote of all its
members may adopt a final resolution of removal.
C. By the preliminary resolution the Board may suspend the Manager from
duty, but shall in any case pay the Manager any unpaid salary and
salary with benefits for such additional time as may be specified in the
employment agreement.
§ 24-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 24-5
1:30
ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Fund
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 129 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973; amended in its entirety 10-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-2]
§ 30-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGE — The age attained by the employee at his or her last birthday.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — Any January 1 after the effective date.
AVERAGE COMPENSATION — The average monthly salary of the
employee at any time of reference computed over the final 36 months
of compensation during his continuous employment by the Township
prior to such date of reference. W-2 wages will be used for purposes of
computing the average compensation.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township, Delaware
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person who has primary
responsibility for the execution of the administrative affairs of this
pension plan, or the designee of that person.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date upon reaching the age of 55
and the completion of five years of service.
EFFECTIVE DATE — Of this article, January 1, 2001.
EMPLOYEE — Any person in the full-time employ of the Township
whose customary employment by the Township is for not less than 35
hours a week. Such employment must be permanent; any person hired
on a temporary or seasonal basis shall not be eligible for this plan.
FUND — All assets held by the Trustee under the Trust Agreement
relating to this pension plan.
MEMBER — Any employee who has satisfied the eligibility
requirements established in § 30-2 hereof and who is, at the time of
reference, making such contributions as may be required pursuant to
§ 30-3A hereof.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident
with or next following the date on which the member attains Age 65
and completes five years of service.
PLAN — The Pension Plan for Nonuniformed Employees of the
Township of Newtown, as herein set forth and as the same may
hereafter be amended.
PLAN YEAR — A period of 12 consecutive months commencing on any
January 1 and ending on the following December 31.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:31
§ 30-2. Eligibility.
§ 30-3. Contributions.
SERVICE — The aggregate of a member's total periods of employment
as a full-time employee of the Township. If a member enters military
service, either voluntarily or by conscription, after he has been
employed for at least six months, such time spent in the Armed Forces
of the United States during a period of national emergency shall be
counted as service for purposes of this plan, provided such member
returns to service with the Township within six months after his
discharge or release from such active duty in the Armed Forces of
the United States. The time spent in military service due to voluntary
extension of such military service during a period of peacetime shall
not be included as service for the purpose of this plan. Time spent
on reserve or National Guard training shall be included as service for
purposes of this plan.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — Any condition arising from
illness or injury (health, mental, or physical) which precludes the
member from performing the duties associated with the normal
occupational requirements with the Township as certified by a
physician designated by the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TRUST AGREEMENT — The contract between the Township and the
Trustees establishing the terms by which and under which the fund is
invested, distributed, accounted for and terminated, as the same now
exists and as it may hereafter be amended.
TRUSTEE — The Board or any other agency or person appointed by the
Board to serve in that capacity.
B. Wherever applicable as used herein, unless the context specifically
provides otherwise, the singular and plural shall be interchangeable,
and the masculine or feminine pronoun shall include either sex.
A. All persons who are employees (as defined in this plan) as of the
effective date hereof shall be a member as of the effective date.
B. Any person who becomes an employee after the effective date hereof
shall become a member on the first day of service as an employee.
A. Contributions by members. Members are not required to contribute
into the fund. However, the Board, at its own discretion, may require
members to contribute in order to keep the fund actuarially sound. If
contributions are required, members would contribute a percentage of
their annual compensation. The Board, on an annual basis, will
determine the percentage to be used in deducting members
contributions. Individual records of contributions by members shall be
§ 30-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-3
1:32
§ 30-4. Retirement benefits.
maintained, including all interest credited to the member's contribution
account. Interest to be credited shall be 5% annually.
B. Refund of member's contributions. Any member who for any reason
shall be ineligible to receive a pension after having made contributions
shall be entitled to a refund of his individual account balance; such
refund is payable immediately upon the discontinuance of his
employment with the Township or within a reasonable time (not more
than 45 days after discontinuance). If such discontinuance is due to
death, then such refund shall be paid to his designated beneficiary or, in
the absence thereof, to his estate. If the retired member is receiving a
benefit, then the refund payable to the beneficiary is equal to the
individual account balance at the date of retirement, less any payments
made to the member.
C. Deposits. Contributions by members (if any) shall be remitted to the
trustee not less than monthly.
D. State aid. Payments made by the State Treasurer from the moneys
received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance
companies for purposes of pension retirement for members shall be
used as follows:
(1) To reduce the unfunded liability; or,
(2) After such liability has been fully funded, to apply against the
annual obligation of the Township for future service costs, or
(3) To the extent that the payment may be in excess of such obligation,
to reduce member contributions pursuant to Subsection A hereof.
E. Township contributions. Subject to the provisions and limitations set
forth in other sections of this plan, the Township shall contribute the
amounts certified to be necessary by the fund's actuary to provide the
benefits provided by this plan.
F. Other contributions. The fund shall be authorized to receive by gift,
grant, devise or bequest, any money or property, real, personal or
mixed, in trust for the benefit of the fund. The trustee of the fund shall
be subject to such directions not inconsistent with this plan as the
donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
A. Normal retirement. Each member may retire on or at any time after his
normal retirement date. Any member so retiring shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension commencing as of the first day of the month
coincident with or next following his date of actual retirement and
ending with the payment made as of the first day of the month in which
his death occurs. The monthly pension to which such retired member
shall be entitled under this plan shall be equal to 2.0% of such
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:33
§ 30-5. Death benefits.
member's average compensation for each year of service, measured in
years and completed months subject to a maximum of 25 years.
B. Postponed retirement. An employee shall be allowed to continue as an
employee beyond his normal retirement date. In such case, the
employee shall remain a member of the plan until he actually retires or
ceases to be an employee. Any member on postponed retirement shall
continue to make the contributions required pursuant to § 30-3A hereof.
C. Early retirement. Each member may retire on or after his early
retirement date. The benefit payable at the early retirement date shall
be the benefit described in Subsection A, reduced by the following for
each year that the early retirement age precedes the normal retirement
age:
Age Reduction Factor
64 0.8916
63 0.7970
62 0.7142
61 0.6415
60 0.5774
59 0.5207
58 0.4704
57 0.4257
56 0.3858
55 0.3501
D. Disability retirement. If a member retires because of a total and
permanent disability, the benefit will be computed in the same manner
as early retirement as described in Subsection C. In no event shall the
disability benefits exceed the benefits to which the member would have
been entitled had he retired early.
A. If a member is eligible to elect a normal retirement or an early
retirement benefit and dies before electing said benefit, it will be
presumed that he elected the benefit the day before he died.
B. A member who meets the qualifications for normal retirement or early
retirement may file an application for said benefit, providing that the
application becomes effective only upon his death. In the event no
application is filed, it will be presumed the member had elected to
retire on a 50% joint and survivor actuarial equivalent basis.
C. Death benefit if no surviving spouse. If a member dies and is not
survived by a spouse, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a
refund of his accumulated member's contributions with credited
§ 30-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-5
1:34
§ 30-6. Vesting; severance of employment.
§ 30-7. Method of distribution of benefits.
interest. If no beneficiary survives, then the refund is payable to the
member's estate.
A. If a member leaves the employ of the Township or ceases to be a
member, whether by reason of his transfer, resignation or discharge, or
by reason of retirement other than after becoming eligible for benefits
pursuant to § 30-4 or 30-5 of this plan, he shall be entitled to a refund of
all contributions made by him and then on deposit in the fund, plus
interest thereon, computed at the rate described in § 30-3A. However,
the member may elect to leave his contributions, plus interest, in the
fund so as to receive a vested pension benefit to start at his normal
retirement date. The vesting percentage is determined from the
schedule below:
Years of Vesting Service Percentage
0 to 4 0%
5 or more 100%
B. The amount of the vested pension benefit shall be computed in
accordance with § 30-4A as of the date of termination multiplied by the
vesting percentage.
A. Refund of member contributions becoming distributable pursuant to
§ 30-6 shall be paid in the form of a lump sum distribution.
B. Options on normal, early retirement disability or vesting.
(1) At the time a member elects to receive a retirement benefit
allowance, the benefit is payable throughout the member's life, in
which case the benefit is known as a "single life annuity." The
member may alternatively elect at the time of retirement, or prior
to retirement, to receive the following actuarial equivalent value in
a lesser allowance:
(a) Single life annuity. This optional form provides a monthly
annuity for the lifetime of the member. There are no death
benefits provided. This form must have spousal consent.
(b) Life annuity with certain period. This optional form provides a
monthly annuity for the lifetime of the member. If his death
occurs before the end of a specified certain period of five, 10,
or 15 years, the balance of the annuity payments for the
certain period will be paid to his beneficiary. The certain period
must be named by the member before his retirement date and
cannot be changed after such date. The member may change
his beneficiary at any time.
§ 30-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7
1:35
§ 30-8. Management of fund.
§ 30-8.1. Duties of Board.
(c) Survivorship life annuity. This optional form provides a
monthly annuity for the lifetime of the member. Upon his
death, a percentage of 50%, 66 2/3% or 100% of such annuity
will continue for the lifetime of his contingent annuitant. The
survivorship percentage and contingent annuitant must be
named by the member before his retirement date and cannot
be changed after such date. If the contingent annuitant dies
before the member's retirement date, this optional form is
cancelled.
(2) Should a member who has elected a single life annuity die before
receiving in annuity payments the full amount of the total
accumulated member's contribution deductions standing to his
credit in the member account on the effective date of retirement,
the balance shall be paid to the designated beneficiary.
A. It is the duty of the trustee to pay the benefits to members and their
beneficiaries, as provided in §§ 30-4, 30-5, 30-6 and 30-7 in accordance
with the instructions received from the Board; provided, however, that
the duty of the trustee to make such payments is wholly contingent
upon the sufficiency of the fund for such purpose.
B. The Township may employ an actuary, investment advisors, counsel, or
other professional consultants from time to time in connection with the
operation of the fund or of this plan. Such persons or entities shall be
compensated by the Township at such rates as may be agreed upon by
the Board. Such compensation may be paid from the fund.
C. The Trustee shall make an annual determination of the fair market
value of the fund as of the anniversary date and as of such additional
dazes as the Board may direct. The fair market value of the fund shall
be reported to the actuary who shall calculate the amount to be
contributed to the fund by the Township with respect to each plan year
in accordance with the assumptions most recently adopted by the Board
for the purpose of such computations; provided, however, that the
liability of the Township to make such contributions is subject to all of
the conditions and limitations set forth elsewhere in this plan.
A. The plan shall be administered by the Board. The Board shall make and
adopt rules and regulations for the efficient administration of the plan.
B. The Board shall keep all data, records and documents pertaining to the
administration of the plan and shall execute all documents necessary to
carry out the provisions of the plan, and shall provide all such data,
records and documents to the Trustee, the actuary and any other
professional whose services are employed pursuant to § 30-8B of this
plan.
§ 30-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-8.1
1:36
§ 30-8.2. Provisions relating to Township.
C. The Board shall construe the plan, shall determine any questions of fact
arising under the plan and shall make all decisions required of it under
the plan or the trust agreement and its construction thereof, and
decisions and actions taken thereon in good faith shall be final and
conclusive. It may correct any defect or supply any omission or
reconcile any inconsistency in such manner and to such extent as it
shall deem expedient to carry the plan into effect, and it shall be the
sole judge of such expediency. The Board shall act uniformly with
respect to matters coming before it concerning employees in similar
circumstances.
D. The Board shall serve without bond except as may be otherwise
required by law and without compensation for its services as such.
E. The members of the Board and each of them, shall be free of all liability
for any act or omission except by willful misconduct or gross
negligence, and each of them shall be fully indemnified by the Township
against all judgements not involving findings of their respective
personal or collective willful misconduct or gross negligence and
against all costs, including counsel fees, incurred in defense of actions
brought against them.
F. The Board shall make available to members, retired members and
terminated members and to their beneficiaries, for examination during
business hours, such records as pertain to the person examining.
G. To enable the Board to perform its functions, the Township shall supply
full and timely information to it on all matters relating to the pay of all
members, their retirement, death, termination of employment and such
other pertinent facts as the Board may require; and the Board shall
advise the trustee of such of the foregoing facts as may be pertinent to
the trustee's administration of the trust and shall give proper
instructions to the trustee for the carrying out of the purposes of this
plan.
H. The Board shall enact such rules and regulations for the conduct of its
business and for the administration of the plan as it may consider
desirable, provided the same shall not be in conflict with any of the
provisions of the plan. All actions of the Board shall be taken at
meetings at which at least two members shall be present, or by written
resolution, and any resolutions concurred in by not fewer than two of its
members shall be the action of the entire Board. Written minutes shall
be kept of the meetings and actions of the Board.
I. The Secretary, acting on behalf of the Board, or any two members of the
Board, shall have the power to execute all documents necessary to
carry out the actions of the Board, and any person, partnership,
corporation, or government agency shall accept such documents over
such signature or signatures as if executed by the Board.
§ 30-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8.2
1:37
§ 30-8.3. Termination or amendment of plan.
§ 30-8.4. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. It is the expectation of the Township that it will continue this pension
plan indefinitely and will from time to time contribute to the fund such
amounts as may be needed to provide the benefits set forth in the plan;
but continuance of the plan is not assumed as an obligation of the
Township and the right is reserved by the Township at any time to
reduce, suspend or discontinue its contributions hereunder.
B. Nothing contained in the plan shall be held or construed as a contract
or guarantee of employment nor to create any liability upon the
Township to retain any person in its service. The Township reserves the
full right to discontinue the service of any person without any liability
except for salary or wages that may be due and unpaid, whenever in its
judgement its best interests so require, and such discontinuance shall
be without regard to this plan.
A. The Township may amend, curtail or terminate this plan at any time;
provided, however, that no amendment affecting the trustee shall be
made without its consent (other than an amendment having the effect of
terminating the plan); nor shall any amendment be made which will, in
any manner, divert any part of the fund to any purpose other than the
exclusive benefit of members or their beneficiaries (except upon
termination, such diversion may be made after all of the fixed and
contingent liabilities to members and their beneficiaries have been
met); nor shall any amendment be made at any time which will, in any
manner, divest any benefit then vested in a member.
B. In the event of termination of this plan, the trustee, upon written
instructions from the Board, shall allocate the assets then remaining in
the fund, to the extent that such assets are sufficient, to members and
retired members in the following order of precedence:
(1) To members and retired members in an amount equal to their
respective contributions with interest, reduced in the cases of
retired members by any prior distributions made to them.
(2) To provide benefits due retired members in the proportion that the
pension earned by each such member bears to the total pensions
earned for all such members.
(3) The remaining assets, if any, to each of the remaining members in
the proportion that his pension credits earned to the date of
termination bears to the total pension credits so earned for all such
remaining members.
C. After allocation of the funds, the Board shall determine whether to
operate the fund as the source of whatever payments the money so
allocated will provide.
§ 30-8.2 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-8.4
1:38
A. No benefit under this plan shall be subject in any manner to
anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge or
encumbrance, nor to seizure, attachment or other legal process for the
debts of any members or member's beneficiary. This provision shall not
apply to a qualified domestic relations order defined in Code Section
414(p), and those other domestic relations orders permitted to be so
treated by the Board under the provisions of the Retirement Equity Act
of 1984. Further, to the extent provided under a qualified domestic
relations order, a former spouse of a member shall be treated as the
spouse or surviving spouse for all purposes under this plan.
B. Any person dealing with the trustee may rely upon a copy of this plan
and any amendments thereto certified to be a true and correct copy by
the trustee.
C. Anything heretofore contained in this plan to the contrary
notwithstanding, it is the intention of the Township that any action
herein provided to be taken by the trustee shall be taken only in
accordance with written instructions of the Board given in such detail
as to preclude the exercise by the trustee of discretion in the
performance thereof.
D. In no circumstances, whether upon amendment or termination of this
plan or otherwise shall any part of the fund be used for or diverted to
any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of members or their
beneficiaries until all of the actuarial obligations to such member or
member's beneficiaries have been met.
E. If the Board deems any person incapable of receiving benefits to which
he is entitled by reason of minority, illness, infirmity, or other incapacity,
it may direct the trustee to make payment directly for the benefit of
such person, or to any person selected by the Board to disburse it,
whose receipt shall be a complete acquittance therefor. Such payment
shall, to the extent therefor, discharge all liability of the Township, the
trustee and the fund.
F. Should any provision of this plan be determined to be void by any court,
the plan will continue to operate and, to the extent necessary, will be
deemed not to include the provision determined to be void.
G. Headings and captions provided herein are for convenience only and
shall not be deemed part of the plan.
H. This plan shall be construed and applied under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania where not in conflict with federal laws
which shall prevail.
§ 30-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8.4
1:39

ARTICLE II
Social Security
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 131 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 30-9. Participation authorized.
Newtown Township shall become a participant in the social security system,
and that participation shall commence as of January 1, 1951, and the
benefits of old-age and survivors insurance shall be extended to its
employees and officers.
§ 30-10. Conferral of benefits.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors are hereby
authorized to execute and deliver to the Secretary of Labor and Industry
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the state agency charged with the
administration of the enabling Act,6 the plan and agreement required under
the provisions of Section 6 of the enabling Act7 and the Social Security Act
to extend coverage to the employees and officers of Newtown Township and
to do all other things necessary to that end.
§ 30-11. Payments; payroll deductions.
The Secretary and Treasurer of the Township are hereby authorized to
make all required payments into the contribution fund established by
Section 7 of the enabling Act8 and to establish such system of payroll
deductions from salaries of officers and employees as may be necessary to
their coverage under the old-age and survivors insurance system.
§ 30-12. Appropriation authorized.
The Board of Supervisors hereby appropriates from the general funds of
the Township the amounts necessary to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act9 and in accordance with the plan
or plans and agreement.
§ 30-13. Continuation.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to do all things
in accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement
necessary to the continued implementation of the old-age and survivors
insurance system.
6. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
8. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
9. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-13
1:41

ARTICLE III
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0310]
§ 30-14. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
AGE — The age attained by the employee at his or her last birthday.
ANNIVERSARY DATE — Any January 1 after the effective date.
AVERAGE APPLICABLE COMPENSATION — The average monthly
earnings of the member at any time of reference computed over the
last 36 months (or such shorter period as represents the member's
total period of continuous employment by the Township prior to such
date of reference). For purposes of computing average applicable
compensation, "average monthly earnings" shall mean total
compensation paid by the Township excluding severance pay or any
accrued time paid at retirement.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person who has primary
responsibility for the execution of the administrative affairs of this
pension plan, or the designee of that person.
COMPENSATION — Shall be based on total compensation paid by
the Township excluding severance pay or any accrued time paid at
retirement.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The first day following the date on which
the member completes 20 years of service.
EFFECTIVE DATE — Of this article January 1, 2011.
EMPLOYEE — Any sworn police officer in the full-time employ of the
Township Police Department whose customary employment is for not
less than 40 hours a week.
FUND — All assets held by the trust under the trust agreement relating
to this Police Pension Plan.
MEMBER — Any sworn police officer in the full-time employ of the
Township Police Department who has satisfied the eligibility
requirements established in Article II hereof and who is, at the time
of reference, or has prior to his/her elimination, been making such
contributions as may be required pursuant to § 30-16A hereof.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day following the date on
which the member completes 25 years of service, and the date on which
the member attains age 50.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Police Pension Fund, adopted
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2, as amended.
§ 30-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-14
1:43
§ 30-15. Eligibility.
§ 30-16. Contributions.
PLAN — The Police Pension Plan for the Township of Newtown, as
herein set forth and as the same may hereafter be amended.
PLAN YEAR — A period of 12 consecutive months commencing on any
January 1 and ending on the following December 31.
SERVICE — The aggregate of member's total periods of employment
as a full-time employee of the Township. If a member enters military
service, either voluntarily or by conscription, after he has been
employed for at least six months, such time spent in the armed forces of
the United States during a period of wartime or general military conflict
shall be counted as service for purposes of the plan, provided that such
member returns to police service with the Township within six months
after his discharge or release from such active duty in the armed forces
of the United States. The time spent in military service due to voluntary
extension of such military service during a period or peacetime shall
not be included as service for the purposes of this plan. Time spent
on reserve or National Guard training shall be included as service for
purposes of this plan.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — Any condition arising from
service-connected illness or injury which precludes an employee from
performing the duties associated with the normal occupational
requirements of any position with the Police Department, as certified by
a physician designated by the Township. In the event that the employee
shall be reemployed, the employee's pension status shall be changed
accordingly.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TRUSTEE — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown or
any other agency or person appointed by such to serve in that capacity
as set forth in the trust agreement.
B. Wherever applicable, as used herein, unless the context specifically
provides otherwise, the singular and plural shall be interchangeable,
and the masculine and feminine pronouns shall include either sex.
A. All persons who are employees (as defined in this plan) as of the
effective date hereof shall be members as of the effective date.
B. Any person who becomes an employee after the effective date hereof
shall become a member on the first day of service as an employee.
A. Contributions by members.
§ 30-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-16
1:44
§ 30-17. Retirement benefits.
(1) Members shall pay into the fund at a rate of 5% of compensation.
"Compensation," for this purpose, shall be as defined in the
definition of "compensation" in § 30-14A of the plan.
(2) The Board may, on an annual basis, by ordinance or resolution,
reduce or eliminate payments into the fund by members. Individual
records of contributions by members shall be maintained, including
all interest credited to their individual accounts. Interest to be
credited shall be 3% compounded annually.
(3) Interest shall be credited from the end of the plan year in which
paid to the end of the month after which a refund becomes payable.
B. Refund of member's contributions. Any member who, for any reason,
shall be ineligible to receive a pension after having made contributions
shall be entitled to a refund of his individual account balance; such
refund is payable immediately upon discontinuance of his employment
with the police force or within a reasonable time (not more than 45 days
after discontinuance). If such discontinuance is due to death, then such
refund shall be paid to his designated beneficiary or, in the absence
thereof, to his estate.
C. Deposits. Contributions by members shall be remitted to the trustee
monthly.
D. State aid. The portion of the payments made by the State Treasurer to
the Township and designated by the Board to be allocated to the Police
Pension Fund from money received from taxes paid upon premiums by
foreign casualty insurance companies for purposes of pension
retirement or disability benefits for policemen shall be used as follows:
(1) To reduce the unfunded liability; or, after such liability has been
fully funded.
(2) To apply against the annual obligation of the Township for future
service costs; or, to the extent that the payment may be in excess of
such obligations.
(3) To reduce member contributions pursuant to § 30-16A hereof.
E. Township contributions. Subject to the provisions and limitations set
forth in other articles of this plan, the Township shall contribute the
amounts certified to be necessary by the fund's actuary to provide the
benefits provided by this plan.
F. Other contributions. The fund shall be authorized to receive, by gift,
grant, devise or bequest, any money or property, real, personal or
mixed, in trust for the benefit of the fund. The trustee of the fund shall
be subject to such directions not inconsistent with this plan as the
donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
§ 30-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-17
1:45
A. Normal retirement.
(1) Each member may retire on or at any time after his normal
retirement date. Any member so retiring shall be entitled to receive
a monthly pension commencing as of the first day following his date
of actual retirement and ending with the payment made as of the
first day of the month in which his death occurs. The monthly
pension to which such retired member shall be entitled under this
plan shall be equal to 50% of such member's average applicable
compensation.
(2) In addition to the monthly retirement benefit described above, each
member who has completed in excess of 25 years of service shall
receive an additional monthly pension benefit equal to $100 for
each completed year of service in excess of 25 years, up to a
maximum of $200 per month. This service increment shall be paid,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The member retired by age 62; and
(b) The amount of the service increment shall not exceed limits
authorized by state law.
B. Postponed retirement. An employee shall be allowed to continue as an
employee beyond his normal retirement date. In such case, the
employee shall remain a member of the plan until he actually retires or
ceases to be an employee. Any contributions required pursuant to
§ 30-16A hereof shall continue.
C. Disability benefit.
(1) If a member retires because of a total and permanent disability, he
shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to 100% of the
member's annual base salary at the time of the disability. This
pension shall continue until the member returns to work or until
the member reaches what would have been his normal retirement
date, when the percentage shall be reduced to 50%. Any member
hired after January 1, 2009, and retirees because of a total and
permanent disability, shall be entitled to receive an amount equal
to 75% of the member's annual base salary at the time of disability.
(2) In either case, the benefit addressed above shall be offset by the
full amount of any workers' compensation, social security, or
Township-provided disability insurance benefits and 50% of any
earnings from other employment subsequent to the disability.
"Annual base salary"shall mean the amount paid to a member at
the appropriate rank and, if applicable, step within the rank,
exclusive of all fringe benefits, such as night differential, longevity
and overtime.
(3) A disabled member shall pursue the maximum workers'
compensation benefits to which the member may be entitled and
§ 30-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-17
1:46
§ 30-18. Death benefits.
may not commute any such benefit without approval by the
Township. The determination of benefits shall not be affected by
any assignment or pledge of workers' compensation proceeds to a
third party. The Township shall be required to provide legal counsel
to a disabled member in case of a disputed workers' compensation
claim.
D. Early Retirement Benefit. Each member may retire on or at any time
after his early retirement date. Prior to termination, the member must
file with the Secretary of the Township a written notice of his intention
to elect an early retirement benefit. This benefit shall become effective
as of the date of the notice or the date designated in the notice,
whichever is later. The amount of the early retirement benefit shall be
the actuarial equivalent of a vested retirement benefit as computed in
§ 30-19. The actuarial equivalent of the vested retirement benefit shall
be determined by actuarially reducing the vested retirement benefit to
reflect that it will commence on the effective date of the early
retirement rather than on the member's normal retirement date. The
actuarial reduction shall be calculated using the actuarial assumptions
reported in the last actuarial valuation report filed with the Public
Employee Retirement Commission.
E. Cost-of-living adjustment. There shall be a cost-of-living increase
provided to all members who retire; provided, however, that such
annual cost-of-living increase shall not exceed the percentage increase
in the All Urban Consumers C.P.I. for the Philadelphia Metropolitan
Area from the year in which the police officer last worked; provided,
further, that in no case shall the total police pension benefits exceed
75% of the salary for computing retirement benefits; provided, further,
that the total cost-of-living increase shall not exceed 30%. No cost-ofliving
increase(s) shall be granted which would impair the actuarial
soundness of the plan. All adjustments shall be made in January and
calculated on the twelve-month percentage change in the consumer
price index as of the previous December.
A. Death Benefit if No Surviving Spouse Nor Dependent Children. If a
member dies prior to the commencement of pension benefits, then his
designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a refund of his accumulated
member's contributions with credited interest. If no beneficiary
survives, then the refund is payable to the member's estate.
B. Pension Benefit to Surviving Spouse and Dependent Children.
(1) If a member dies survived by a spouse or dependent children, after
having become eligible to receive a pension benefit [i.e., he was
eligible because (a) he was already receiving a pension, or (b) he
met the age and service requirements but he had not yet retired],
then a monthly pension benefit shall be provided.
§ 30-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-18
1:47
(2) The amount of the monthly pension benefit shall be 50% of the
pension the member was receiving or would have been entitled to
receive if he had been retired at the time of his death.
(3) In the event a member dies after completing 12 or more years of
service but was not yet eligible for normal retirement or
preretirement survivor benefits, the surviving spouse shall act on
behalf of the member in selecting the alternative addressed in
§ 30-19A. If a vested benefit is selected, the surviving spouse shall
receive 50% of the member's vested monthly benefit, commencing
on the first day of the month following the member's normal
retirement date.
(4) In the event a member dies after completing 20 or more years of
service but was not yet eligible for normal retirement or
preretirement survivor benefits, the surviving spouse shall act on
behalf of the member in selecting the alternative addressed in
§ 30-19A.
(5) If an early retirement benefit is selected, the surviving spouse shall
receive 50% of the member's monthly early retirement benefit,
commencing on the first day of the month following the election of
this benefit.
C. The monthly pension benefit is payable to the surviving spouse until
death, or then to surviving dependent children under the age of 18
years or, if attending college, until attaining the age of 23 years.
"Attending college" shall mean the eligible children are registered at an
accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum
courseload of seven credit hours per semester. Dependent children
shall include adopted children and any child conceived before the time
of the member's death and thereafter born to the member's spouse.
D. Preretirement Survivor Benefit.
(1) In the event a member is killed in service, the member's family
shall receive the benefits provided for and subject to the terms of
Act 51 of 2009, which benefits are paid exclusively by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with the exception of any pension
benefit to which the member was entitled prior to the member's
death solely by virtue of the member's service as a Township police
officer (i.e., either a normal, early, or vested pension benefit). It is
understood that "family" shall refer to the surviving spouse and
dependent children. The benefit is payable to the surviving spouse
until death, then to the surviving dependent children under the age
of 18 years or, if attending college, until attaining the age of 23
years. The terms "dependent children" and "attending college"
shall be consistent with those of § 30-18C.
§ 30-18 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-19
1:48
§ 30-19. Severance of employment.
If a member leaves the employ of the Township or ceases to be a member,
whether by reason of his transfer, resignation or discharge, or by reason
of disability or retirement other than after becoming eligible for benefits
pursuant to § 30-17 or 30-18 of this plan, he shall be entitled to a refund of
all contributions made by him and then on deposit in the fund, plus interest
thereon, computed at the rate described in § 30-16A. However, a member
who has completed 12 or more years of service may elect either Subsection
A or B as described below:
§ 30-20. Method of distribution of benefits.
§ 30-21. Management of fund.
A. He may elect to leave his contributions, plus interest, in the fund so as
to receive a vested pension benefit to start at his normal retirement
date. He must file with the Secretary of the Township, within 90 days of
the date he ceases to be a full-time police officer, a written notice of his
intention to vest. The amount of the vested pension benefit shall be (x)
divided by (y) where (x) is the number of years of service at the date of
termination and (y) is the number of years of service which the member
would have had if he worked until his/her normal retirement date,
multiplied by the benefits described in § 30-17A. Years of service shall
be measured in years and completed months.
B. He may elect to receive a refund of all contributions made by him and
then on deposit in the trust fund, plus interest thereon, computed at the
rate described in § 30-16A. If he elects to receive the refund of his
contributions plus interest, he would forfeit the pension benefit outlined
in Subsection A.
A. Refund benefits becoming distributable pursuant to § 30-19 and death
benefits becoming distributable pursuant to the provision of § 30-18A
shall be paid in the form of a lump-sum distribution.
B. The normal form of all benefits payable hereunder shall be a pension for
the life of the member, commencing on the date specified and ending
with a payment made on the first day of the month in which the member
dies; subject, however, to the payment of a death benefit calculated
pursuant to § 30-18B.
A. It is the duty of the trustee to pay the benefits to members and their
beneficiaries, as provided in §§ 30-17, 30-18 and 30-19, in accordance
with the instructions received from the Board; provided, however, that
the duty of the trustee to make such payments is wholly contingent
upon the sufficiency of the fund for such purposes.
B. The Township may employ an actuary, investment advisors, counsel, or
other professional consultants from time to time in connection with the
operation of the fund or of this plan. Such persons or entities shall be
§ 30-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-21
1:49
§ 30-22. Duties of the Board.
compensated by the Township at such rates as may be agreed upon by
the Board. Such compensation may be paid from the fund.
C. The trustee shall make an annual determination of the fair market value
of the fund as of the anniversary date and as of such additional dates as
the Board may direct.
D. The fair market value of the fund shall be reported to the actuary, who
shall calculate the amount to be contributed to the fund by the
Township with respect to each plan year in accordance with the
assumptions most recently adopted by the Board for the purpose of
such computations; provided, however, that the liability of the Township
to make such contributions is subject to all of the conditions and
limitations set forth elsewhere in this plan.
A. The plan shall be administered by the Board of the Township of
Newtown. The Board shall make and adopt rules and regulations for the
efficient administration of the plan.
B. The Board shall keep all data, records and documents pertaining to the
administration of the plan, and shall execute all documents necessary to
carry out the provisions of the plan, and shall provide all such data,
records and documents to the professionals whose services are
employed pursuant to § 30-21 of this plan.
C. The Board shall construe the plan, shall determine any questions or fact
arising under the plan and shall make all decisions required of it under
the plan. Decisions and actions taken thereon in good faith shall be final
and conclusive. It may correct any defect or supply any omission or
reconcile any inconsistency in such manner and to such extent as it
shall be the sole judge of such expediency. The Board shall act
uniformly with respect to matters coming before it concerning
employees in similar circumstances.
D. The members of the Board, and each of them, shall be free of all liability
for any act or omission except by willful misconduct or gross
negligence, and each of them shall be fully indemnified by the Township
against all judgments not involving findings of their respective personal
or collective willful misconduct or gross negligence and against all
costs, including counsel fees, incurred in defense of actions brought
against them.
E. The Board shall make available to members, retired members and
terminated members and to their beneficiaries, for examination during
business hours, such records as pertain to the person examining.
F. To enable the Board to perform its function, the Township
administration shall supply full and timely information to it on all
matters relating to the pay of all members, their retirement, death,
§ 30-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-22
1:50
§ 30-23. Provisions relating to the Township.
§ 30-24. Termination or amendment of plan.
termination of employment and such other pertinent facts as the Board
may require.
G. The Board shall enact such rules and regulations for the conduct of its
business and for the administration of the plan as it may consider
desirable, provided the same shall not be in conflict with any of the
provisions of the plan. All actions of the Board shall be taken at
meetings at which at least three members shall be present, or by
written resolutions concurred in by not fewer than three of its members
shall be the action of the entire Board. Written minutes shall be kept of
the meetings and actions of the Board.
H. The Secretary, acting on behalf of the Board, shall have the power to
execute all documents necessary to carry out the actions of the Board;
and any person, partnership, corporation or government agency shall
accept such documents over such signature or signatures as if executed
by the Board.
A. It is the expectation of the Township that it will continue this pension
plan indefinitely and will, from time to time, contribute to the fund such
amounts as may be needed to provide the benefits set forth in the plan.
B. The provisions of any ordinance establishing, amending, or maintaining
the plan shall not be a charge on any other fund in the Treasury of the
Township or under its control, save the Uniformed Employee's Pension
Fund herein provided for.
C. Nothing contained in the plan shall be held or construed as a contract
or guaranty of employment nor to create any liability upon the
Township to retain any person in its service. The Township reserves the
full right to discontinue the service of any person without any liability
except for salary or wages that may be due and paid whenever, in its
judgment, its best interests so require, and such discontinuance shall
be without regard to this plan.
A. The Township may amend this plan from time to time as is necessary to
maintain its actuarial soundness and to incorporate changes in plan
benefits or entitlements. However, no amendment shall be made which
will, in any manner, divert any part of the fund to any purpose other
than the exclusive benefit of members or their beneficiaries (except
that, upon termination, such diversion may be made after all of the fixed
and contingent liabilities to members and their beneficiaries have been
met); nor shall any amendment be made at any time which will in any
manner divest any benefit then vested in a member or reduce or
eliminate a benefit to which a member has been given an expectation by
virtue of the pension ordinance or pension calculations for retiring
officers who retired during the member's participation in this plan.
§ 30-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-24
1:51
§ 30-25. Miscellaneous provisions.
B. In the event of termination of this plan, the Board shall allocate the
assets then remaining in the fund as follows:
(1) Sufficient funds shall be maintained to provide the pension benefits
prescribed in Article III for all members who have retired prior to
termination or who are eligible for retirement at the time of the
termination of this fund.
(2) Contributions with interest at a rate established by the Board as
provided in Article III shall be refunded to any and all members
who terminate service at the time of the termination of the fund.
(3) Of the remaining funds, those which can be identified as
municipality contributions or contributions other than from
members or from the commonwealth allocation shall be distributed
as the Board sees fit, provided that such distribution is in
compliance with § 30-21.
(4) All funds in excess of the funds described in Subsection B(1), (2),
and (3) above shall be returned to the commonwealth as unused
funds pursuant to the Act of May 12, 1943, P.L. 259, as amended,
72 P.S. § 2263.1 et seq.
A. No benefit under this plan shall be subject in any manner to
anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, or
encumbrance, nor to seizure, attachment, or other legal process for the
debts of any member or member's beneficiary. This provision shall not
apply to a "qualified domestic relations order," defined in Code Section
414 (p),11 and those other domestic relations orders permitted to be so
treated by the Board under the provisions of the Retirement Equity Act
of 1984. The Township shall establish a written procedure to determine
the qualified status of domestic relations orders to administer
distributions under such qualified orders. Further, to the extent
provided under a qualified domestic relations order, a former spouse of
a member shall be treated as the spouse or surviving spouse for all
purposes under this plan.
B. Any person dealing with the Township may rely upon a copy of this plan
and any amendments thereto certified to be true and correct by the
trustee.
C. In no circumstances, whether upon amendment or termination of this
plan or otherwise, shall any part of the fund be used or diverted to any
purpose other than the exclusive benefit of members or their
beneficiaries until all of the actuarial obligations to such member's or
members' beneficiaries have been met.
11.Editor's Note: Refers to the Internal Revenue Code.
§ 30-24 NEWTOWN CODE § 30-25
1:52
D. If the Board deems any person incapable of receiving benefits to which
he is entitled by reason of minority, illness, infirmity, or other incapacity,
it may make payment directly for the benefit of such person to the
guardian or trustee for said person, whose receipt shall be complete
acquittance therefore. Such payment shall, to the extent therefor,
discharge all liability of the Township or the fund.
E. Should any provision of this plan be determined to be void by any court,
the plan will continue to operate and, to the extent necessary, will be
deemed not to include the provision determined to be void.
F. Headings and captions provided herein are for convenience only and
shall not be deemed part of the plan.
G. This plan shall be construed and applied under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania where not in conflict with federal laws,
which shall prevail.
H. This article repeals all other ordinances prior to the date of its
enactment.
§ 30-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-25
1:53
Chapter 33
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
§ 33-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as
set forth in Act No. 247, approved July 31, 1968, known as the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,"12 there is hereby created and established
a Planning Commission for Newtown Township, to be known as and
hereinafter referred to as the "Newtown Township Planning Commission."
§ 33-2. Composition.
The Newtown Township Planning Commission shall consist of seven
members, to be appointed as hereinafter provided, all of whom shall be
Township residents.
§ 33-3. Appointment of members.
All members of the Newtown Township Planning Commission shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 33-4. Term of office.
Except as hereinafter provided, all members of the Newtown Township
Planning Commission shall serve for terms of four years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified. However, the initial and subsequent
terms of members shall be so fixed such that no more than two members
shall be reappointed or replaced during any calendar year.13
§ 33-5. Vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs in the Newtown Township Planning Commission other
than by expiration of term, the Board of Supervisors shall fill such vacancy
for the unexpired term. The Chairman of the Newtown Township Planning
Commission shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors concerning any
vacancy in the Newtown Township Planning Commission.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: Original Section 133.05, Continuation of present members, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2.
§ 30-25 NEWTOWN CODE § 33-6
1:54
§ 33-6. Removal from office; hearing.
Any member of the Newtown Township Planning Commission may be
removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office
or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance written notice of the intent
to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if
the member shall request it in writing.
§ 33-7. Engineering advisor.
The Township Engineer or an engineer appointed by the Board of
Supervisors shall serve the Newtown Township Planning Commission as
engineering advisor.
§ 33-8. Compensation; expenses.
All members of the Newtown Township Planning Commission shall serve
without pay, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses
at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 33-9. Officers; rules; records. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
The Newtown Township Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman
and Vice Chairman and create and fill such other offices as it may determine
and establish. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed
themselves. The Newtown Township Planning Commission may make and
alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures, consistent
with Township ordinances and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Newtown Township Planning Commission shall keep a
full record of its business.
§ 33-10. Powers and duties.
The Newtown Township Planning Commission shall have all of the powers
and authority conferred upon and all of the duties and obligations imposed
upon planning commissions of Second Class Townships under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247, approved
July 31, 1968,14 as well as all amendments, supplements, modifications,
revisions and deletions thereto and therefrom which may hereafter be
enacted.
Chapter 39
RISK MANAGEMENT
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1
1:55
§ 39-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform procedure for the
handling of the Township of Newtown's liability, property, fidelity and
fiduciary risk exposure.
§ 39-2. Payment of insurance premiums and damage claims.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Annually, the budget of the Township may allow for payment for property,
casualty, fiduciary and fidelity insurance premiums. Damage assessed to
the Township which is not covered by insurance which falls within the
deductible amount may be financed by charging the first $500 of any cost to
the appropriate department. Any amount in excess of $500 is to be charged
to the Risk Management Reserve of the general fund. The Risk Management
Reserve of the general fund may be funded up to 2% of the Township's
annual budget for all funds and may be used for payment of damage claims
not covered by insurance.
§ 39-3. Insurance coverage. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
It shall be the Township policy to insure with outside insurance carriers
utilizing appropriate deductible limits for each class of insurance and in
certain cases to self-insure. The amount of the deductible may change
from time to time. Fiduciary liability and public officials liability insurance
deductibles shall be as negotiated with insurance carriers. The Risk
Management Reserve, if established, shall pay the deductibles as they apply
to the Township and/or each Township official in the absence of actual fraud
by such officials.
Chapter 41
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 39-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 39-3
1:56
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995-8]
§ 41-1. Compensation; payment.
A. Each Supervisor of Newtown Township elected or appointed to office on
or after November 7, 1995, shall receive compensation as a Supervisor
in the annual amount of $3,250.
B. Each Supervisor of Newtown Township elected or appointed to the
office before November 7, 1995, shall receive compensation as a
Supervisor in the annual amount of $2,600.
C. Such compensation shall be paid in quarterly installments.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-1
1:57
Chapter 42
STREETLIGHT DISTRICT
§ 42-1. Establishment of district; schedule of properties.
§ 42-2. Cost assessment.
Chapter 46
TRUSTS AND AGREEMENTS
A. The Streetlight District shall consist of those properties on streets
within 250 feet of a streetlight. The list of streets with streetlights and
properties within 250 feet of a streetlight is hereby incorporated by
reference hereto, and shall be maintained at all times by the Township.
A. The cost of public lighting set forth in this chapter shall be by an equal
assessment upon each property benefited, based upon the assessment
of each property for county tax purposes.
§ 41-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 42-2
1:58
ARTICLE I
Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 4-13-1982 as Sections 1 through 4 of Ord. No. 1982-4]
§ 46-1. Participation authorized.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act15 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "trust") and
entering into the declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effects as if it had been set out verbatim in this section, and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this section
was adopted.
§ 46-2. Purchase of shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
section.
§ 46-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
trust.
§ 46-4. Determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,16 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 46-1 hereof.
B. This municipality's participation in the trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the trust.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:59
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 46-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 46-4
1:60
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 55
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 55-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or corporation who
sells or leases and/or installs automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and who
have the duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency
message over a designated or direct trunk line to the communications
center of the Police or Fire Departments.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
the building and designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal
act or other emergency requiring police to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits a prerecorded voice alarm over regular telephone line, by direct
or indirect connection to the Police or Fire Departments, upon receipt of
a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or
condition inherently characteristic of a fire or intrusion.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system or group
of such systems operated privately for customers by a person, firm or
corporation which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded messages
from automatic protection devices at a central station having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times that have the duty to
take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including
the relaying of messages by designated or direct trunk line to the
communications center of the Police or Fire Departments.
COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The communications room and other
rooms which house auxiliary communications equipment.
§ 46-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:61
DESIGNATED TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police or Fire Departments that is for the
primary purpose of handling emergency messages which originate from
automatic protection devices and are transmitted directly or indirectly
through an intermediary.
DIRECT TRUNK LINE — A nonlisted, directly connected telephone line
leading from an intermediary to the communications center of the Police or
Fire Departments that is for the primary purpose of handling emergency
messages on a person-to-person basis.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given the
police or fire communications center to which police or firemen respond,
which is not the result of a burglary, fire, robbery or similar emergency.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service, as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
PERMIT — Written permission, duly granted to an applicant by the
Township upon payment of the required fee.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police or Fire Departments that is for the purpose of handling
emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is identified by
a specific listing among the white pages in the telephone directory issued
by the telephone company.[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
SECONDARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police or Fire Departments that is for the
purpose of handling administrative and other calls on a person-to-person
basis and which line is identified by a specific listing among the white pages
in the telephone directory by the telephone company.[Amended 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 55-2. Registration and permit required.
Any person desiring to install an automatic protection device on his
premises must register with and obtain written permission from the
Township.
§ 55-3. Fees.
A. An installation permit fee and an annual fee may be charged. The
amount of such fees shall be established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
B. All fees shall be payable upon registration by the alarm equipment
supplier or installer.
C. Fees shall be nonrefundable.
§ 55-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 55-4
1:62
§ 55-4. Registration of builders.
§ 55-5. Required information.
§ 55-6. Inspection.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter and as a condition of installing
and maintaining an automatic protection device, the owner or lessee thereof
shall execute a consent in such form as may be prescribed by the Township,
which shall authorize the Township to enter upon a lessee's or owner's
premises within the Township at such reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice to inspect the installation and operation of an automatic
protection device.
A. All persons proposing to construct, install or service alarms shall be
registered as a builder in accordance with the Township Building
Code.17 No person shall be registered unless he has complied with all
provisions of this chapter.
B. After the effective date of this chapter, no one except an alarm
equipment supplier holding a valid permit from the Township shall
install any automatic protection device to a designated trunk line.
A. Within 90 days from the effective date of this section, every alarm
equipment supplier who has installed or serviced an automatic
protection device in the Township shall furnish to the Township a
current list of such installation, which shall include the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a control station,
protective system or any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the
device is installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, other than the alarm equipment supplier who is
responsible for maintenance and repair of the automatic protection
device.
B. Every alarm equipment supplier shall furnish the information listed in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) hereof for each new installation made in the
Township at the time of application for an installation permit. All
information furnished pursuant to these subsections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Township only.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 55-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:63
§ 55-7. Testing.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an automatic
protection device without first obtaining permission from the Police and/or
Fire Departments. Where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary,
no such permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed
to the Police or Fire Departments.
§ 55-8. General requirements.
Automatic protection devices installed in the Township that are keyed to
designated trunk lines shall meet the following requirements:
§ 55-9. Requirements for suppliers.
A. The type and content of recorded messages must be intelligible and in a
format approved prior to installation by the Township as appropriate for
the type of emergency.
B. No more than one call shall be made over a designated trunk line to the
Police Department or Fire Department as a result of a single activation
of the automatic protection device.
C. The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed 15
seconds.
D. Recorded messages may be repeated during one call, but the interval
between each recorded message shall be no less than eight nor more
than 12 seconds.
E. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire
or intrusion, so that the device shall not be actuated by impulses due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibration of doors and windows, vibrations to the premises
caused by the passing of vehicles, variations in voltage due to electrical
storms and power failures or any other force not related to genuine
alarms.
F. All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the
owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum reliability of
operation.
G. Fire detectors which are installed after the effective date of this
chapter, other than temperature type, shall be cross-zoned so two
detectors shall be activated before recorded messages are keyed into
the telephone transmission system.
A. All alarm equipment suppliers who install telephone alarm or intrusion
alarm equipment in the Township, whether leasing or selling such
equipment, shall furnish operating instructions, without diagrams, and
a maintenance manual to the customer. This shall be done at the time
§ 55-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 55-9
1:64
§ 55-10. Repair service.
§ 55-11. Disconnection.
When messages indicate failure to comply with operational requirements
and the Township concludes that the automatic protection device sending
such messages should be disconnected in order to relieve the Township of
the burden of responding to false alarms, the Police Chief is authorized
to demand that the owner or lessee of the device or his representative
disconnect the device until it is made to comply with the operational
requirements. If disconnection of the defective device is not accomplished
promptly and the Township determines that the malfunctioning device is
repeatedly sending false alarms without any intermittent valid alarms, he
may then take any steps necessary to disconnect the defective automatic
protection device.
§ 55-12. Direct keying required.
such equipment is installed or, in the case of equipment installed prior
to the effective date of this section, within 60 days of that effective date.
B. Each alarm equipment supplier shall furnish operating instructions,
circuit diagram and maintenance manual for each type of automatic
protection device he deals in and installs in the Township. If the
instructions are not clear, the alarm equipment supplier may be
required to revise the instructions to the Township and all buyers and
lessees of the particular automatic protection device.
C. Alarm equipment suppliers, installers of audible alarms and
intermediaries shall furnish at or prior to the time of contracting, and at
their expense, a copy of this chapter to owners, lessees or users of the
equipment or services to be supplied.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the Township which is keyed to a designated trunk
line shall make service available directly or through an agent on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days a week, to repair such
device or to correct any malfunction that may occur. Such service shall
be made available for any person using an automatic protection device
supplied at such user's election and expense.
B. At the time of installation, an alarm equipment supplier shall furnish to
any buyer or lessee using a repair service written information as to how
service may be obtained at any time, including the telephone number of
the alarm equipment supplier or agent responsible for service. The
buyer or lessee and the alarm equipment supplier or agent supplying a
service shall be responsible for having the device disconnected or
repaired as quickly as possible after notice that the automatic
protection device is not functioning properly.
§ 55-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-12
1:65
§ 55-13. Timing mechanisms.
After the enactment of this section, owners or lessees must equip audible
alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after
a maximum period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing
mechanism shall be unlawful in the Township and must be disconnected by
the owner or lessee within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 55-14. False alarms; liability of owners; failure to comply.
[Amended 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
A. No automatic protection device installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be keyed to a primary or secondary trunk line. After the
effective date of this chapter, all automatic protection devices that
transmit recorded messages directly to the Police or Fire Departments
shall be keyed to a designated trunk line.
B. Within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, existing
automatic protection devices in the Township shall be disconnected
from primary and secondary trunk lines.
A. For the purpose of defraying the costs to the Township of responding to
a false alarm, the owner or lessee of an automatic protection device and
persons using the services of intermediaries and users of audible
alarms and users of any other kind of direct or indirect connection with
the police or fire communication centers, except persons using two-way
live voice communications by telephone, shall, as a condition to
installation and continued operation of such equipment or service,
execute a consent in such form as may be prescribed by the Township
regarding the payment of fees to the Township for false alarms
originating from the owner's premises. This sum shall be a civil claim by
the Township and does not affect the penalty provisions prescribed by
§ 55-15. Such amount shall be billed by the Township to the property
owner or lessee and shall be paid within 60 days from the date of the
bill. Interest on delinquent bills shall accrue at the rate of 6% per year,
and the amount due plus accrued interest may be filed as a municipal
lien upon the property owner or lessee and collected as provided by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Claims Act.18
B. The procedure for imposing the aforementioned fees shall be as follows:
(1) The determination as to whether an alarm is a false alarm shall be
made by the Chief of Police, whose determination shall be final.
(2) Following a determination of a false alarm, the Township will mail a
written notice of the false alarm to the record title owner, lessee or
other entity in control of the premises as indicated on the consent
form, of the property where the false alarm occurred, notifying said
property owner, lessee or user to take corrective action to prevent
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 55-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 55-14
1:66
§ 55-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-12-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-12; 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-8; 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2; 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-09]
further false alarms and that future fees and penalties may result
from future false alarms.
(3) Such owner, lessee or user will pay a fee for each subsequent false
alarm in a one-year period, in amount to be determined from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. For purposes of
this consent, the one-year period shall be counted from the date of
the first false alarm in that one-year period if there are no
subsequent false alarms in the one-year period, and if there are any
subsequent false alarms in that one-year period, from the date of
any subsequent false alarm.
C. Any such owner, lessee or user who fails to execute the consent
described in Subsection A above within 60 days from the effective date
of this section shall, within the sixty-day period, disconnect the alarm,
automatic protection device or any other kind of direct or indirect
connection with the police or fire communications center and shall
discontinue using the services of any intermediaries. Continued use
after the sixty-day period without executing the consent shall be a
violation of this chapter subject to the penalties of § 55-15.
A. Notice violations. Failure to comply with the requirements of written
notice of a violation of any provision hereof within five days of receipt of
such notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall
constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.
Costs of prosecution are to be collectible before any Magisterial District
Judge as like fines and penalties are now by law collectible. Such notice
shall continue in force and effect until full compliance with the
requirements stated herein, and each and every failure to comply with
such notice within 24 hours after the five days allowed for compliance
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Intentional false alarm violations. Any person found guilty of misuse,
orintentional or deliberate fake or false activation shall be liable for a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, for each and
every such activation, to be collectible before any Magisterial District
Judge as like fines or penalties are now by law collectible.
C. Continual accidental activation. Any person found guilty of continual
accidental activation shall be liable for a fine of not more than $300,
plus costs of prosecution for each and every occurrence, to be
collectible before any Magisterial District Judge as like fines and
penalties are now by law collectible. Continual accidental activation
shall mean any subsequent accidental activation after three false
alarms or activations, whether intentional or accidental, within the
same consecutive twelve-month period.
§ 55-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-15
1:67
Chapter 56
FALSE ALARMS
§ 55-15 NEWTOWN CODE § 55-15
1:68
ARTICLE I
Abuse of 911 System
[Adopted 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 56-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or similar entity.
§ 56-2. Intentional false 911 calls prohibited.
§ 56-3. Unintentional 911 calls.
§ 56-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon summary
conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 and not exceeding $1,000 and cost of prosecution, and in default of fine
A. No person shall use the 911 telephone system for any purpose other
than to make a legitimate request for police, fire, or emergency medical
services.
B. No person shall use the 911 telephone system to report an emergency
knowing that the situation being reported does not exist.
C. No person shall dial 911 and then hang up without speaking to the 911
system operator unless a legitimate emergency exists and prevents the
caller from speaking.
D. No parent, guardian or other person having care and custody of a
juvenile or mentally handicapped individual shall permit or by
insufficient control allow such person to violate the provisions of this
section.
A. Unintentional calls to 911 made due to human error, equipment
malfunctions, or equipment programming shall be the joint and several
responsibility of the person dialing the unintentional 911 call and the
owner, tenant, business occupant, occupant or person in control of a
premises or telephone equipment including wireless telephones from
which such false 911 calls originate.
B. The person dialing the unintentional 911 call, or the owner, tenant,
business occupant, occupant or person in control of a premises or
telephone equipment including wireless telephones from which such
false 911 calls originate, shall be issued a citation for violation of this
section. No citations shall be issued for the first three false calls in a
calendar year (January 1 through December 31).
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-4
1:69
and costs, such person may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more
than 30 days.
§ 56-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 56-4
1:70
Chapter 58
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 172. Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine,
contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any
price, may be operated or used as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score, and whether or not a prize is offered.
It shall include but not be limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, photoelectric shooting or target machines, electronic video
games, air-hockey tables, football games and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated
or described. It shall not include devices or machines whose sole purpose is
to dispense merchandise such as candy, cigarettes, etc.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
displaying or maintaining for use and operation any jukebox, mechanical
amusement device or pool table or otherwise permitting the use or
operation of such devices for a fee or charge.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation, and, whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term, as applied to a copartnership or association, means the
partners or members thereof and, as applied to a corporation, the officers
thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place authorized as such as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
POOL TABLE — Any table with cushions and/or pockets upon which games
of pool and/or billiards in any form are played upon payment of a price,
whether or not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token or key into
any slot or other opening.
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:71
§ 58-2. License required.
No operator shall display, keep or maintain for use and operation or
otherwise permit the use and operation of any jukebox, mechanical
amusement device, pool table or similar machine without first having
registered with and obtained a license from the Township as prescribed
herein.
§ 58-3. License application.
§ 58-4. License tax; fees.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license for a mechanical or electronic
device shall apply therefor, in writing, to the Township. Such
application shall set forth the full name and address of the applicant
and the address at which such device is to be located, together with:
(1) A plan of the premises showing the location or locations where the
jukebox, mechanical amusement device or pool table or similar
machine or device is to be displaced or maintained and indicating
the same as a supervised area.
(2) This plan shall show all doorways, aisle widths of three feet.
(3) This application shall not exceed more than three devices, without
a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) The type, manufacturer and serial number of each jukebox,
mechanical device or pool table for which application is made.
B. Such information shall be furnished over the signature of the applicant
and shall be made under oath or affirmation.
C. No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days has elapsed from
the date of an application, during which time the Township may
investigate the facts set forth in the application.
D. Upon approval of the application, the Township shall issue a license for
each location where a jukebox, mechanical or electronic amusement
device or pool table is to be displayed or maintained and may also issue
a seal to be affixed to each jukebox, mechanical or electronic device or
pool table registered and licensed under this chapter.
A. For general revenue purposes, the Township hereby levies and imposes
an annual mechanical devices license tax, which shall be paid by the
operator to the Township at the time that the application is filed. The
amount of such license tax shall be:
(1) For each jukebox: $50.
(2) For each mechanical or electronic amusement device: $200.
(3) For each pool table: $100.
§ 58-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 58-4
1:72
§ 58-5. General regulations.
§ 58-6. License suspension.
After the Police Department has responded to two complaints pertaining
to disturbances related to the operation of such devices at any licensed
premises, the Board of Supervisors shall have the right to review the
complaints, and, if decided that the complaints were legitimate, they shall
B. No deductions or refunds of any license tax shall be granted in case of a
tax payable for less than a full calendar year or in the case of any device
destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after
payment of the tax. In the event of the transfer of the registration of any
device, there shall be a transfer fee for that device, the amount of which
shall be established by resolution.
C. In the case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original license
or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal issued shall apply to
the Township, who shall then issue a new seal or license upon payment
of a fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution.
A. A copy of the license shall be visibly posted upon the premises where
any jukebox, mechanical or electronic device or pool table is displayed
or maintained for use and operation, and the seal which shall be
provided shall be affixed to the jukebox, mechanical or electronic
amusement device or pool table for which issued in accordance with the
directions of the Township.
B. Any premises upon which any jukebox, mechanical or electronic
amusement device or pool table is displayed or maintained shall be
open to the examination and inspection by duly authorized agents of the
Township during all hours that such premises are open to use by the
public.
C. No mechanical or electronic device or pool table shall be used for
gambling or other illegal purposes.
D. Any premises or places of business primarily or substantially devoted to
the display or maintenance of mechanical or electronic amusement
devices or pool tables shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 172,
Zoning, relating to places of amusement. For the purposes of this
subsection, any premises upon which are displayed or maintained more
than a total of three mechanical or electronic amusement devices and/
or pool tables shall be considered as being substantially devoted to the
display or maintenance of mechanical or electronic amusement devices
or pool tables.
E. No loitering shall be permitted on the premises.
F. Each device shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of floor area.
G. No device shall be placed within 10 feet of any doorway.
§ 58-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-6
1:73
have the right to suspend the license and enforce the removal of all devices
from the licensed premises for the remainder of that calendar year.
§ 58-7. License expiration; renewal.
Licenses issued under this chapter expire on June 30 of each year.
Applications for renewal, accompanied by the required annual fee, shall be
submitted in the month of June and may consist of a signed verification of
the original application contents so long as there have been no changes.
§ 58-8. Transfer of license.
Licenses shall apply only to the operator and location to which issued,
and any transfer shall require an amendment of the original application,
approved by the Township, and payment of the fee specified in § 58-4B. A
new seal may be issued for a replacement for a jukebox, mechanical or
electronic device or pool table previously registered under this chapter only
upon amendment of the original applications, approval by the Township and
payment of the fee specified in § 58-4C.
§ 58-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval
as required by law; provided, however, that any operator subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall register and apply for a license as provided
herein within 30 days from when this chapter takes effect, and such
registration shall remain in effect until June 30, 1983, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein provided.
§ 58-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and in default of fine and costs,
such person may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30
days. Each and every day in which any person shall be in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense. It is expressly understood that
the permits issued for the operation of such machines or devices shall be for
amusement purposes only. Any indication of gambling, i.e., the awarding of
cash or premiums, shall constitute a breach of this chapter, and the licensee
shall be liable to prosecution under this chapter.
Chapter 61
ANIMALS
§ 58-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 58-10
1:74
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 709 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 61-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Includes every person having a right of proprietorship or
ownership in a dog, and every person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it
in his care, and every person who permits a dog to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him.
§ 61-2. Confinement of dogs. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
The owners of all dogs within the Township shall keep such dogs confined
so that such dogs cannot escape or run at large, or the dogs shall be firmly
secured so that they cannot stray, escape or run at large.19
§ 61-3. Prohibited acts.
§ 61-4. Seizure; impoundment; disposition. [Amended 7-12-1982 by
Ord. No. 1982-11; 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Any licensed or unlicensed dog found running at large in the Township shall
be seized and detained by police officers or agents of the Township and shall
A. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to remain in the open and to
howl, yelp or bark for extended periods of time.
B. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to cause annoyance to the
residents or other persons lawfully in the Township by barking, yelping,
howling or causing any other unseemly noise.
C. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to injure any person by
biting, jumping on, knocking down or attacking such person.
D. No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to damage or injure personal
property, real estate, shrubs, hedges, flowers or any growing thing by
running over or across such property or by urinating thereon or defiling
the same or by causing excrement to be placed thereon. The owner or
keeper of any dog that deposits excrement on public property or on
private property not belonging to the owner of such dog shall remove
such excrement and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. [Amended
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
19.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (b), pertaining to dogs running at large, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2.
§ 61-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-4
1:75
be impounded, kept and redeemed or disposed of as provided in the Dog
Law, 3 P.S. §§ 459-302 and 459-303.20
§ 61-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-5; 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2; 2-22-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-06]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than
$600 and the costs of the prosecution and, in default of the payment of the
fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. A violator
shall also reimburse any costs incurred by the Township for the care of
stray dogs that have been picked up and transported to the SPCA or other
authorized facility for accepting stray dogs within 30 days of notice to the
violator of the costs incurred by the Township.
20.Editor's Note: Former 3 P.S. § 459-303 was repealed December 11, 1996, by P.L. 943, No.
151, § 9. See now 3 P.S. § 459-302(c).
§ 61-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 61-5
1:76
Chapter 66
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Leaves and vegetative matter — See Ch. 145,
Art. IV.
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:77

ARTICLE I
Brush, Grass, Weeds, Trees and Bushes
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 1113 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 66-1. Restrictions.
§ 66-2. Removal of obstructions; costs; notice.
Whenever any lands or lots in the vicinity of buildings in the Township
have thereon tall grasses or weeds or similar nonedible vegetation that
may, in the judgment of the Township Manager, constitute a fire hazard
or whenever any tree or trees, hedges or tall grasses upon or along the
highways and streets or elsewhere within the limits of the Township become
an obstruction to public travel, either upon the sidewalks or the roadways
of the highways and streets, or whenever any tree or trees obstruct the
proper lighting of the highways, streets and sidewalks of the Township,
the Township Manager shall notify the owners or occupants of the land or
lot in front of or upon which such tree or trees, hedges or grasses and
weeds stand to remove the obstruction or fire hazard within five days. If the
owners or occupants neglect or refuse to do so after notice as aforesaid,
then the Township Manager may cause the work to be done at the cost of
the property owner. The expense of the necessary labor for doing the work,
together with a penalty of 10%, shall be charged against and paid by such
delinquent property owner, and in default of payment, the same shall be
collected by action in the name of the Township, as debts of like amount
are collected, or by the filing of a municipal lien against the property of
such owner. The notice provided for by this section may be served on the
property owner by leaving the same at his place of residence, or if he has
no residence in the Township, then by leaving the same with the tenant or
occupant of the premises and mailing a copy thereof to the owners at their
last known address, or if the premises are vacant or unoccupied, by posting
A. No owner or person in possession of any land or real property shall
permit any weeds or similar vegetation, not edible or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose, so as to exceed a height of 12 inches or
to become a nuisance, to grow or remain on lots in any residential area
within 20 feet of the dividing line between a lot and a street or a
proposed street on which the lot abuts or within 100 feet of any
building, structure or flammable material. These provisions shall not be
construed nor are they intended to prohibit the growth or maintenance
of wooded areas in their natural state. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
B. No property owner or person in possession of any premises in the
Township shall maintain trees or hedges that obstruct the proper
lighting of the streets, sidewalks and highways or permit trees, hedges
or tall grasses to grow along the sidewalks in front of their lots so as to
obstruct the use of the sidewalks or highways.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:79
the notice on the premises and mailing a copy thereof to the owners as
aforesaid.
§ 66-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
offense, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 66-4. through § 66-9. (Reserved)
§ 66-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 66-4
1:80
ARTICLE II
Bamboo
[Adopted 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 66-10. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to preserve and protect private and public
property from the damage and spread from bamboo grasses, protect
indigenous plant materials from invasive spread of bamboo and maintain
the general welfare of the residents of Newtown Township.
§ 66-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAMBOO — Any type of the roughly 1,450 species of bamboo known
throughout the world from the grass family Poaceae, subfamily
Bambusoideae, tribe Bambuseae. Fallopia japonica, commonly known as
Japanese knotweed, although not bamboo, is an invasive plant that
resembles bamboo that is also considered bamboo for the purposes of this
article.
BAMBOO OWNER — Any property owner or resident who has planted and/
or grows bamboo, or maintains bamboo on his property, or permits bamboo
to grow or remain on the property even if the bamboo has spread from an
adjoining property. Any owner of, or tenant in possession or control of, a
property on which bamboo is found will be considered a bamboo owner.
CLUMPING BAMBOO — Any sympodial or pachymorph rhizome structure
bearing bamboo, including but not limited to Fargesia, Thamnocalamus,
Chusquea, and Borinda. Clumping bamboos are also fast-growing but not
as invasive as running bamboo. However, the thick root system can be very
damaging to roads and other structures.
RUNNING BAMBOO — Any monopodial or leptomorph rhizome structure
bearing bamboo, including but not limited to Phyllostachys, and Pseudosasa
as well as Golden Bamboo and Arrow Bamboo. Japanese knotweed shall
be considered running bamboo for the purposes of this article. Running
bamboo is extremely fast-growing and highly invasive.
§ 66-12. Applicability.
For purposes of the article, bamboo found growing upon a property shall
constitute presumptive evidence that the bamboo was planted and/or grown
with the consent of the bamboo owner.
§ 66-13. Prohibition.
Upon the effective date of this article, the planting of running bamboo
shall be prohibited within the Township. Any person or entity that hereafter
plants, causes to be planted, or permits or allows to be planted running
§ 66-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-13
1:81
bamboo shall be deemed to be in violation of this section, and shall be
subject to such penalties as are set forth herein.
§ 66-14. Regulation.
Any bamboo that has been planted or otherwise permitted to grow on any
property within the Township prior to the effective date of this section, or
any clumping bamboo planted or permitted to grow after the effective date
of this section, may remain on such property subject to compliance with this
section.
§ 66-15. Removal.
A. Bamboo shall not be maintained or otherwise permitted to exist within
the greater of area within 10 feet of the bamboo owner's property line
or 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or traveled portion of any public
roadway in the Township;
B. Any bamboo owner whose property contains bamboo shall remove and
abate the growth of the bamboo within the greater of the area within 10
feet of their property line or 40 feet of the edge of the pavement or
traveled portion of a public road in the Township;
C. Each bamboo owner shall be responsible to ensure that the bamboo
planted or growing on the property does not encroach or grow upon any
adjoining or neighboring property or properties, including public
property and Township rights-of-way;
D. Prior to planting any clumping bamboo, as regulated by this section, all
property owners or tenants in possession must provide a written
certification from a certified Pennsylvania horticulturist or other
similarly qualified individual that the bamboo being planted is a
clumping bamboo and is being planted in accordance pursuant to
regulations of this section.
E. Each bamboo owner shall be required to take such reasonable
measures to prevent such bamboo from invading or growing into the
aforementioned setbacks and adjoining properties, which shall include
at a minimum installation of sheathing comprised of metal or other
material impenetrable by bamboo at least 30 inches deep within the
property line or lines where the bamboo is planted or is growing to
prevent such invasion.
A. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo owner's property
invades or grows on an adjoining or neighboring property that is owned
or held on behalf of the Township, or to within 40 inches of the paved or
traveled portion of any public roadway in the Township, the Township
shall notify the bamboo owner in writing that the bamboo must be
removed. If the bamboo is not removed within 30 days of the notice, the
Township, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for the removal of
§ 66-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 66-15
1:82
§ 66-16. Replanting prohibited.
Any running bamboo either planted or caused to be planted or existing on
a property prior to the effective date of this article may not be replanted or
replaced in kind once such said running bamboo is or has become, for any
reason, dead, destroyed, uprooted or otherwise removed.
§ 66-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision of this article
shall, in addition to the other charges hereinbefore provided for each
offense, upon summary conviction before any Magisterial District Justice,
pay a fine of not exceeding $1,000 for each offense, plus costs of
prosecution, and in default of said payment of the fines and costs, the
violator may be sentenced to the county jail for a term of not more than 30
days. Each and every day in which any person, firm, corporation or entity is
in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
such bamboo, to the extent it does not comply with the regulations of
this article.
B. The bamboo owner shall be liable and responsible to the Township for
all costs incurred in removing the bamboo and may be assessed against
the property of the bamboo owner.
§ 66-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-17
1:83
Chapter 69
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 72.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Plumbing — See Ch. 121.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 66-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 66-17
1:84
ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Adopted 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-2]
§ 69-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-03; 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Township Manager of the Township of Newtown, being marked and
designated as the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as
the Building Code of the Township of Newtown in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided,
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 69-5 and § 69-6 of
this article.
§ 69-2. Restrictions on permit issuance.
No building permits shall be issued for any building, the plans for which
must be approved by the Commonwealth Department of Labor and Industry,
until such time as the approval of the Commonwealth Department of Labor
and Industry to such plans has been given. Plans approved by the
Commonwealth Department of Labor and Industry must be submitted for all
buildings requiring such approval as part of the application for a building
permit.
§ 69-3. Application for certificate; procedure; fee; violations and
penalties. [Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-04]
Certificates of use and occupancy for the transfer of a residential property
shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Application. Applications for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be
filed with the Code Department by the seller of the property not later
than the date of execution of an agreement for sale between the buyer
and seller. Applications shall contain such information as the Township
may require. A fee in the amount of $75 shall accompany the residential
application, and a fee of $125 for a commercial or industrial
application.
B. Inspection.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Code Department
shall, within five business days, conduct an inspection of the
property to determine compliance with the following Township
standards:
(a) Display of house numbers, which shall be:
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3
1:85
[1] Clearly visible from the street on which the number is
assigned.
[2] At least four inches high and 2 1/2 inches wide with
Scotchlite reflective material.
[3] Of a color which contrasts with their background.
[4] Displayed in such a way as to avoid confusion regarding
which building or unit is being identified.
(b) Maintenance of public sidewalks and curbs and/or gutters in
accordance with Article I of Chapter 145, Street and
Sidewalks, § 145-4, of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
Sidewalks and curbs which abut the property shall be kept in
good repair and in a safe condition for public use. Sidewalks
and curbs with a horizontal crack or a difference in elevation
shall be replaced upon the issuance of a permit by the
Township Engineer or Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) If a violation is determined during the inspection, the seller shall be
mailed a notice within three business days of the inspection, which
shall clearly describe the violation and remedial action for
compliance.
C. Reinspection. Upon correction of any violation or violations, the
applicant shall notify the Code Department, in writing, for a
reinspection, which shall be conducted within five business days from
receipt of this letter.
(1) Where it is determined by the Township that, due to unique
circumstances or weather conditions, sidewalks cannot be replaced
or repaired to comply with Township standards, or house numbers
cannot be installed, the Township shall establish a dollar value to
complete the work necessary to comply with the terms of this
chapter, which shall be escrowed by the seller with the Township of
Newtown on behalf of the buyer.
D. Certification statement. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and
occupancy, the Township shall be in receipt of a notarized statement,
signed by the sellers and purchasers, which shall certify compliance
with the following provisions of the Township Code:
(1) That operating smoke detectors or a smoke-detection system is
located within the immediate vicinity of all bedrooms and on every
level of the building in compliance with the IBC Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) That all sump pump(s) or other devices which discharge drainage
resulting from rainwater, springs, wells, or other groundwater have
been disconnected from the sanitary sewer system in accordance
with Chapter 121 of the Township Code.
§ 69-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-3
1:86
§ 69-4. Driveways and parking lots.
Driveways and parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) Form 408, Specifications, as amended to date. All material
thicknesses shall be thicknesses after compaction of materials.
Construction methods other than those listed below may be allowed if
permitted under PennDOT Form 408, Specifications, and approved by the
Township Engineer.
(3) The certification statement shall be on forms provided by the
Township and shall contain such information as the Township may
require.
E. Upon determining that the property complies with the full provisions of
this article, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Director.
Such certificate shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of
issuance.
F. Any building, residential or commercial, hereafter erected, transferred,
or altered as to occupancy shall not be occupied until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued therefor by Newtown Township, signed by
the Building Official, Fire Marshal, Plumbing Inspector and Zoning
Officer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, builder, or seller to
secure such certificate of occupancy from the Township before
permitting the building to be occupied. If the owner, builder, or seller
proposes to convey title to the building to a new owner, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner, seller, or builder conveying title to secure
such certificate of occupancy before permitting the conveyance to be
consummated. The Township shall keep a record of all certificates
issued and shall charge a fee for certificates for each individual
dwelling or dwelling unit and a fee for certificates for all other buildings
or parts thereof. Should any owner, seller, or builder of a building
permit the occupancy of the same prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for such building or should any owner or builder permit
the occupancy of one or more units within a building prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for such building or units, each
such occupation shall constitutes a separate violation of this Building
Code. Whenever such owner, seller, or builder has been officially
notified by the Building Official, Zoning Officer or any other official of
Newtown Township or by service of a summons in a prosecution or in
any other official manner of a violation of this section, each day
thereafter that such violation continues shall constitute a new and
separate offense punishable by fine or penalty as provided in this
Building Code.
A. Apartments and offices; driveway and parking areas.
(1) Subbase shall consist of the preparation of the surface of the
graded roadway as per Section 3.7, Form 408, Pennsylvania
Highway Specifications.
§ 69-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-4
1:87
(2) The compacted finished base course shall consist of a six-inch
thickness of crushed aggregate or 3A modified stone rolled and
compacted with a ten-ton roller or other approved attainable
compaction equipment.
(3) Bituminous surface course shall consist of two courses, a one-inch
binder course and a one-inch wearing course, constructed of ID-2
bituminous material, with each course being rolled and compacted
as approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Shopping center and other commercial construction.
(1) Surface drives and through drives.
(a) Subbase shall consist of the preparation of the surface of the
graded roadway as per Section 3.7, Form 408, Pennsylvania
Highway Specifications.
(b) The compacted finished base course shall consist of eight
inches of No. 3 crushed stone or slag rolled and compacted
with a ten-ton roller or other approved attainable compaction.
After final compacted thickness of base course has been
obtained, it shall be choked by application of No. 1 screenings
such as to fill all voids and ensure smooth, hard monolithic
surface.
(c) The bituminous surface course shall consist of two courses, a
1 1/2 inch binder course and a one-inch wearing course,
constructed of ID-2 bituminous material, with each course
being rolled and compacted with a ten-ton roller or other
approved attainable compaction equipment.
(2) Parking areas.
(a) Subbase shall consist of the preparation of the surface of the
graded roadway as per Section 3.7, Form 408, Pennsylvania
Highway Specifications.
(b) The compacted finished base course shall consist of six inches
of No. 3 crushed stone or slag rolled and compacted with a tenton
roller or other approved attainable compaction equipment.
After final compacted thickness of base course, it shall be
choked by application of No. 1 screenings such as to fill voids
and ensure a smooth, hard and monolithic surface.
(c) The bituminous surface course shall consist of two courses, a
one-inch binder course and a one-inch wearing course,
constructed of ID-2 bituminous material, with each course
being rolled and compacted with a ten-ton roller or other
approved attainable compaction equipment.
§ 69-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-5
1:88
§ 69-5. Contractor registration. [Amended 12-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-6]
A. Purpose. The Board of Supervisors finds it in the best interest of the
residents of Newtown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, that
persons or firms who engage in construction, repairs, remodeling,
rehabilitation or demolition, and operating as general contractors, and
including, but not limited to mechanical contractors, electrical
contractors, plumbing contractors, fire prevention contractors,
specialty contractors, home improvement contractors, elevator
contractors, grading contractors, roofing contractors, painting
contractors, paperhanging contractors, tree surgeons, or landscapers,
who may be prime contractors or subcontractors shall be required to
obtain a license from the Township for such purpose, to the end that
only responsible and qualified persons shall be permitted to engage in
such business in said Township of Newtown.
B. Compliance with regulations. No person or firm may engage in or
transact any construction, building repairs, remodeling, rehabilitation
or demolition business, or hold themselves out to the public as doing
such business or solicit such business, in the Township of Newtown,
Pennsylvania, except in compliance with the applicable provisions of
this section. No person or firm may engage in this Township in any
trade or practice or other act prohibited by any provision of this section,
and any person or firm who willfully participates in a prohibited act or
violation is subject to the criminal penalty therefor. The provisions of
this section may not be waived by agreement.
C. License limitations; nonapplicability.
(1) A license issued pursuant to this section may not be construed to
authorize the licensee to perform any particular type of work or
kind of business which is reserved to qualified licensees under
other provisions of state or local law, nor shall any license or
authority other than as issued or permitted pursuant to this section
authorize engaging in construction, building repairs, remodeling,
rehabilitation, demolition or home improvement business in the
Township of Newtown.
(2) This section shall not apply to the official transaction of an
authorized representative of the United States of America or any
instrumentality thereof, or of any state, the District of Colombia,
territory of the United States or any city or county thereof or of any
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision thereof.
D. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Whenever the terms "Building
Inspector" or "Assistant Building Inspector" appear in this chapter, it
shall be and mean the duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer or his
§ 69-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:89
assistant, or deputy, of the Township of Newtown, said terms being
synonymous.
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written or contained in
one or more documents, between a contractor and an owner for the
performance of work, including all labor, services and materials to be
furnished and performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, other than a bona fide employee of the
owner, who undertakes or offers to work, whether or not such person
is licensed or subject to the licensing requirements of this section and
whether or not such person is a prime contractor or subcontractor with
respect to the owner.
OWNER — Any property owner, tenant or other person who orders,
contracts for or purchases the services of a contractor, subcontractor,
specialty contractor or home improvement contractor, or the person
entitled to the work of such pursuant to a contract.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, trust,
association, owner, contractor, salesman or other legal entity.
E. Administration and enforcement; certificate of insurance.
(1) It is the duty of the Building Inspector or Assistant Building
Inspector to administer and provide for the enforcement of all the
provisions of this section and specifically to issue licenses to all
applicants who shall be duly qualified under and who comply with
provisions of this section, and to refuse licenses to or suspend or
revoke licenses issued to persons who do not so quality or so
comply. The Township Building Inspector or Assistant is authorized
to issue licenses upon the proper application, the furnishing of a
certificate of insurance as required by Subsection I(2), and the
license fee having been paid.
(2) A certificate of insurance acceptable to the Building Inspector shall
be filed with the Township prior to the issuance of a license. These
certificates shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under
the policy will not be cancelled until at least 15 days prior to
written notice having been given the Township of Newtown.
F. License fee. No license shall be issued or become effective until the
applicant pays the required fee, payable to the Township of Newtown as
follows: All contractors as provided for in Subsection A and who are in
good standing may be issued an annual license on a calendar year basis
beginning January 1 of each year upon application and the payment of a
fee of $50. An abatement of said fee shall be made on September 1 for
the balance of the calendar year at the rate of $25.
G. License required. Except as otherwise specifically exempted by the
provisions of this section, no person shall act in the capacity of general
contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor or home improvement
§ 69-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-5
1:90
contractor unless authorized to do so by an existing license issued in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
H. Exceptions to license requirements. No contractor's license shall be
required of any person when acting in the particular capacity or
particular type of transaction set forth in this section:
(1) An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for
wages or salary.
(2) Any person who is required by state or local law to attain standards
of competency or experience as a prerequisite to engaging in such
craft or profession, and who is acting exclusively within the scope
of the craft or profession for which he is currently licensed
pursuant to such other law.
I. Issuance, refusal and renewal of licenses; insurance.
(1) When an application has been filed with the Building Inspector or
Assistant Building Inspector, in proper form, he must, within a
period of 30 days from the date following the date the application is
received, issue or refuse the appropriate contractor's license to the
applicant. If an application for a license is refused, the applicant
shall be sent a written statement setting forth the reason for the
refusal to grant the license.
(2) An applicant for any license required by the provisions of this
section shall file a written application on a form supplied by the
Township, which shall be signed and under oath. The application
shall require (among other items) the names of owners, partners,
directors and officers of the applicant, and the business addresses
and trade names of the applicant, together with a certificate of
insurance written for not less than any limit of coverage specified
under this section. The contractor shall take out and maintain at his
own expense, during the life of the license, public liability, property
damage, products liability and completed operations insurance.
Said applicant must provide a current certificate of insurance to
the Township written for a minimum policy of $500,000 combined
single limits covering said requirement.
(3) Every contractor licensee shall within 10 days after a change in
control of ownership or management, or change of address or trade
name, notify the Building Inspector of such changes.
(4) Licenses of all contractors shall expire on December 31 following
the date of issue unless prior thereto the license is revoked or
suspended. Upon payment of the annual license fee, as prescribed
by Subsection F, prior to the expiration date, a license shall be
renewed for another year, and the authority to do business shall
continue in effect until such time within the year as the Board
revoked or suspended the license.
§ 69-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:91
J. Standard for license issuance or continuance. For the protection of the
people of this Township, no license shall be issued or continued if
already issued, where:
(1) The person or the management personnel are untrustworthy or not
of good character.
(2) The business transactions of the person have been marked by a
practice of failure to perform contracts or the manipulation of
assets or accounts, or by fraud or bad faith.
K. Grounds for refusal, revocation or suspension of license.
(1) The Building Inspector shall have the power, upon approval of the
board of Supervisors, to refuse, suspend or revoke any licenses
issued under the provisions of this section where the Building
Inspector or Board of Supervisors finds that the licensee has
violated any provisions of this section or is performing or
attempting to perform any act prohibited by this section, or violates
the Township of Newtown Building Code.
(2) A violation of any condition of a permit shall be cause for
suspension or revocation of the license.
(3) Any violation of any of the provisions of this section upon the part of
any director, manager, partner, officer, salesman, agent or
employee of a contractor shall be cause for suspension or
revocation of the license of the contractor unless it shall appear to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors and Building Inspector
that the individuals engaged in the management of the contractor:
(a) Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct; or
(b) Were unable to prevent the violation.
L. Hearing.
(1) The Board shall suspend or revoke any license or authority to do
business only after a hearing. At least 10 days prior to the date set
for the hearing, the Building Inspector shall notify the licensee in
writing of any change made, and afford said licensee an
opportunity to be heard in person and by counsel in reference
thereto. Such written notice shall be served by delivery of the same
to the licensee by certified mail to the business address of such
licensee of record with the Board. The hearing on such changes
shall be at such time and place as the Board of Supervisors shall
prescribe.
(2) If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that any licensee is
guilty of any violation of any of the provisions of this section, the
authority of the licensee to do business may be revoked or
suspended for such period of time as shall be determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 69-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-5
1:92
(3) If a license is refused, the applicant may, within 10 days from the
date the notice of refusal is mailed, request a hearing. Said hearing
must be held within 30 days from the date of the request, and the
Board of Supervisors must render its decision within 20 days
following the hearing.
M. Prohibited acts.
(1) The following acts are prohibited:
(a) Abandonment or willful failure to perform, without
justification, any contract or project engaged in or undertaken
by a contractor, or willful deviation from or disregard of plans
or specifications in any material respect without obtaining the
consent of the owner in writing and without providing the
Township building officials notification of such changes.
(b) Making any substantial misrepresentation in the procurement
of a contract, or making any false promise of character likely to
influence, persuade or induce.
(c) Any fraud in the execution of, or in the material alteration of
any contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document
incident to a contractual transaction.
(d) Preparing or accepting any mortgage, promissory note or
other evidence of indebtedness upon the obligation of a
contractual transaction with knowledge that it received a
greater monetary obligation than the consideration for the
work to be performed, which consideration may be a time-sale
price.
(e) Directly or indirectly publishing any advertisement relating to
work or services which continue an assertion, representation
or statement of fact which is false, deceptive or misleading,
provided that any advertisement which is subject to and
complies with the then existing rules, regulations or guides of
the Federal Trade Commission shall not be deemed false,
deceptive or misleading; or by any means advertising or
purporting to offer the general public any work or service with
the intent not to accept contracts for the particular work or at
the price which is advertised or offered to the public.
(f) Willful or deliberate disregard and violation of the building
laws of this state or this Township, or of the safety of labor or
workmen's compensation insurance laws of this state.
(g) Doing any business with or through any person who is subject
to the licensing requirements of this section with the
knowledge that such person is not licensed as required.
§ 69-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:93
§ 69-6. Insertions and amendments.
The following sections of the BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition,
1993, are hereby revised as follows:
(h) Misrepresentation of a material fact by an applicant in
obtaining a license.
(i) Willful failure to notify the Board of any change of control in
ownership, management or business name or location.
(j) Conducting a business in any name other than the one in which
the contractor or salesman is licensed.
(k) Willful failure to comply with any order, demand or
requirement lawfully made by the Board of Supervisors under
and within the authority of this section.
(2) Violations of any of the prohibitions of this section shall subject any
violator, to whom the licensing provisions of this section apply, to
the administrative sanctions of this section and to criminal
prosecution.
N. Doing business without a license. Any person who shall knowingly and
willfully engage in building construction, repairs, remodeling,
rehabilitation or demolition without obtaining a license as required by
this section, and who is not otherwise exempted from said licensing
requirements, and any person who continues in business as a
contractor after revocation or during suspension, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 for each separate violation, and in default of
payment thereof be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
O. (Reserved)
P. Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or any other application
of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or application; and to this end, all provisions of this section are declared
to be severable.
Q. Solicitation. A license issued under this section does not supersede the
requirements of Chapter 118 of the Code of the Township of Newtown
pertaining to soliciting, etc., but is to be enforced in conjunction
therewith where applicable.
A. Section 101.1 (Title). Insert "Township of Newtown."
B. Section 108.2, Suspension of permit, is amended to read as follows:
§ 69-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-6
1:94
108.2 Suspension of permit: Any permit issued shall become invalid
if the authorized work is not commenced within six months from
the issuance of the permit or if the authorized work is suspended
or abandoned for a period of six months from the time the work
commences or if all work is not completed within a period of two years
after commencing the work. If a permit becomes invalid, a new permit
must be obtained for any work.
C. Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, is amended to read as follows:
112.3.1 Fee schedule: The fees to be charged by the Township of
Newtown shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors from time to
time by resolution in applying the provisions of this code. The value of
the work shall be determined by the Building Official on the basis of
estimated current costs.
D. Sections 112.4, Accounting, is amended to read as follows:
112.4 Accounting: The Township Manager or his designee shall keep
an accurate account of all fees collected; and such fees collected shall
be deposited in a timely manner in the appropriate Township account.
E. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
116.4 Violation penalties: It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in violation
of any provision of this code or to cause, permit or suffer any such
violations to be committed. For any and every violation of the
provisions of this Building Code, the owner, general agent or
contractor of a building or premises where such violation has been
committed or exists and the lessee or tenants of the entire building or
entire premises where such violation has been committed or exists and
the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person
who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation
shall be liable, on conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty of not less
than $75 nor more than $300 for each and every offense. Whenever
such person has been officially notified by the Building Inspector or
by any other official of the Township or by service of a summons in
a prosecution or in any other official manner that he is committing
a violation of this Building Code, each day that he continues such
violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be
collected as like fines or penalties are now collected by law.
F. Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, is amended to read as follows:
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who continues any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $300.
§ 69-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-6
1:95
§ 69-7. Deletions.
The following sections of the BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition,
1993, are hereby deleted:
G. Section 121.2, Membership of board, is amended to read as follows:
121.2 Membership of board: The Board of Supervisors of the
Township shall act as the Board of Appeals.
H. Section 914.2, Where required, is amended to read as follows:
914.2 Where required: Standpipe systems shall be installed where
required by this code and in the locations indicated in Sections 914.2.3
and 914.2.4.
I. Section 3408.2, Applicability. Insert "April 30, 1938."
A. Section 102.2, Existing structures.
B. Section 104.3, Organization.
C. Section 104.4, Deputy.
D. Section 108.7, Approval of part.
E. Section 112.3, New construction and alterations.
F. Section 121.2.1, Qualifications.
G. Section 121.3, Notice of meeting.
H. Section 109.0, Temporary structures.
I. Section 914.2.1, Building height.
J. Section 914.2.2, Building area.
K. Section 3102.4.3, Permit exemptions.
L. Section 3102.13.2, Additional permits.
§ 69-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 69-7
1:96
ARTICLE II
Underground Storage Tanks
[Adopted 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-3]
§ 69-8. Secondary containment synthetic liner system.
§ 69-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-12-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-5]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
offense, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
A. In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the
Township and to provide protection from failure of storage tanks from
causing environmental damage, the Township Building Code and
Plumbing Code are hereby respectively amended to require that a
secondary containment synthetic liner system shall also be installed.
Such synthetic liner system shall conform with all standards of the
commonwealth and federal agencies and shall, if not in conflict with
these standards, be equal to the Petrogard System of MPC Containment
Systems, Ltd.
B. Propane tanks and tanks supplied with a secondary containment system
with a Township-approved interstitial monitoring system shall not be
required to install a synthetic liner.
§ 69-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:97
Chapter 72
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
§ 72-1. Definitions.
The following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following
meanings:
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling or
place of business or industry, but shall not include any public building or
structure built as a place of worship or any accessory building located on a
lot where there is also a main building.
STREET — Includes any street, road, public highway or private road upon
which there are located two or more buildings, as defined by this chapter,
whether or not such street, road, highway or private right-of-way is
physically opened up or laid out on a recorded plan but not physically
opened.
§ 72-2. Naming of streets.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown shall have the right
from time to time to establish by resolution the names of streets or to
change or alter the names of streets when, in the judgment of the Board
of Supervisors, the existing street names are confusing or prevent proper
identification of such streets and their locations.
§ 72-3. Establishment of numbering plan.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to establish a numbering plan
for all lots and buildings in the Township of Newtown. Numbers shall be
assigned to buildings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 72-4. Assignment of numbers.
Whenever the Zoning Officer shall find that a section or portion of the
Township shall be built up to the extent that the location of buildings in
such section shall be difficult without the use of street numbers or when
the Zoning Officer has ascertained that the United States of America is
serving or proposes to serve such section with mail delivery requiring the
numbering of buildings, then the Zoning Officer shall assign numbers to all
existing buildings in such section as soon as possible.
§ 69-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 72-5
1:98
§ 72-5. Notice; time limit for posting numbers.
After the Zoning Officer shall determine the street or section of the
Township required to be numbered by the provisions of this chapter, he shall
determine thereafter and send to the owner or occupant of every lot upon
which a building is located a notice of the number assigned to such building.
Said notice may be served personally upon the owner or occupant or by
certified mail. In the event that the Zoning Officer shall ascertain that any
building has been previously numbered and that such number shall not be
in the sequence of established numbers, then the Zoning Officer shall assign
a new number to such building in the manner set forth for the numbering
of buildings under the provisions of this chapter. The property owner or
occupant of any building to which a number has been assigned or, in the
event of a renumbering, to which a new number has been assigned shall,
within 15 days after the date of the service of said notice, affix the number
or new number, as the case may be, to such building or elsewhere upon the
property in the manner prescribed by this chapter. Every property owner
who shall disregard or fail to comply with such notice within the time limits
therein shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 72-6. Display of numbers.
Numbers, as assigned to the buildings in the Township according to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be affixed to or painted upon or carved upon
such buildings or upon a permanent standard, base or support between
such building and the street. Each number shall be at least 2 1/2 inches
high and be of such color and material as to be visible from the street
and shall be maintained constantly in complete and legible form. A number
affixed to or painted upon a mailbox established in accordance with postal
regulations, if of sufficient size and legibility and properly maintained, shall
be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event
of a renumbering, the property owner or occupant shall remove the old
or former number and shall place the new number on said property as
hereinbefore provided within 15 days of the date of notice, provided that,
in the case of buildings occupied by other than the owner thereof, the
occupant, rather than the owner, shall be responsible for the placing and
maintaining of the numbers upon such building as hereby required.
§ 72-7. New buildings.
Whenever a building shall hereafter be commenced on a street or in a
section of the Township in which street numbers have been assigned, the
Building Inspector or the Zoning Officer, as the case may be, shall assign
a number to said building when the zoning and building permits have been
granted, and the owner or occupant shall affix such number prior to the
application for a final compliance inspection.
§ 72-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-8
1:99
§ 72-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 75
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
§ 75-1. Findings.
In order to regulate the collection of local services tax and obtain other
important information concerning the general health, safety and welfare
of the community, the Board of Supervisors finds it in the best interest of
the residents of Newtown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, that
all persons or firms that engage in any business whatsoever in Newtown
Township, except those persons, firms, associations or corporations
referred to in Chapter 69, § 69-5, of the Newtown Township Code and
children, are required to register and obtain a registration certificate from
the Township of Newtown for such purpose, to the end that Newtown
Township is informed as to what businesses are in said Township and the
extent of such business.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "business" means any trade,
profession, vocation, service, construction communication or commercial
activity or making sales to persons or rendering services from or
attributable to any office or location in Newtown Township, whether for
gain or profit or otherwise. The term "business" shall not include children,
the business of any political subdivision, authority, agency or similar
organization created pursuant to statute to perform an essential
government function, businesses referred to in Chapter 69, § 69-5, and
any other business upon which the power to impose business registration
requirements is withheld by law.
§ 75-3. Registration certificate required; fees.
After the effective date of this chapter, any person, firm, association, or
corporation desiring to conduct or continue to conduct any business within
the Township of Newtown shall file with the Township Manager or his
designee an application and pay a fee of $35 for a permanent business
registration certificate or temporary business registration certificate, as
the case may be. This fee may be amended annually by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. A permanent business registration certificate shall
be issued to a business that is to continue for longer than 30 days. A
temporary business registration certificate shall be issued to a business that
§ 72-8 NEWTOWN CODE § 75-3
1:100
is to continue less than 30 days. There shall be no pro-rata discount in the
application fee for engaging in business for less than the registration year.
§ 75-4. Expiration of registration certificate.
The registration certificate or certificates shall expire on December 31 of
the year in which issued. Temporary registration certificates shall be valid
until the last day business is conducted but not exceeding 30 days from the
date of issue.
§ 75-5. Registration application; lost or destroyed certificates;
posting of certificates.
§ 75-6. Powers and duties of Township Manager.
§ 75-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The application for a registration certificate shall be made on an
application form approved by the Township Manager.
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant, if a natural person, and
in the case of an association or partnership by a member or partner
thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
C. Upon receiving the signed application and fee, the Township will issue a
registration certificate to the registering business and a duplicate shall
be kept in the file by the Township of Newtown.
D. The certificate shall be in the form approved by the Township Manager.
E. In case of loss, defacement, or destruction of any certificate, the
business shall apply to the Township for reissuance and pay a fee of
$10.
F. Such business registration permits shall be conspicuously posted at
each place of business within the Township at all times.
A. The Township Manager or his designee is charged with the duty of
collecting and receiving the registration fees imposed by this chapter. It
shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him,
from whom received and the date of such receipt.
B. The Township Manager and/or his duly appointed agents are hereby
empowered, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Newtown, to prescribe, adopt or promulgate rules or
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this chapter and are charged with enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and any rules and/or regulations promulgated
pursuit hereto.
C. Any additional information as requested by the Township Manager shall
be submitted by the applicant at the time of application.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-7
1:101
Chapter 79
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Plumbing — See Ch. 121.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 79-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Newtown Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 79-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of Newtown Township.
§ 79-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Newtown Township
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
governing body of Newtown Township from time to time by resolution:
A. A person commits a violation of this chapter if:
(1) He or she makes any false or untrue statement on any application
required by this chapter;
(2) A person authorized to file the application under § 75-5 fails or
refuses to file a registration application as required by this chapter;
or
(3) Otherwise fails or refuses to comply with this chapter.
B. Any person who should violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
judgment thereof, pay a fine of not more than $300, together with the
cost of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
shall be liable to a term of imprisonment in the county jail for a period
not to exceed 30 days.
§ 75-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 79-3
1:102
§ 79-4. Board of Appeals: intermunicipal agreement. [Amended
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
The Township is hereby authorized to enter into an intermunicipal
agreement with the County of Delaware and such other municipalities
within the County who may choose to participate in same, via which the
Delaware County Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board shall serve as
the Township's board of appeals pursuant to 35 P.S. § 7210.501 (c)(1). Such
agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township's Solicitor.
§ 79-5. Effect on other regulations.
§ 79-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Newtown Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 84
A. By the designation of an employee of Newtown Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Newtown Township.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Newtown Township.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Newtown Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Newtown Township
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-6
1:103
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPLOSIVES — Includes any chemical compound or mechanical mixture
that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an
explosion, that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or other
ingredients in such proportion, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire,
friction, concussion, percussion or detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. The term "explosive" does
not mean or include small arms ammunition.
§ 84-2. Permit required. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operations or store or keep
any explosives in the Township without first having obtained a permit from
the Township Manager.
§ 84-3. Refusal of permit; revocation. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
The Township Manager shall have the power to refuse to grant or to revoke
any blasting permit or permit to store explosives if after investigation he
believes that such blasting or storage of explosives would unduly endanger
the health, safety, welfare or property of any person.
§ 84-4. Permit fees. [Amended 7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-11;
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
The permit fees shall be an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 84-5. Permit issuance; bond required.
No blasting permit or permit to store explosives shall be issued until the
applicant has:
A. Completed the permit application form for blasting or to store
explosives; and
§ 79-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 84-5
1:104
§ 84-6. Application for blasting permit.
An application for a blasting permit may be made by:
§ 84-7. Application for permit to store explosives.
An application for a permit to store explosives may be made by:
§ 84-8. Licensed blaster required. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
The superintendent, foreman or person in charge of or directing the actual
blasting operations or the person doing the actual blasting must be a
competent blaster under the regulations of the Department of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 84-9. Permit issued jointly; supervision.
All permits granted hereunder shall be given jointly to the person, firm
or corporation responsible for the blasting or storage and the particular
superintendent, foreman or person named in the application as being in
charge of or directing the actual blasting operations or being in charge of
storage and having a key to the storage magazine. No blasting shall be
permitted pursuant to the blasting permit, except in the presence of the
superintendent, foreman or person so named therein.
§ 84-10. Permit forms.
B. Filed a bond conditioned for the payment of any damage to Township
property, public improvement or private property or persons. The
principal amount of the bond shall be $1,000,000 unless, in the opinion
of the Township Manager, this amount is not adequate because of the
location of the blasting operation of place of storage of explosives. In
such event, the amount of the bond shall be fixed by the Township
Manager. But in instances where an applicant applies for permits to
store and blast at the same place and time, only one bond need be filed
under this section. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. The superintendent, foreman or person who is to do or direct the actual
blasting;
B. The contractor who employs the person who will do or direct the actual
blasting; or
C. The owner of the property on which the blasting is to be done.
A. The owner of the property on which the explosives are to be stored; or
B. The tenant or agent of the owner of the property on which the
explosives are to be stored.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-10
1:105
§ 84-11. Time restrictions.
§ 84-12. Inspections; flagmen. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to appoint inspectors to
inspect any blasting operations. The Township Manager is also authorized
to require the person, firm or corporation blasting or carrying on the
blasting operation to station flagmen on any highways which in any way
may be affected by such blasting or blasting operation so as to give proper
warning to the traveling public thereon. Failure to place flagmen on the
highways in instances required by the Township Manager shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 84-13. Permits for quarrying; fee; noncompliance.
It shall be legal for the Township Manager to issue blasting permits for
definite future periods of time, not exceeding three months, to persons,
firms or corporations engaged in quarrying operations upon the payment
of a permit fee of an amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
for each calendar month covered by such permit, provided that all persons
operating under such extended term licenses shall at all times admit any
inspectors appointed by the Township Manager and shall comply with the
order and directions of the inspector with reference to the operations. In the
event of noncompliance with any such orders or directions, the permit shall
be immediately revoked by the Township Manager on notice to the person,
firm or corporation responsible for the blasting operations.
§ 84-14. Magazine requirements.
A. The blasting permit and the permit to store explosives shall be issued
on forms approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-221]
B. Forms for applications for permits shall be furnished by the Township
Manager.
A. No blasting will be done in the Township between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. local time.
B. No blasting will be done in the Township on Sundays or other legal
holidays.
A. All explosives stored in the Township shall be stored in a magazine
which is located, constructed and maintained according to the
Regulations for the Storage, Handling and Use of Explosives of the
Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The magazine shall be kept locked except when being
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section 1509.12, Explosive storage
form, which immediately followed this section.
§ 84-10 NEWTOWN CODE § 84-14
1:106
§ 84-15. Fireworks display permits. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
The Township Manager may, upon application and proof of insurance, issue
a permit to a properly qualified person for giving a pyrotechnic display of
fireworks in public parks or other open places in the Township, pursuant to
the provisions of 35 P.S. § 1272.22 Such permit shall impose such restrictions
as, in the opinion of the Township Manager, will be necessary to properly
safeguard life and property in each case. The permit fee shall be in an
amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 84-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
offense, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
Chapter 86
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 86-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that every food establishment
shall be conducted, operated and maintained in accordance with the
requirements prescribed in the following sections and with such additional
requirements as the Board/Township may, by regulation, prescribe to
protect the health of the ultimate consumers of food handled in such
establishments.
§ 86-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place, permanent or temporary, within the
Township of Newtown where food or drink is prepared, handled, served or
provided for the public, with or without charge. Food establishments shall
inspected or when explosives are being placed therein or moved
therefrom.
B. Blasting caps or detonators of any kind shall not be kept in the same
magazine with other explosives.
22.Editor's Note: Former 35 P.S. § 1272 was repealed 11-30-2004 by P.L. 1598, No. 204, § 3.
See now 35 P.S. § 1275.2.
§ 84-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-2
1:107
include, but not limited to, eating and drinking establishments, mobile food
establishments and retail food establishments.
LICENSE — A grant to the licensee to conduct a food establishment.
LICENSOR — Newtown Township.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any vehicular food service
establishment.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any food establishment which
operates at any location for a temporary period of time not to exceed more
than 14 consecutive calendar days, regardless of whether the establishment
operated continuously during this time, in connection with a fair, carnival,
church, club, public exhibition or similar gathering.
§ 86-3. License required; application; issuance, denial.
§ 86-4. Fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to conduct or operate a food
establishment within Newtown Township without first obtaining a
license, as herein provided. Such license shall be issued by the
Township.
B. Application for license shall be made on forms provided by the licensor
and shall be accompanied by the appropriate license and inspection
fees.
C. No license shall be issued until inspection of the premises, facilities and
equipment has been made by the licensor and found to be adequate for
the protection of the public health and comfort of the patrons and to be
in compliance with the rules and regulations of this chapter and all
other applicable chapters of this Code.
D. Whenever a license is denied, the licensor shall state in writing to the
applicant the reasons for such refusal.
A. License fee. The annual license fee shall be $1.
B. Inspection fees.
(1) An annual inspection fee shall be charged to defray the cost of
inspections, consultations and servicing of the food establishments.
All such inspections shall be for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the requirements of Title 25, Environmental
Protection, Part I; Department of Environmental Protection,
Subpart D; Environmental Health and Safety, Article I; Food
Protection, Chapter 151; Food Establishments, and the rules and
regulations and requirements of the Code of the Township of
Newtown applicable thereto.
(2) The inspection fees shall be based upon the floor area of the food
establishments as follows:
§ 86-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 86-4
1:108
§ 86-5. License period and renewal; display; licenses
nontransferable.
§ 86-6. Rules and regulations.
Newtown Township shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of
food establishments. Such regulations shall be adopted by resolution by
the Board of Supervisors. They shall be reviewed periodically and updated
when necessary.
§ 86-7. Submission of plans required prior to construction.
(square feet)
Floor Area
(square meters) Fee
Less than 1,500 Less than 139 $100
1,501 to 2,500 139 to 232 $150
2,501 to 5,000 232 to 464 $225
5,001 to 7,500 464 to 697 $350
7,501 to 10,000 697 to 929 $500
10,001 to 15,000 929 to 1,393 $600
Greater than 15,001 Greater than 1,393 $700
(3) The annual health license fee covers the cost of routine inspections
each year, as well as one follow-up visit, if necessary. In the event
any food establishment requires more frequent inspections due to
noncompliance with local, state or federal health codes, an
additional inspection charge of $50 per inspection will be levied.
A. Licenses shall be granted for a period of one year from date of issue.
Application for renewal shall be made one month before expiration of
the existing license. A license granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall be renewed if, on inspection by the licensor, the conditions
specified in § 86-3C of this chapter are fulfilled.
B. Licenses, herein provided for, shall specify the date of issuance, the
period which is covered, the name of the licensee and the place
licensed. Such licenses shall be conspicuously displayed at all times in
the place thereby licensed.
C. Licenses shall not be transferable.
A. Before work is begun in the construction, remodeling or alteration of a
food establishment where food is prepared, stored or served, or in the
conversion of an existing establishment to a food establishment,
properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted to and
approved by the licensor.
§ 86-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-7
1:109
§ 86-8. Inspections.
§ 86-9. Revocation of license; appeals.
B. The plans and specifications shall include, where applicable, data
relating to the following:
(1) Surrounding grounds.
(2) Buildings.
(3) Equipment.
(4) Sewage disposal.
(5) Water supply, including plumbing.
(6) Refuse disposal.
(7) Any other such information required by the licensor.
A. The licensor shall conduct periodic inspections of all food
establishments licensed under this chapter and keep accurate records
of such inspections. The Township or its authorized representative shall
have the right to enter any food establishment in order to conduct
inspections and obtain samples to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and other provisions of this Code. Any
license issued under this chapter shall be immediately suspended in the
event an authorized representative of the licensor, after presenting
proper identification, is denied entry to any area of any food
establishment when the establishment is open to the public or during
other reasonable hours. Such suspension shall continue until entry is
allowed to the authorized representative of the licensor, an inspection is
completed and conditions are found to be satisfactory. In the event that
entry is denied for seven or more consecutive days, the license may be
revoked.
B. Whenever inspection produces samples which indicate adulterated
food, the cost of laboratory testing shall be borne by the food
establishment, and the Health Officer shall issue a statement therefor.
A. Any licensee who, after investigation made by the licensor and after
having the opportunity to be heard by the Township, has failed or
refused, after a reasonable interval, to correct conditions found to
constitute a violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder, shall have his/her license revoked or suspended.
B. Any applicant who has been refused a license or any licensee whose
license has been revoked or suspended and who feels aggrieved by the
action of the licensor shall be privileged to appeal that decision to and
be heard by the Board of Supervisors. The licensor shall be given notice
of any such hearing and shall prevent all applicable records to the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 86-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 86-9
1:110
§ 86-10. Employees with communicable diseases.
§ 86-11. (Reserved)
C. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by an action of the Board of
Supervisors shall be privileged, on payment of the reasonable expense
of preparing the same, to have such records certified to the Court of
Common Pleas of the County of Delaware, whereupon the Court shall
review such records and proceedings and properly enter such order or
decree as the facts shall justify.
A. No employee with any disease in a communicable form or who is a
carrier of such diseases shall work in any food establishment in any
capacity which brings him/her into contact with the production,
handling, storage or transportation of food or equipment used in food
establishments.
B. No proprietor shall employ in any capacity any such person suspected
of having any disease in a communicable form or being a carrier of such
disease.
C. Any employee who has a discharging or infected wound, sore or lesion
on the hands, arms or any exposed portion of the body shall be excluded
from those operations which will bring him/her into contact with food,
beverages, utensils or equipment used in food establishments.
D. When reasonable grounds exist to indicate that there is a possibility of
transmission of infection from any employee, the proprietor, the
Township and/or Health Officer shall be authorized to require any or all
of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from the food
establishment.
(2) Restriction of the services of the employee to some work area
where there is no danger of transmission of disease.
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and his/her
associates, with such laboratory examination as may be necessary.
E. When there are reasonable grounds to indicate that there is a danger of
food-borne disease outbreak, the Heath Officer, with the concurrence of
a physician, may require the immediate closing of the establishment
until no further danger of an outbreak exists.
F. The Township may establish, at its own discretion, medical and/or
screening programs and may require any or all employees of food
establishments to be tested.
§ 86-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-12
1:111
§ 86-12. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Chapter 86, entitled "Food Establishments," shall include the addition of
a new provision to the chapter to be known as "Part 2," which shall be
and is hereby adopted by reference as an amendment to Chapter 86 of the
Code of the Township of Newtown entitled "Food Establishments," namely
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Agriculture, rules and
regulations under Title 7, Chapter 78,23 as if fully set out in this chapter and
as may from time to time be amended.
§ 86-13. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Health Officer of the Township
or a designee to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 86-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of
Chapter 86, Food Establishments, or who should shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or a directive of the Township of Newtown's
Health Officer or his deputy relating thereto shall, upon judgment against
any person, persons, firm or corporation, be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1, Article I, entitled "Adoption of Code," § 1-15, entitled "General
Penalty," thereof.
Chapter 88
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 55.
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Explosives and fireworks — See Ch. 84.
23.Editor's Note: See 7 Pa. Code Chapter 78.
§ 86-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 86-14
1:112
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-3]
§ 88-1. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion that certain code known as the "BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, 1993 Edition," which is a standard fire code, duly bound
in book form, as the Fire Code of the Township of Newtown, together with
any and all supplements, revisions, changes, deletions, modifications and
amendments thereto, whether now promulgated or promulgated thereafter
in the future, except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or
amended.
§ 88-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 88-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Township which is hereby established and which shall
be operated under the supervision of the Fire Marshal.
B. The Bureau shall consist of the Fire Marshal, who shall be in charge of
the Bureau and who shall serve as the chief enforcement officer, and, in
addition, not more than three Assistant Fire Marshals.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Fire Marshal for the Township.
Appointees to the office of Fire Marshal shall be appointed for and shall
serve for a term of one year. The Fire Marshal shall not be removed
from office except for cause shown.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall also appoint not more than three
Assistant Fire Marshals for the Township. Appointees to the office of
Assistant Fire Marshal shall be appointed for and shall serve for a term
of one year until the first Monday in January of each succeeding year.
No Assistant Fire Marshal shall be removed from office except for cause
shown.
E. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made at least
annually and transmitted to the Board of Supervisors. It shall contain all
proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the Bureau may
wish to include therein. The Fire Marshal shall also recommend any
amendments to the code which, in his judgment, are desirable.
F. The Fire Marshal and the Assistant Fire Marshals shall serve without
compensation except as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:113
CODE OFFICIAL or FIRE OFFICIAL — As used in the adopted Fire
Prevention Code, the Fire Marshal, Fire Suppression Engineer or Assistant
Fire Marshal.
§ 88-4. Amendments.
The 1993 BOCA National Fire Prevention Code is amended and changed as
follows:
A. F-101.1, Title, shall read as follows:
F-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Fire
Prevention Code of the Township of Newtown, herein referred to as
"this code."
B. F-105.1, entitled "Code official," shall read as follows:
F-105.1 Code official: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Fire Prevention Bureau to enforce the provisions of this code. The
designated enforcement officer of this code is herein referred to as the
"code official."
C. F-105.2, Appointment, shall read as follows:
F-105.2 Appointment: The code official shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown and shall not be
removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be
heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointed
authority.
D. F-105.3, Organization, is hereby deleted.
E. F-105.4, Deputy, is hereby deleted.
F. F-108.1, Inspections, is hereby deleted.
G. F-112.3, entitled "Penalty for violations," shall read as follows:
F-112.3 Penalty for violations: Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of the code shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to a maximum fine or penalty of $1,000 for each
and every offense. Each day that a violation continues after a service of
notice as provided for in the code shall be deemed a separate offense
thereof for each day.
H. F-113.0, entitled "Means of Appeal," is hereby deleted and a new
section inserted to read as follows:
§ 88-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 88-4
1:114
F-113.0 APPEALS
F-113.1 Appeals: Appeals from any decision of the Fire Marshal may
be made to the Board of Supervisors. All hearings before the Board
of Supervisors shall be open to the public. The Board of Supervisors
shall modify, reverse or sustain the decision of the code official by a
consenting vote of three or more members.
I. Section F-403.0, entitled "Open burning," is hereby deleted and a new
section is hereby inserted to read as follows:
F-403.0 Outdoor fires: The Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshals
and/or any police officer of the Township may extinguish outdoor fires.
The Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshals and/or any police officer
of the Township may extinguish or cause to be extinguished any fire,
whether public or private property, started or burning in violation
of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, with or without the
consent of the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the subject
premises and/or fire if, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal, Assistant
Fire Marshals and/or any police officer of the Township, such fire
constitutes a danger to persons or property or constitutes a nuisance.
J. Section F-311.4, entitled "Towing of motor vehicles," is hereby inserted
to read as follows:
F-311.4 Towing of motor vehicles: The Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire
Marshals and/or police officers of the Township shall have the power
to order the towing of vehicles parked in violation of restrictions and
regulations under Section 311.0. Within 12 hours from the time of such
towing, notice of the fact, together with the place of the impoundment
of the vehicle towed, shall be sent by the Township Police Department
to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall include the
place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal
and the place in which it is stored. Towing and storage charges shall
be paid by the owner of record of the vehicle towed before its release.
K. Section F-311.5, entitled "Enforcement of regulations concerning the
parking of motor vehicles or other forms of obstructions and
establishing penalties therefore," is hereby inserted to read as follows:
§ 88-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-4
1:115
§ 88-5. Modifications.
The Fire Marshal may recommend that a modification of any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code be made upon application, in writing,
of the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical
difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial
justice done. However, no such modification shall be made without the prior
approval of the Board of Supervisors. Such modification, when granted,
shall be entered upon the records of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and a
signed copy shall be furnished the applicant and the Board.
F-311.5 Enforcement of regulations concerning the parking of motor
vehicles or other forms of obstructions and establishing penalties
therefore: The Fire Marshal, the Assistant Fire Marshals and/or any
police officer of the Township are hereby authorized to enforce the
restrictions and regulations concerning the parking of motor vehicles
and other forms of obstructions as provided in Section F-311.0. Any
person who violates a restriction or regulation promulgated under
Section F-311.0 shall be guilty of a violation of the Fire Prevention
Code and fined not less than $15 per violation. All violation notices
issued in accordance herewith shall be served upon the accused
personally, or by affixing the same to the subject motor vehicle or
form of obstruction, or by certified mail. In all cases where the written
notice has been served upon the accused personally or by affixing
the same to the subject motor vehicle or form of obstruction, no
prosecution shall be instituted within 48 hours after the time of
issuance thereof, and during the period, the accused may voluntarily
appear at the Township Building and voluntarily enter a plea of guilty
and pay a fine of $15 per violation to the Township. The provisions of
this section are cumulative and shall not be construed to be in lieu
of or limit or restrict any other provision of the Fire Prevention Code
relating to violations, fines and penalties.
L. Chapter 21, entitled "Waste Material and Junkyards," is hereby deleted.
M. Chapter 31, entitled "Fireworks," is hereby deleted. Chapter 84 of this
Code shall remain in full force and effect.
N. Section F-503.3, entitled "Fire standpipes," shall read as follows:
F-503.3 Fire standpipes: All buildings having floors used for human
occupancy which are located more than two stories above grade and
have a travel distance in excess of 150 feet from the nearest
emergency exit shall be provided with standpipes installed in
accordance with the building code listed in Appendix A. The standpipes
shall have an approved fire department connection with hose
connections at each level.
§ 88-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 88-6
1:116
§ 88-6. Conflicts with other provisions.
In the event that any provision of this article or of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted are conflicting or inconsistent with any statutes or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the statutes or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply and be fully
effective, and the conflicting or inconsistent provision shall be superseded
thereby.
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-6
1:117

ARTICLE II
Sprinklers
[Adopted 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-2]
§ 88-7. Sprinklers required. [Amended 11-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-7]
§ 88-8. Inspection, testing and maintenance.
A. All new buildings, except those excluded herein, which are constructed
on or after the effective date of this section shall be provided with
sprinkler systems in accordance with the BOCA Code and the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards.
B. The following types of construction are exempt from this provision:
(1) All unheated buildings and additions, except if the BOCA Code so
requires when not contrary to this article.
(2) Buildings not more than 500 square feet in gross floor area.
(3) Additions to single-family, residential buildings, where the building
does not have an existing sprinkler system.
(4) For other than single-family residential structures: additions or a
series of additions to an existing building where the additions are
heated and all additions are in aggregate less than 50% of the
preexisting gross floor area of the building as of June 6, 1986, when
such retrofitting would not be required under the BOCA Code.
C. When an addition to a single-family residential building is constructed
greater than 50% of the preexisting gross floor area of a building that
does not have an existing sprinkler system, a fire smoke detection
system shall be installed for the entire building. The detectors shall be
installed in approved locations and shall be wired in a manner that the
activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the system.
A. All sprinkler systems shall be maintained by the owner to prevent
deterioration or impairment of the system in order that said system
shall serve its purpose and operate at maximum efficiency.
B. The owners of commercial and institutional properties with sprinkler
systems and multifamily residential dwellings with sprinkler systems
which are served by a common water meter shall provide to the
Township, on forms provided by the Township, an annual report of tests
and inspections made on the sprinkler system. Such tests and
inspections shall be done on an annual basis or more often if deemed
necessary by the Township. Such tests shall be conducted by a qualified
inspection agency acceptable to the Township. It shall be the owner's
responsibility to inspect, test and maintain the sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA Standard 13A.
§ 88-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:119
§ 88-9. Installation.
Sprinkler systems shall be installed in all areas in residential occupancies
in accordance with the 1989 Edition of the National Fire Protection
Association which most closely relates to the intended occupancy, except
they need not be installed as follows when approved by the Township:
§ 88-10. Fire Suppression Engineer.
C. The owner must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that
sufficient water supply is available to operate the sprinkler system. The
design of any sprinkler system shall be consistent with applicable
regulations of the public water supplier (when applicable), the 1989
Edition of the National Fire Protection Association pamphlet which
most closely relates to the given occupancy of the structure and the PA
Public Utility Commission's Rules and Regulations.
D. The owner shall be required to obtain approval from the Township for
any modifications or changes to any sprinkler system permitted under
this article.
E. All applicants, except those applying for permits in relation to the
construction of a new single-family detached housing unit, shall bear all
the costs of inspections required hereunder and shall deposit with the
Township such sum as shall be determined by the Township Manager to
cover the cost of such inspections.
A. Bathrooms not exceeding 55 square feet (5.1 square meters) with
noncombustible plumbing fixtures.
B. Small clothes closets where the least dimension does not exceed three
feet (0.9 meter) and the area does not exceed 24 square feet (2.2 square
meters) and the walls and ceiling are surfaced with noncombustible or
limited combustible materials as defined by NFPA 220, Standard on
Types of Building Construction.
C. Open attached porches, balconies, corridors and stairs, when such
structures are open to the weather.
D. Attics, crawl spaces, floor/ceiling spaces, elevator shafts and other
concealed spaces that are not used or intended to be used for living
purposes or for storage.
A. There shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors a Fire
Suppression Engineer who shall receive such compensation as the
Supervisors may direct by resolution from time to time and who shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Supervisors or until a successor is
appointed.
B. The Fire Suppression Engineer shall receive all applications, plans and
specifications and authorize the issuance of a permit for any sprinkler
system which shall be constructed under this article and shall:
§ 88-8 NEWTOWN CODE § 88-10
1:120
§ 88-11. Permit required; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do or begin any
work on any sprinkler system unless an application shall be made by the
owner or by duly authorized representative to the Township and a permit
has been obtained. Permit fees shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 88-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than
$1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not
more than 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1) Approve such plans and specifications if in conformity with the
provisions of this article, the BOCA Code and the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) standards.
(2) Disapprove such plans and specifications if they do not conform
with this article, the BOCA Code and National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standards.
(3) Inspect, prior to building occupancy, all sprinkler systems and
certify that the sprinkler system installation is in conformance with
applicable codes and regulations. In lieu of inspection by the Fire
Suppression Engineer, the Township may delegate to other
qualified persons the responsibility to inspect and certify the
sprinkler system installation.
§ 88-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-12
1:121
Chapter 91
(RESERVED)
Chapter 104
NATURAL FEATURES AND LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 66.
Slope conservation — See Ch. 134.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
138.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
§ 88-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 88-12
1:122
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Newtown Township Natural Features
and Landscaping Ordinance" and may be cited as the "Township Landscape
Ordinance."
§ 104-2. Purpose.
§ 104-3. Scope.
The scope of this chapter is as follows:
A. It is the purpose of the Township of Newtown through this chapter to
maintain the open character of a Green Countrie Towne community,
while accommodating future growth and protecting the community's
natural resources from the adverse impacts of development.
B. These regulations are also intended to protect the rights of the
residents of Newtown Township to enjoy clean air, pure water and the
natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the environment, as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Constitution and in other commonwealth and
federal statutes.
C. These regulations are also intended to require landscaping and planting
that will enhance the properties being developed and complement
surrounding communities.
A. To provide shade trees along public roads within the Township,
including type of tree, initial planting, care of trees and replacement of
trees.
B. To control disturbances and the landscaping of land on all lots or tracts
except those which are or will be utilized for single-family residences or
farming.
C. To establish the position of Landscape Inspector of Newtown Township.
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:123

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 104-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. The present tense includes the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated in this article:
BOARD — The Newtown Township Board of Supervisors.
BUFFER — An area of required yard space adjacent to a use or facility
within a property or to the boundary of a property or district, upon
which may be located a visual barrier to mitigate the visual impact
of the adjacent development. Such barrier may be comprised of plant
material, earth berms, fences and walls, or a combination of these
materials. The width of the buffer area and the extent of screening
required shall be determined by the type of use proposed and the
adjacent uses, as provided herein. The impact of the proposed use on
adjoining properties is the basis for the establishment of buffer area
standards.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches above the
ground level for trees up to and including four inches in caliper size. For
trees of larger size caliper, the measurement is taken 12 inches above
the ground level.
PRIMARY BUFFER AREA — A buffer area located adjacent to
any residential zoning district. The "primary buffer area" may be
included in any front, side or rear yard area required under the
provisions of this chapter. Any and all front, side or rear yard
areas which adjoin residential zoning districts shall be treated as
"primary buffer areas."
(1)
SECONDARY BUFFER AREA — A buffer area located adjacent to
any zoning district other than a residential zone. The "secondary
buffer area" may be included in any front, side or rear yard area
required under the provisions of this chapter. Any and all front, side
or rear yard areas which are adjacent to any zoning district other
than a residential zoning district shall be treated as a "secondary
buffer area."
(2)
SPECIAL BUFFER — A buffer area, as designated by the Township,
which requires more stringent screening treatment in order to
mitigate adverse visual conditions resulting from unique
topographic or other physical factors evolved through the
procedure in development of the land.
(3)
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:125
DRIPLINE — A line on the surface of the ground which is generally of
a circular configuration, formed by the dripping of rainwater from the
outermost ends of tree branches.
EARTHWORK — Operations connected with excavations and
embankments of earth such as those encountered in the procedure of
grading land areas and includes the stripping and stockpiling of topsoil.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state having a reciprocal
registration agreement with Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENT — The addition of features to the land
which enhances a particular site from the standpoint of noise
abatement, recreational enjoyment and visual amenity.
LANDSCAPE INSPECTOR — The Township official appointed annually
by the Board of Supervisors and responsible to the Township Manager
for the administration of this chapter.
MITIGATION — Any action taken to lessen the specified undesirable
impacts of a proposed land use or land disturbance activity, including
those which would adversely affect the health or longevity of a natural
feature, pose a visual intrusion or conflict or otherwise be deemed
incompatible with surrounding properties.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building containing two
or more dwelling units, including but not limited to a four-family
dwelling (fourplex, quadraplex), townhouse (single-family attached) or
apartment building.
NATURAL FEATURE — A component of a landscape, either naturally
occurring or man-made, such as a water body, wetland, special plant or
woodland, or any part thereof identified by Newtown Township at any
time as being important for conservation.
PRESERVATION — The planned management of a natural feature to
prevent its exploitation, destruction or neglect.
SHADE TREE — A deciduous tree grown for the purpose of providing
shade.
SITE DISTURBANCE — Any activity which involves removal of
vegetation or which causes land on a given site to be exposed to the
danger of erosion, including clearing, grading, filling, plowing and/or
other types of earthwork.
SPECIAL PLANT — A specifically selected plant, tree, shrub, flower or
other vegetation considered worthy of preservation by the Township
because of species, size, shape, age, historical importance or any other
significant characteristics.
STREET TREE — A tree planted or growing adjacent to a highway or
street.
SWALE — A channel which collects or carries surface water runoff.
§ 104-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-4
1:126
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — A low-lying, wet ground area such as a swamp or marsh,
which supports plant and animal life indigenous to this environment.
WOODLAND — A land area characterized by tree cover and other
woody vegetation.
§ 104-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:127

ARTICLE III
Protection and Conservation Standards
§ 104-5. Compliance required.
Within the areas of the scope of this chapter as set forth in § 104-3, no
person shall disturb any natural feature within Newtown Township
identified in this article except in compliance with §§ 104-6 and 104-7. In
assessing compliance with §§ 104-6 and 104-7, the Township may take into
account the extent to which the property owner is taking other remedial
or compensatory actions which would fulfill the same basic intent as to the
conservation standards.
§ 104-6. Conservation standards.
§ 104-7. Protection standards.
A. Conservation of surface and ground water resources. Any
encroachment of streams shall be regulated as specified by Chapter 91,
Flood Damage Prevention,24 and Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control.
B. Preservation of woodlands and other vegetation. Except in conjunction
with routine property maintenance, disturbance to the following shall
be minimized:
(1) Healthy, well-stocked woodlands. In instances where disturbance
or tree cutting is unavoidable or considered desirable in
accordance with sound forest management practice, an effort shall
be made, with consultation from a qualified professional, to retain
as much of the woodland of a size and configuration which would
promote its growth and natural regeneration.
(2) Vegetation, other than woodlands, providing wildlife food and cover
or visual amenity. This may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, single or groups of specimen trees, hedgerows and other
vegetation not considered as woodland.
C. Conservation of sloping lands. Any site disturbance on slopes exceeding
15% shall comply with Chapter 134, Slope Conservation.
A. Protection of vegetation from mechanical injury and grading change.
(1) All trees to be retained within 25 feet of a building, parking or other
proposed improvement shall be protected during construction from
equipment damage by snow fencing or other effective barriers.
(2) Heavy equipment operators shall exercise caution in the operation
of such equipment so as to minimize damage to trees.
24.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-12, as amended, was repealed 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5. See now Ch. 172,
Zoning, Art. XXB, Flood Hazard District.
§ 104-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:129
(3) Tree trunks and tree roots damaged during construction shall be
treated to salvage these plants. Bark damage shall be scar traced
back to healthy tissue to promote proper healing. Root damage
shall be treated by cutting back damaged areas to sound tissue and
backfilling soil over the root system. Should an extensive portion of
the root system require removal, a comparable amount of
branching shall be removed to balance the effect of the root
removal.
(4) Trees shall not be used to secure or support cables, ropes, signs,
fencing or other objects.
(5) The area beneath the tree branching and over the root system
within the dripline shall remain undisturbed. Equipment storage,
material storage, debris and fill material shall not be permitted
within the area of the dripline, unless approved by the Township.
(6) All grade changes shall reflect proper surface water drainage so as
not to adversely affect vegetative growth or cause other possible
damage.
B. Protection of vegetation from excavations.
(1) When digging trenches for utility lines or similar uses, disturbance
to the root zones of all woody vegetation shall be minimized.
(2) If trenches must be excavated in the root zone, all disturbed roots
shall be cut back to healthy tissue and the trench backfilled as soon
as possible. The branching of trees with damaged root systems
shall be trimmed and thinned out to balance the removal of
damaged roots.
C. Protection of topsoil.
(1) Topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled from all areas of
construction. No topsoil shall be removed from a site unless a
sufficient quantity is retained to provide at least six inches of
topsoil cover over all of the disturbed surfaces of the site.
(2) Topsoil removed by grading operations shall be redistributed and
stabilized as soon as possible following the completion of a phase of
work or the entire project. All exposed earth surfaces shall be
stabilized by the following methods or approved equal:
(a) Seeding or planting of slopes with a gradient of 30% or less
steep.
(b) Sodding, hydroseeding or riprap of slopes with a gradient of
30% or more steep, and all swales designed to carry
stormwater.
(3) Grading and earthmoving operations shall be scheduled so as to
minimize site disturbance during the period when the soil is frozen.
§ 104-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-7
1:130
D. Protection during cleanup.
(1) All construction debris shall be hauled away from the site.
Materials shall not be burned or buried on the site.
(2) Any protective fences and barriers used during construction shall
be removed upon completion of construction.
§ 104-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:131

ARTICLE IV
Regulated Activities
§ 104-8. Applicability.
All persons undertaking any of the following activities shall comply with the
standards in § 104-9:
§ 104-9. Mitigation of visual impacts.
A. Building construction as follows:
(1) All nonresidential buildings.
(2) All multifamily residential buildings.
B. Construction of streets, parking areas, loading or storage areas as
follows:
(1) All streets, whether dedicated to the Township or not.
(2) Driveways with cartways 18 feet or more in width and 40 feet or
more in length.
(3) Any parking area which exceeds 3,000 square feet.
(4) Any loading or storage area, for equipment and materials, which
exceeds 3,000 square feet.
C. Construction of structures or facilities which exceed 3,000 square feet
in ground coverage as follows:
(1) Public utility facilities and structures.
(2) Liquid and solid waste collection, storage, conveyance and
treatment facilities.
(3) Stormwater management basins and related facilities.
D. Construction of trash, garbage, refuse or other storage areas of any
size.
A. Consistent with the terms of §§ 104-12 and 104-13, the applicant shall
plant trees and shrubs and make other landscape improvements (e.g.,
berms, fences) as necessary to mitigate the adverse visual impacts
which the proposed actions will have on the property, adjoining
properties and the Township in general.
B. In demonstrating compliance with Subsection A hereof, the applicant
shall adhere to the landscape design guidelines given in §§ 104-12 and
104-13.
§ 104-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-9
1:133

ARTICLE V
Plan and Planting Requirements
§ 104-10. Coordination with other applications.
The submissions for approval as required under this chapter shall be closely
coordinated with the submission of subdivision, land development and/or
building permit applications, as deemed appropriate by the Township. Any
application for subdivision or land development, which includes activities as
described in § 104-8, shall not be considered complete unless accompanied
by the appropriate submittals as outlined in this section. In no instance shall
any site disturbance occur, except for testing and surveying, in connection
with activities as outlined in § 104-8 prior to the Township approval of the
final landscape plan.
§ 104-11. Existing conditions and preservation inventory plan.
§ 104-12. Preliminary landscape plan.
A preliminary landscape plan may be prepared and submitted to the
Township for review, or at the option of the applicant, a final landscape plan
may be submitted in lieu of the preliminary landscape plan. If submitted for
review, the preliminary landscape plan shall be drawn to scale, indicate all
existing trees or other plants to either be removed or retained in addition
to plants proposed as part of the landscape design. This plan may include
notes, sketches or other graphics that the applicant feels are necessary to
indicate the proposed landscape treatment.
A. A plan indicating existing site conditions, as prepared by a civil
engineer or landscape architect is required as part of the submission of
the landscape plan. This plan shall be entitled "Existing Conditions and
Preservation Inventory" and shall include a preservation inventory
indicating all special plants or other plants to be protected and
salvaged on the site. These plants shall be noted on the plan and, in
addition, keyed and listed in a columnar manner indicating the name
and size of the tree or shrub. This plan shall indicate all plantings on the
site by foliage lines or other graphic representation, noting which
plants are to be salvaged and which plants are to be removed. It shall be
the prerogative of the Township to visit the site of proposed
development and to verify and/or determine which trees or other plants
shall be considered as special plants which require protection and are
to remain on the site. Trees over 24 inches in caliper shall not be
removed unless authorized by the Township, in writing. If removal is
authorized, two trees with a minimum caliper of three inches shall
replace any trees removed for a property which are over 24 inches in
diameter. The proposed tree species and variety and the proposed
planting location shall be approved by the Township prior to planting.
B. Should the site be devoid of plantings of any significance, this drawing
is not required,
§ 104-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-13
1:135
§ 104-13. Final landscape plan.
A final landscape plan shall be prepared and sealed by a landscape
architect. The final landscape plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
following requirements and submitted to the Township for review and/or
approval:
A. Plan requirements and graphics shall be as follows:
(1) Sheet size: 24 by 36 inches.
(2) Scale: one inch equals 20 feet or one inch equals 30 feet. (Other
scales may be used if deemed appropriate by the Township.)
(3) North sign. Indicate direction of North on plans.
(4) Detail drawings. Details covering the proper method for the
planting of trees and shrubs, including details for staking and/or
guying of trees, shall be indicated on the final landscape plan.
Details covering special landscape treatment such as tree wells,
tree walls, use of landscape timber and any other construction
related to landscape work shall be indicated on the final landscape
plan.
(5) Exterior lighting. The location and type of all proposed exterior
lighting fixtures shall be indicated on the final landscape plan to
ensure that there is no conflict between the location of light
standards and the location of trees and that trees will not adversely
affect lighting patterns. Lighting fixture locations shall be indicated
on the plan by symbol.
(6) Statement of plant standards. The following statement shall be
included on the final landscape plan: "All sizes and grading
standards for plant materials shall conform with the Latest Edition
of American Standard of Nursery Stock as sponsored by the
American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., and approved May 2,
1986, by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the
latest revised edition of this standard."
(7) Planting schedule. A planting schedule or plant list shall be
indicated on the final landscape plan and contain the following
information presented in tabular form:
(a) Key/symbol, plants as indicated on plans.
(b) Botanical name of plant.
(c) Common name of plant.
(d) Quantity or number of each plant variety.
(e) Size of plant proposed.
(f) Pertinent remarks about proposed plant.
§ 104-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-13
1:136
§ 104-14. Minimum planting requirements.
(8) Number of plants required and proposed. The final landscape plan
shall include a compilation of the number of plants required by the
various criteria and categories stated in the chapter, as indicated in
the example below:
Plant Requirements
Type Required Proposed
Street trees
Deciduous trees 10 10
Evergreen trees 10 10
Parking areas
Deciduous trees 7 7
Building area
Deciduous/evergreen shrubs 36 87
Flowering/evergreen trees 8 8
Deciduous trees 4 4
Buffer area
Evergreen trees 40 40
Deciduous trees 0 0
Evergreen shrubs 0 0
Deciduous shrubs 0 0
(9) Statement of guaranty. The following statement shall be included
on the final landscape plan: "All planting and related work shall be
guaranteed for a period of one year from the date of acceptance by
the Township. Dead plants shall be removed immediately and
replacements made not later than during the next planting season."
A. Street trees. Within any land development or subdivision where new
streets are to be constructed and where there are no existing trees
along the street frontage, street trees shall be planted. Also, within any
land development or subdivision fronting on an existing street or
streets and where there are no existing trees, street trees shall be
planted along the frontage of the developed area.
(1) Design criteria. The design for the planting of street trees may be
of a formal or informal arrangement using large or medium
deciduous trees, evergreen trees or a combination of these types.
Large size deciduous trees are trees with a growth potential of over
50 feet in height. Medium size deciduous trees are trees with a
growth potential of under 50 feet in height.
(2) Trees recommended for street tree planting.
§ 104-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-14
1:137
(a) Large deciduous street trees.
Acer platanoides (Norway maple varieties/patents)
Acer rubrum (Red maple and varieties/patents)
Acer saccharum (Sugar maple varieties/patents)
Fraxinus americana (White ash varieties/patents)
Ginkgo biloba male (Male ginkgo varieties/patents)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis (Thornless honey locust
varieties/patents)
Liquidambar styraciflua (Sweetgum)
Platanus acerifolia (London plane tree)
Platanus occidentalis (American sycamore)
Quercus borealis (Northern red oak)
Quercus coccinea (Scarlet oak)
Quercus palustris (Pin oak)
Quercus phellos (Willow oak)
Tilia cordata (Littleleaf linden varieties/patents)
Ulmus americana (American elm varieties/patents)
Zelkova serrata (Japanese zelkova varieties/patents)
(b) Medium street trees.
Acer campestre (Hedge maple)
Acer ginnala (Amur maple)
Acer griseum (Paperbark maple)
Acer palmatum (Japanese maple)
Acer palmatum atropurpureum (Japanese red maple)
Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry)
Cercidiphyllum japonicum (Katsura-tree)
Chionanthus virginicus (White fringe tree)
Cornus florida (Flowering dogwood varieties/patents)
Cornus kousa (Kousa dogwood)
Crataegus lavallei treeform (Treeform Lavalle hawthorn)
Crataegus phaenopyrum treeform (Treeform Washington
hawthorn)
Koelreuteria paniculata (Goldenrain tree)
Malus baccata (Siberian crab varieties/patents)
Malus eleyi (Eley flowering crab)
Malus hopa (Hopa red flowering crab)
§ 104-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-14
1:138
Phellodendron amurense (Amur corktree)
Prunus Accolade (Accolade flowering cherry)
Prunus sargenti columnaris (Columnar Sargent cherry)
Prunus serrulata Kwanzan Treeform (Treeform Kwanzan
cherry)
Prunus serrulata Amanogawa (Amanogawa cherry)
Pyrus calleryana (Callery pear varieties/patents)
Sophora japonica (Chinese scholartree varieties/patents)
Sorbus aucuparia (European mountain ash)
(c) Evergreen trees.
Abies concolor (White fir)
Cedrus atlantica (Atlas cedar varieties/patents)
Chamaecyparis pisifera filifera (False cypress)
Chamaecyparis pisifera veitchi (Blue false cypress)
Cryptomeria japonica lobbi (Lobb cryptomeria)
Cupressocyparis leylandi (Leyland cypress)
Ilex opaca, berried (Female American holly)
Ilex opaca male (Male American holly)
Juniperus virginiana (Eastern red cedar varieties/patents)
Picea excelsa (Norway spruce)
Picea omorica (Serbian spruce)
Picea pungens (Colorado spruce)
Picea pungens glauca (Colorado blue spruce)
Pinus nigra (Austrian pine)
Pinus strobus (White pine)
Pinus thunbergii (Japanese black pine)
Pseudotsuga taxifolia (Douglas fir)
Thuja occidentalis nigra (Dark American arbor vitae)
Tsuga canadensis (Canada hemlock)
(3) Street tree spacing.
(a) For street tree plantings where the proposed design is a formal
arrangement, large street trees shall be planted at intervals of
not more than 40 feet and medium street trees shall be planted
at intervals of not more than 25 feet along the street frontage
within the proposed subdivision or land development.
(b) If development occurs on both sides of new and/or existing
streets, trees may be planted opposite each other or in an
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-14
1:139
alternate spacing alignment. The pattern shall be consistent
throughout the entire development. Should development occur
only on one side of new or existing streets, street trees shall
be planted on the developed side using the arrangement and
spacing specified herein.
(c) Where there are some existing trees, the arrangement and
spacing shall conform as close as is feasible to the
requirements stipulated herein. The planting design covering
the condition of both existing and new trees shall be
coordinated to effect a pleasing visual effect.
(d) For street tree plantings where the proposed design is of an
informal arrangement, trees may be planted in groups with
regular or random spacing between the individual trees and
between groups of trees. The number of trees required under
the informal arrangement shall be based on the following
criteria:
[1] One large deciduous street tree will be permitted for each
40 feet of street frontage.
[2] One medium deciduous street tree will be permitted for
each 25 feet of street frontage.
[3] Evergreen trees may be used as part of the informal
design arrangement, and if included in the design, two
evergreen trees will be permitted for every 30 feet of
street frontage.
[4] The ratio of evergreen trees to deciduous trees shall not be
greater than one evergreen tree to three deciduous trees.
(e) Where the planting of new street trees is not feasible, the trees
which would have been required for said area shall be
allocated and used for planting in the median strip or any
traffic islands adjacent to and within 300 feet of the property,
as approved by the Township.
(4) Minimum sizes for trees for street tree plantings.
(a) Large street trees shall have a caliper of 2 1/2 inches to three
inches and a minimum height of 12 feet.
(b) Medium street trees shall have a caliper of 2 1/2 inches to
three inches and a minimum height of 10 feet.
(c) Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of eight feet.
(5) Street tree planting locations. Street trees shall be planted outside
the public right-of-way and within five feet of the right-of-way line.
Where conditions exist that make such planting impractical, trees
§ 104-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-14
1:140
may be planted within the right-of-way or allocated for use in the
median strips or other public areas, as approved by the Township.
B. Building area planting. The intent of these provisions is to establish
minimum standards, not to dictate design criteria. The minimum
plantings required around a new building or an addition to an existing
building are based on the following criteria:
(1) Shrubs. For every 100 feet of building perimeter, 15 evergreen or
deciduous shrubs shall be planted. The minimum size of plants,
when size is designated by spread, shall be in the eighteen-totwenty-
four-inch-spread category. For plants with the size
designation by height, the minimum size shall be 24 inches to 30
inches in height.
(2) Flowering or evergreen trees. For every 100 feet of building
perimeter, two flowering or evergreen trees shall be planted. The
minimum size of the flowering or evergreen trees shall be eight feet
high.
(3) Deciduous trees. For every 100 feet of building perimeter, one large
deciduous tree of 2 1/2 inches to three inches in caliper shall be
planted.
(4) Location of plantings. Plantings around buildings shall be located
adjacent to or within 20 feet of the building perimeter. These
plantings are minimal requirements and are not intended to limit
the plantings around buildings. Additional plantings may be used
as necessary to obtain the desired effect. Should site conditions
indicate that the twenty-foot requirement is insufficient or not
feasible, the distance requirement may be expanded or waived by
the Township.
(5) Accessory buildings. Landscape treatment is required around
accessory buildings, exterior electrical transformers, airconditioning
units and dumpster enclosures. One evergreen shrub
or tree shall be required for every five foot of perimeter of such
structures. Minimum size of plants shall be six feet high.
C. Landscaping of parking areas. The landscaping of parking areas shall
comply with § 172-135, Required green area. Off-street parking areas
shall be landscaped to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise,
the glare of automobile lights and the level of carbon dioxide, to create
shade and to provide a more aesthetic environment about paved areas.
(1) Tree planting requirements.
(a) For every four parking spaces, one shade tree of 2 1/2 inches to
three inches in caliper shall be planted. Should there be any
existing trees adjacent to the parking area which create an
effective shade pattern, each such tree shall be counted to
meet this requirement.
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-14
1:141
(b) Trees shall be planted within traffic islands, parking bay
separators or about the perimeter area in such locations so as
to create a shade pattern.
(2) Green area surface cover. All green areas within a parking lot shall
have a surface cover of grass, ground cover plantings and/or dwarftype
shrubs. Also, stone mulch or shredded hardwood mulch may
be used in conjunction with and to supplement grass, ground cover
plantings and/or dwarf-type shrubs, but in no case are mulches to
be used as the only cover or surfacing material of green areas
within a parking lot.
(3) Screening to prevent headlight glare. For parking spaces where the
front of the parking space faces a residentially zoned property and
where automobile headlights may produce glare toward the
residential property, a screen shall be installed to alleviate this
condition. Effective screening shall be accomplished through the
use of evergreen plant material, fences, walls and earthen berms,
individually or in combination. The intent of this section is to create
a solid screen with a minimum maintained height of three feet
above the grade at the edge of the parking area. This type of
screening shall be required even where a street may intervene
between the parking area and the adjacent residentially zoned
property.
D. Buffer areas.
(1) A primary buffer area is a buffer area located adjacent to any
residential zoning district.
(2) A secondary buffer area is a buffer area located adjacent to any
zoning district other than a residential zoning district.
(3) Special buffer. Should the Township determine that a more
stringent or effective screening is necessary in the buffer area to
mitigate an adverse visual impact resulting from development, the
Board of Supervisors may require the installation of either of the
following types of buffer screening:
(a) Wood screen-type fence. The height, type, design, finish and
location of installation of a screen-type fence shall be approved
by the Township. The height of the fence shall not exceed six
feet.
(b) Evergreen screen with immediate effect.
[1] New buffer areas. Because of unique topographic or other
physical considerations, it may be deemed necessary to
require a screen planting that has a more immediate effect
in order to comply with § 104-9, Mitigation of visual
impacts. Should the Township require more immediate
effect with the planting of Type A evergreen trees in the
§ 104-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-14
1:142
primary buffer area, starting with a height of eight feet at
the time of planting, the table below, Size and Spacing of
Evergreen Trees, shall be applicable. The Township shall
select the height of the trees to be used and the length or
portion of the buffer area to receive such treatment.
Size and Spacing of Evergreen Trees
Height
(feet)
Spacing on Centers
(feet)
8 5
10 6
12 7
14 8
[2] Established buffer areas. Should screen plantings in an
established buffer area die, the dead plants shall be
removed immediately. Replacements shall be made
immediately or during the subsequent planting season and
with plants in the category entitled "Evergreen Screen
with Immediate Effect." The height of the replacement
trees shall be the same as the height of the existing
evergreen trees in the buffer area to a maximum of 14 feet
in height.
(4) Storage areas and trash disposal units. The screening of storage
areas, including trash disposal units, shall be constructed of
masonry walls with a masonry cap or coping. The top of the cap or
coping shall be at least one foot above the storage or trash disposal
unit and the structure shall not be more than a total height of six
feet. A solid wood face or solid metal face gate with a full height
frame shall screen the opening. The applicant shall submit a
drawing of the proposed storage unit, drawn to scale and with
elevation views or a perspective sketch, for review and approval by
the Township. In addition, the structure shall be landscaped as
required for an accessory building.
(5) Existing plant material in buffer areas. In the preparation of the
landscape plan, existing healthy plant material in the buffer area
shall be indicated on the plan and may be included as part of the
screening requirement, if acceptable to the Township. Photographs
of such existing trees or shrubs shall be included as part of the plan
submission.
(6) Required time schedule for planting of buffer area.
(a) Primary buffer areas. Plantings required in the primary buffer
area shall be installed within 30 days from the beginning of
construction. The Township may waive this requirement if
special conditions warrant such action.
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-14
1:143
(b) Other buffer areas. Plantings required in other buffer areas
may be installed at such time that other required plantings are
installed.
(7) Plant material recommended for buffer areas shall be as follows:
(a) Type A evergreen trees.
Picea excelsa (Norway spruce)
Picea pungens (Colorado spruce)
Picea pungens glauca (Colorado blue spruce)
Pinus strobus (White pine)
Pinus thunbergii (Japanese black pine)
Pseudotsuga taxifolia (Douglas fir)
Tsuga canadensis (Canada hemlock)
(b) Type B evergreen trees.
Chamaecyparis pisifera filifera (False cypress)
Chamaecyparis pisifera veitchi (Blue false cypress)
Cupressocyparis leylandi (Leyland cypress)
Juniperus chinensis columnaris (Columnar Chinese juniper)
Juniperus virginiana (Eastern red cedar)
Taxus cuspidata capitata (Upright Japanese yew)
Thuja occidentalis nigra (Dark American arbor vitae)
(c) Type C plants for screen filler.
Cornus alba sibirica (Siberian dogwood)
Cornus racemosa (Gray dogwood)
Euonymus alatus (Winged euonymus)
Forsythia intermedia spectabilis (Showy border forsythia)
Hamamelis vernalis (Vernal witch hazel)
Hamamelis virginia (Common witch hazel)
Hamamelis mollis (Chinese witch hazel)
Ligustrum ovalifolium (California privet)
Lonicera fragrantissima (Winter honeysuckle)
Lonicera korolkowi (Blue-leaf honeysuckle)
Philadelphus virginalis (Virginial mock orange)
Spiraea vanhouttei (Vanhoutte spirea)
Syringa vulgaris (Common lilac)
Viburnum dentatum (Arrowwood)
§ 104-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-14
1:144
Viburnum lentago (Nannyberry)
Viburnum rhytidophyllum (Leatherleaf viburnum)
Viburnum tomentosum (Doublefile viburnum)
(8) Buffer area planting arrangement requirements shall be as follows.
For any linear distances under 100 feet, the requirements shall be
prorated.
(a) Zoning Districts R-4, R-4A, R-5, A, A-O, and O.
[1] Primary buffer area. There shall be a primary buffer area
along the district boundary line within R-4, R-4A, R-5, A, AO
and O Zoning Districts when adjacent to R-1, R-1A, R-2
and R-3 Zoning Districts, the depth of which shall be a
minimum of 25 feet measured from the lot boundary line.
The primary buffer area shall be planted with a
combination of evergreen trees and deciduous scrubs
based on the following criteria:
[a] Type A evergreen trees: buffering using Type A
evergreen trees. For each 10 feet of buffer area along
the district boundary line, one evergreen tree a
minimum of eight feet in height and one deciduous
shrub a minimum of four feet in height shall be
planted. In addition, one evergreen tree a minimum of
eight feet high shall be planted at the end of the row.
The deciduous shrub is to serve as a temporary screen
filler until the evergreen trees mature. Trees and
shrubs shall be planted in the buffer area in a straight
row or in a staggered arrangement with the evergreen
trees being 10 feet on center and the deciduous
shrubs planted in line with and centrally located
between the evergreen trees.
[b] Type B evergreen trees: buffering using Type B
evergreen trees. For each five feet of buffer area along
the district boundary line, one evergreen tree a
minimum of six feet in height shall be planted. The
evergreen trees shall be planted in the buffer area in a
straight row or in a staggered arrangement five feet
on center, with an additional tree planted at the end of
the row.
[2] Secondary buffer area.
[a] There shall be a secondary buffer area along the
property line when adjacent to any zoning district
other than R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 residential zoning
districts, the depth of which shall be a minimum of 25
feet measured from the property line. The secondary
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-14
1:145
buffer area may be included in any front, side or rear
yard area required under the provisions of this
chapter.
[b] For every 100 linear feet of secondary buffer area
along the property line within the buffer area, the
following shall be planted:
[c] Two Evergreen trees with a minimum height of six
feet.
[d] Two flowering trees with a minimum height of eight
feet.
[e] Four evergreen shrubs having a minimum height of
three feet.
[f] Four deciduous shrubs having a minimum height of
three feet.
(b) Zoning Districts C-1, C-2, I, SU-1 and SU-2.
[1] Primary buffer area. There shall be a primary buffer area
along the district boundary line within C-1, C-2, I, SU-1
and SU-2 Zoning Districts when adjacent to R-1, R-1A, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-4A and R-5 Residential Zoning Districts, the
depths of which shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the lot boundary line. The primary buffer area shall
be planted with a combination of evergreen trees and
deciduous shrubs based on the following criteria:
[a] Type A evergreen trees: buffering using Type A
evergreen trees. For each 10 feet of buffer area along
the district boundary line, one evergreen tree a
minimum of eight feet in height and one deciduous
shrub a minimum of four feet in height shall be
planted. In addition, one evergreen tree a minimum of
eight feet high shall be planted at the end of the row.
The deciduous shrub is to serve as a temporary screen
filler until the evergreen trees mature. Trees and
shrubs shall be planted in the buffer area in a straight
row or in a staggered arrangement with the evergreen
trees being 10 feet on center and the deciduous
shrubs planted in line with and centrally located
between the evergreen trees.
[b] Type B evergreen trees: buffering using Type B
evergreen trees. For each five feet of buffer area along
the district boundary line, one evergreen tree a
minimum of six feet in height shall be planted. The
evergreen trees shall be planted in the buffer area in a
straight row or in a staggered arrangement five feet
§ 104-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-14
1:146
§ 104-15. Maintenance of buffer areas.
§ 104-16. Alternative design; request for waiver.
Where unique physical conditions or other hardships exist which make
meeting the requirements of this chapter impractical, the applicant may
request a waiver of some of the requirements. For the Township to consider
such a request, the applicant shall submit, in writing, the nature of the
on center with an additional tree planted at the end of
the row.
[2] Secondary buffer area.
[a] There shall be a secondary buffer area along the
property line when adjacent to any zoning district
other than residential districts, the depth of which
shall be a minimum of 25 feet measured from the
property line. The secondary buffer area may be
included in any front, side or rear yard area required
under the provisions of this chapter.
[b] For every 100 linear feet of secondary buffer area
along the property line within the buffer area, the
following shall be planted:
[c] Two evergreen trees with a minimum height of six
feet.
[d] Two flowering trees with a minimum height of eight
feet.
[e] Four evergreen shrubs having a minimum height of
three feet.
[f] Four deciduous shrubs having a minimum height of
three feet.
A. Permanent plantings. All plantings and related work in the buffer area
shall be maintained and kept in a neat and healthy growing condition.
All dead plants shall be removed and replacements shall be made
immediately or during the subsequent planting season. The buffer shall
be maintained indefinitely. Should any screening die and result in a
visual opening in the buffer screen, new plantings shall be made in
accordance with the requirements under § 104-14D(3)(b), Evergreen
screen with immediate effect.
B. All landscape improvements and, in particular, plantings in the buffer
area shall be maintained in a neat, healthy and sound condition as
determined by the Township. Failed plantings, including ground cover,
as shown on the final landscape plan shall be replaced.
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-16
1:147
waiver request and the reasons for the request, along with a plan of the
proposed alternative design for review and/or approval by the Township.
§ 104-16 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-16
1:148
ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 104-17. Appointment of Landscape Inspector.
The Newtown Township Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Landscape
Inspector for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter.
The Landscape Inspector shall be appointed annually by the Newtown
Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 104-18. Subdivision and land development application.
When an application is required pursuant to Article V as part of a
submission under Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, the
provisions of such chapter for application, review, site inspections,
performance and maintenance guaranties, application fees, violations and
penalties shall govern such an application.
§ 104-19. Fees; cost estimates.
§ 104-20. Appeals.
Appeals from any action or decision of the Township or from other
administrative actions of the Township, in relation to the terms of this
chapter, shall be to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 104-21. Final landscape plan modifications.
A. The applicant shall agree, in writing, to reimburse the Township for all
costs of administration and review of the application by the Township.
Funds shall be deposited with the Township in an amount as specified
by the Township.
B. Fees covering the cost of inspections shall be paid by the applicant to
the Township prior to plan approval. If problems arise requiring more
extensive involvement of the Township during the inspection process,
any resulting costs that exceed the initial fee will be assessed to the
applicant.
C. Upon the request of the Township, a cost estimate covering landscape
development shall be submitted with the final landscape plan. The cost
estimate may serve as the basis for establishing an escrow account for
the landscape improvements.
A. Major modifications of any approved final landscape plan shall be
resubmitted in the same manner as the original plan. All development
and land disturbance activities may be suspended by the Township
Manager pending the approval of modified plans.
B. Field modifications of a minor nature may be approved by the Township
Manager in the form of written authorization.
§ 104-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-22
1:149
§ 104-22. Cease and desist order; failure to comply.
§ 104-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-12-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-5]
A. If, at any time, the Township determines that the site work does not
conform to the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be given
to the developer. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections
required and the time within which corrections shall be made. Upon
failure to comply within the time specified, the developer shall be
considered in violation of this chapter, and the Township may issue a
cease and desist order on all work on the site until corrections are
made.
B. If corrections are not undertaken within the time specified or the
applicant violates the cease and desist order:
(1) Penalties shall be imposed per § 104-23 hereof; and/or
(2) The work shall be completed by the Township and the costs
charged to the developer.
A. Anyone damaging trees, shrubs or other vegetation located within the
road right-of-way, in public parks and on property owned and utilized by
the Township by cutting, striking or by vehicle shall be subject to a fine
for each tree, shrub or other vegetation damaged of not more than
$1,000, plus the costs of replacement of such damaged trees, shrubs or
other vegetation.
B. Anyone violating any provision of § 104-22A shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a penalty of
not more than $1,000 for each and every violation. Each day that the
violation continues after proper notification shall be a separate
violation. In addition thereto, the Township may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or
equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this
chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to
issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 104-22 NEWTOWN CODE § 104-23
1:150
Chapter 106
NOISE CONTROL
§ 106-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Noise Control
Ordinance."
§ 106-2. Chapter designation.
This chapter shall be designated as Chapter 106 of the Code of the
Township of Newtown.
§ 106-3. Policy.
Whereas excessive noise is detrimental to the health, comfort, living
conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Township of Newtown, it
is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of Newtown to safeguard
the citizens of the Township from noise pollution.
§ 106-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network and read as
"dBA."
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sounds of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation or other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties, including any governmental agency.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans;
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
C. Endangers or injures personal property; or
Exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels set forth in the
regulations.
D.
§ 104-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-4
1:151
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of
a sound-level meter with an A-weighting frequency network as specified in
American National Standards Institute specifications for sound-level meters
(ANSI S1. 4-1971 or the latest approved revision thereof). All terminology
not defined here shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
§ 106-5. Noise Control Officer.
§ 106-6. Regulations.
A. Authorized position. The Code Enforcement Officers, police officers and
other persons as may be designated by the Board of Supervisors shall
serve as Noise Control Officers.
B. Duties. Noise Control Officers shall have the powers and duties to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
contained herein.
(2) Receive and initiate complaints of violations of the regulations of
this chapter.
(3) Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and inspect any
private property or place and inspect any report or records at any
reasonable time when granted permission by the owner or by some
other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When
permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may
be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of
probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist.
Such inspection may include administration of any necessary tests.
(4) Send written notice of any violation of this chapter to the person
responsible for the violation.
(5) Institute prosecution for violation of the regulations of this chapter.
A. No person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any noise disturbance:
(1) Across a real property boundary or between adjacent units of a
multiple-family dwelling, except for activities open to the public
and for which a permit has been issued by a Noise Control Officer.
(2) At a distance extending more than 50 feet from a noise-producing
device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-ofway
or public space.
B. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
noise disturbance between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day when the noise produced is associated with:
§ 106-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 106-6
1:152
(1) The operation of an instrument, sound amplifier or similar device
which reproduces, produces or amplifies sound.
(2) The loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of
boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or
similar objects.
(3) Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment
used in construction, drilling, demolition work or home
maintenance.
(4) The operation of powered model vehicles, motorboats, domestic
power tools and other motor-driven apparatus; repairing,
rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor-operated vehicle,
motorcycle, powered model vehicle, motor-driven apparatus or
power tool.
(5) The operation of an electronic insect device which emits
unreasonable noises.
C. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private property any
source of sound in such a manner that creates a sound level greater
than the limits set forth for the receiving land use category specified
below when measured at the real property boundary of the property on
which the source of the sound is located.
(1) Table.
Maximum Cumulative Time Allowed at Sound Level
Limit in Any 24-Hour Period
By Land Use Category
Residential, Apartment, Public Space,
Institutional
Commercial,
Business,
Shopping
Center
Sound Level
Limit (dBA)
Day (7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.)
Night (11:00
p.m. to 7:00
a.m.) Day and Night
Less than or
equal to 50
16 hrs. 8 hrs. 24 hrs.
55 16 hrs. 4 hrs. 30 min. 24 hrs.
60 7 hrs. 30 min. 1 hr. 0 min. 24 hrs.
65 1 hr. 30 min. 30 min. 12 hrs.
70 45 min. 5 min. 2 hrs. 30 min.
75 9 min. 3 min. 1 hr. 0 min.
80 5 min. 1 min. 15 min.
85 1 min. 0 min. 7 min.
§ 106-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-6
1:153
§ 106-7. Violations and penalties.
Maximum Cumulative Time Allowed at Sound Level
Limit in Any 24-Hour Period
By Land Use Category
Residential, Apartment, Public Space,
Institutional
Commercial,
Business,
Shopping
Center
Sound Level
Limit (dBA)
Day (7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.)
Night (11:00
p.m. to 7:00
a.m.) Day and Night
Greater than or
equal to 90
0 min. 0 min. 1 min.
(2) For any source which emits a pure tone sound, the maximum time
of operation will be for the next lower sound (dBA) level in the
above table.
D. Plans for construction and operation of new bus routes, railroads,
trolleys or roads or expansion of such existing transportation systems,
regardless of the source of project funds, shall comply with applicable
state or federal noise control standards. If there is reason to believe
that these plans are not consistent with this chapter, the department or
agency responsible will be requested to consider the advisability of
revising the plans to make them more consistent with this chapter.
A. Prosecutions under this chapter shall be instituted by the Noise Control
Officer and shall be prosecuted in the name of the Township of
Newtown. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine
and costs by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The Noise Control Officer may institute an action in equity for an
injunction to restrain continuous violations of this chapter in the event
that the Noise Control Officer has issued an abatement notice which is
being violated and which is not then the subject of judicial review.
§ 106-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 106-7
1:154
Chapter 107
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 61.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 66.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 115.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 162.
§ 107-1. Determination of nuisances; notice.
Whenever the Township Manager, upon information or inspection,
determines that the construction, alteration, repair, lack of repair, use,
occupancy, care or maintenance of any premises, land, buildings, structures
or any part thereof constitutes a nuisance in fact or a menace to health or
a threat to public safety, he shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant
of such premises, land, buildings, structures or part thereof of his
determination. If notice as aforesaid cannot be given, then a copy of the
notice shall be posted on the premises.
§ 107-2. Abatement; costs.
§ 107-3. Right of entry. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
The Township Manager or such other persons as he may designate shall
have the power to enter at any time upon any premises, lands, buildings,
structures or parts thereof which the Manager suspects may constitute a
nuisance in fact or a menace to health or a threat to public safety for the
purpose of examining, inspecting, correcting or abating the same.
A. At the time of the notification of determination aforesaid or at some
later time, the Manager may also deliver or have delivered a written
order of abatement directed to the owner or occupant aforesaid
requiring an abatement of the condition described within such time as
may be specified in the order of abatement. The order of abatement
may provide for removal, replacement, repair, construction, installation
or any other relief deemed appropriate by the Manager.
B. In case such order of abatement is not obeyed within the time specified
therein, the Manager may direct or engage the appropriate Township
employees or other persons to remove, correct or abate the condition
described, and the expense therefor shall be recoverable from the
owner of the premises, land, building or structure involved, together
with a penalty of 10% of such expense in the manner provided by law
for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 106-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-4
1:155
§ 107-4. Designation of nuisances.
Whenever any of the following conditions are brought to the attention of
the Manager, he shall, in his discretion, proceed to see whether the order
of abatement provided for in this chapter shall be made. The following
conditions are not meant to be all inclusive, and other conditions, although
not listed herein, may require the Manager to proceed as hereinbefore set
forth.
§ 107-5. Conflicts with other provisions.
Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter
shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 107-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Noxious or offensive manufacture, art or business.
B. Dangerous buildings or structures.
C. Buildings damaged by fire or other cause.
D. Improper or unsafe construction, repair or alteration.
E. Discharge or draining of harmful oils or fluids on lands or into streams.
F. Improper accumulation of debris, refuse, trash, garbage or manure.
G. Improper sanitation facilities, dumps or cesspools.
H. Dumping, storage or accumulation of junk.
I. Dangerous excavations, holes or pits.
J. Dangerous accumulation of water or other liquids.
A. The refusal to obey an order of abatement within the time specified
shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
B. In addition to any remedy provided herein, the Township may proceed
for relief by a bill in equity or an action at law.
C. For each violation of this chapter, the owner of any premises, land,
buildings, structures or part thereof shall be fined not more than
$1,000. Each day that the violation continues after the time specified in
the order of abatement shall constitute a separate offense punishable as
such. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties
are now collected by law. The provisions of this section are in addition
to any other remedy provided by this chapter. [Amended 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 107-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 107-6
1:156
Chapter 109
OBSCENE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107. Peace and good order — See Ch. 115.
§ 109-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code25
to prohibit nuisances and to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and
safety of the citizens of Newtown Township and the authority of political
subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enact local
ordinances to regulate activities concerning obscene and other sexual
material as provided for in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(k) and as upheld by the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in
Brown v. Pornography Commission of Lower Southampton Township, 620 F.
Supp. 1199 (1985), the Township of Newtown enacts the following chapter.
§ 109-2. Prohibited acts.
No persons, knowing the obscene character of the materials or
performances involved, shall, within the Township of Newtown:
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual material, as
defined in § 109-3, in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display
rack, billboard, display board, viewing screen, motion-picture screen,
marquee or similar place in such manner that the display is visible from
any public street, highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other
public thoroughfare or in any business or commercial establishment
where minors, as part of the general public or otherwise, are or will
probably be exposed to view all or any part of such materials;
B. Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene material
to any person under the age of 18 or offer to sell, lend, distribute,
exhibit or give away or show, or have in his possession with intent to
sell, lend, distribute exhibit or give away or show, any obscene material
to any person under the age of 18 or knowingly advertise any obscene
material in any manner;
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene materials;
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information,
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 107-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:157
§ 109-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this section:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary community
standards in this chapter, the state.
KNOWING — As used in § 109-2, having general knowledge of, or reason
to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection
or inquiry of, the character and content of any material or performance
described therein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the
person charged with violation of this chapter.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing; any figure,
visual representation, or image, including any thawing, photograph,
picture, videotape or motion picture.
NUDE — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below
the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or in
a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one who is nude or so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
whom, or by what means any obscene material can be purchased,
obtained or had;
E. Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a
portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity; or
F. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this section.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this chapter; and
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 109-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 109-3
1:158
sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexually bestiality; and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad cars, buses, and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 109-4. Dissemination to minors.
No person shall knowingly disseminate, by sale, loan, or otherwise, explicit
sexual materials to a minor. "Explicit sexual material," as used in this
section, means materials which are obscene or:
§ 109-5. Admission of minors to shows.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for monetary
consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission
ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for monetary consideration
to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion-picture show or other
presentation or performance which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity,
sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors,
except that the foregoing shall not apply to any minor accompanied by his
parent.
§ 109-6. Additional definitions.
As used §§ 109-4 and 109-5 of this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or representation
in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
A. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
videotape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
B. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in § 109-3,
Subsection B of the definition of "obscene," or explicit and detailed
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest of
minors; and
A.
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors; and
B.
§ 109-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-6
1:159
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area,
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is clad in undergarments, a mask or in bizarre costume or the condition
of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of
one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, sexual bestiality or physical contact with a person's clothed or
unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
§ 109-7. Requiring sale as condition of business dealings.
No person shall knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a
condition to sale or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature,
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any written
or printed matter, or any article or instrument to purchase or take by
consignment for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene
literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic
book, writing, drawing, photograph, videotape, figure or image, or any
written or printed matter of an obscene nature or any article or instrument
of an obscene nature.
§ 109-8. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, Township or town library, any public library, any library of any
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational
or scientific value for minors.
C.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible to examination by the person
charged with violation of this chapter; and
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the person charged
with violation of this chapter made a reasonable bona fide attempt to
ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
§ 109-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 109-8
1:160
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
§ 109-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine not to
exceed $600 and costs of prosecution. Upon judgment against any person
by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the
payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the person who shall
have violated this chapter may be sentenced and committed to the county
jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 112
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 61. Peace and good order — See Ch. 115.
§ 112-1. Compliance required.
No person, firm or corporation shall use any park or recreational area
owned, leased, maintained or operated by the Township unless such person,
firm or corporation complies strictly with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 112-2. Restrictions.
No person, firm or corporation using any park or recreational area owned,
leased, maintained or operated by the Township shall do any of the
following:
A. Build any fire anywhere in such park or recreational area except in
fireplaces provided for such purposes. Such fires shall be guarded at all
times and shall be extinguished before the person guarding the same
leaves.
B. Cut, mutilate or remove or destroy in any manner whatsoever any trees,
shrubbery, flowers, plants or wood.
C. Deface, mark, damage, remove or destroy any buildings, posters,
fences, gates or guardrailings or any other park property in any manner
whatsoever.
D. Use intoxicating drinks or beverages or engage in intoxication or enter
in an intoxicated condition and use indecent language, gamble or
conduct himself in any disorderly manner.
§ 109-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:161
§ 112-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 115
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107.
§ 115-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute disorderly conduct for any person
within the limits of the Township:
E. Be accompanied by dogs or permit the entry of dogs except when on a
leash.
F. Litter grounds with refuse or place refuge and rubbish anywhere except
in barrels and/or containers provided for that purpose.
G. Park cars anywhere within such areas except in places designated for
parking.
H. Operate any motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour or
in any manner that evidences the lack of due care and regard for the
safety of property or persons within such area.
I. Use the park and recreational area at any time after sunset and before
sunrise unless a permit is first obtained for an overnight camping
privilege by application to the Township Manager or his designated
agent.
J. No organized group shall use the park or recreational areas unless a
permit therefor is applied for and first obtained from the Township
Manager or his designated agent.
K. Operate any motor-driven vehicles, minibikes or motorcycles in any
park or recreational area owned, leased, maintained or operated by the
Township of Newtown. Entry and exit to designated parking areas will
be permitted by properly licensed operators operating properly
inspected and properly registered motor vehicles.
§ 112-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 115-1
1:162
§ 115-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 118
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 112.
Precious metals and gems — See Ch. 124.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
A. To breach the peace; to be a vagrant; to engage in fighting; to incite
others to fight; to engage in any act tending to imperil the personal
security of any person; or to endanger or injure property.
B. To use loud, boisterous, profane, blasphemous, indecent or immoral
language upon or near any of the public highways or public places or
any other place in a manner so as to annoy residents in the
neighborhood; or to make any unseemly noise or disturbance to the
annoyance of the users of the highways and roads or the residents
nearby.
C. To loaf, loiter or stand upon any of the sidewalks or public highways,
roads or places so as to interfere with the free passage of the users of
the highways, roads and sidewalks.
D. Except when hunting in compliance with state laws and regulations, to
discharge any gun or firearm unless in defense of person or property.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
E. To throw on or into any highway, road or pavement any stones,
snowballs or any other material; or to explode any torpedo, bomb,
firecracker, or fireworks of any kind in or on the highways, roads or
pavements.
F. To tamper with, destroy or otherwise interfere with any lights, highway
signs, guardrails or any other property or materials placed in the public
highways or roads by the Township or any of its officials.
G. To operate or cause to be operated any equipment or hand tools used in
residential or commercial construction, repair, alteration, or demolition
work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances in any
land use category between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. [Added
4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:163
§ 118-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 118-2. License required.
No person shall act as a transient retail merchant or engage in peddling in
the Township without first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 118-3. License application; transfer; investigation. [Amended
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Every person desiring to engage in the activity of a transient retail
merchant or engage in peddling in the Township shall first make application
to the Township Manager for a license. Upon such application, such person
A. As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
PEDDLER — Any person who engages in peddling, as herein defined.
PEDDLING — Engaged in peddling, canvassing, soliciting, hawking,
selling or taking orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods,
wares or merchandise upon the streets or sidewalks or from house
to house within the Township. However, "peddling" does not apply to
farmers selling their own produce; nor to the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise donated by the owners thereof and the proceeds thereof
are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose; nor to
the taking of orders for merchandise by sample from retailers or
merchants; nor to any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread
and bakery products, meat and meat products or milk and milk
products; except that the peddling of ice cream, frozen ices or like
products shall be included under these regulations for peddling.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Every person, whether principal
or agent, entering into, beginning, desiring to begin or carrying on
a transient retail business in the Township for the sale of any goods,
wares or merchandise whatsoever and who hires, leases, occupies or
uses any room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other
place or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise. However, "transient retail merchant" does not include a
farmer selling his own produce; nor anyone who sells goods, wares or
merchandise which are donated by the owner thereof and the proceeds
of the sale thereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose; nor any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and
bakery products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products;
nor any person taking orders for merchandise by sample from dealers
or merchants.
B. The singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the
feminine and the neuter.
§ 115-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 118-3
1:164
shall give his name, address, any criminal record, the name of the person
for whom he works, if any, the type of goods, wares and merchandise he
wishes to dispose of as a transient retail merchant or peddler, the length
of time for which he wishes to be licensed, the type of vehicle he uses, if
any, and the number of helpers he has. Where a person makes application
for himself and one or more helpers, all applicable personal information
specified above shall be given for each helper and an individual license shall
be required for each helper. No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferable from one person to another. The Township Manager shall refer
each application to the Police Department for investigation of the applicant.
§ 118-4. License fee. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the license fee, in the
amount therefor set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall be paid
to the Township.
§ 118-5. Issuance of license; display.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to the applicant as a transient retail
merchant or a peddler, as requested in the application. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given upon the application therefor.
Transient retail merchants shall at all times post the license in a
conspicuous place in the room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car
or other place or structure used for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares
or merchandise. Every peddler shall at all times, when engaged in peddling
in the Township, carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit such
license, upon request, to all police officers, Township officials and residents.
No transient retail merchant and no peddler shall engage in the selling of
any products not mentioned upon such license.
§ 118-6. Time restrictions.
§ 118-7. Prohibited acts.
A. No person licensed as a transient retail merchant under this chapter
shall engage in this activity at any time on Sunday, nor on Monday to
Thursday, inclusive, before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. local time, nor
on Friday or Saturday before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. local time.
B. No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in
peddling at any time on Sunday nor upon any other day of the week
during the period between 1/2 hour prior to sunset and 9:00 a.m. local
time. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. No person, licensed as a peddler under this chapter, shall hawk or cry
his wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor
shall be use any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 118-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-7
1:165
§ 118-8. Records.
The Township Manager shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter, and he shall supply the Chief of Police with a list of all such licenses
issued.
§ 118-9. License suspension and revocation. [Amended 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any
license issued under this chapter upon proof that the application for the
license contained false information or when the applicant has violated this
chapter or when the licensee has been convicted of or pled guilty to a crime
involving moral turpitude after the issuance of such license.
§ 118-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 121
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
B. No person, licensed as a peddler under this chapter, shall park any
vehicle upon any the streets, public ways or sidewalks of the Township
in order to sell goods, wares and merchandise from such vehicle or to
sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor
may any such person place or deposit any refuse upon any of the streets
or alleys; nor may any such person maintain or keep a street or
curbstone market by parking such vehicle on any street or alley in the
Township for longer than is necessary in order to sell therefrom to
persons residing in the immediate vicinity. [Amended 4-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
C. No person licensed as a transient retail merchant or peddler under this
chapter shall occupy any fixed location or conduct sales upon any of the
streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way or sidewalks in the Township for
the purpose of soliciting or peddling with or without any stand or
counter. [Added 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 118-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 118-10
1:166
§ 121-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Township Manager of the Township of Newtown, being marked and
designated as the "BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Township of
Newtown for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said BOCA National Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 121-2 of this chapter.
§ 121-2. Additions, insertions and amendments.
The BOCA National Plumbing Code, Ninth Edition, 1993, is amended and
changed as follows:
A. P-101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing Code
of the Township of Newtown," hereinafter referred as "this code."
B. P-113.2, entitled "Fee schedule," shall read as follows:
P-113.2 Fees schedule: The fees to be charged by the Township of
Newtown shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors from time to
time by resolution in applying the provisions of this code.
C. P-116.4, entitled "Violation penalties," shall read as follows:
P-116.4 Violation penalties: Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this code shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 for each
and every offense. Each day that a violation continues after a service of
notice as provided for in this code shall be deemed a separate offense
thereof for each day.
D. P-117.2, entitled "Unlawful continuance," shall read as follows:
P-117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not
more than $1,000.
E. P-304.3, entitled "Public systems available," shall read as follows:
P-304.3 Public systems available: A public sewer system shall be
considered available to a structure where the structure is located
within 150 feet of a public sewer main or lateral.
§ 118-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-2
1:167
F. P-309.4, entitled "Freezing," shall read as follows:
P-309.4 Freezing: Water service piping shall be installed below
recorded frost penetration but not less than 42 inches below grade.
Plumbing piping in exterior building walls or areas subjected to
freezing temperatures shall be protected against freezing by insulation
or heat or both.
G. P-309.5, entitled "Sewer depth," shall read as follows:
P-309.5 Sewer depth: Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 36 below grade.
H. Section P-403.4.
(1) P-403.4, entitled "Water service pipe," shall read as follows:
P-403.4 Water service pipe: Water service pipe shall conform to
NSF 61 listed in Chapter 19 and shall conform to the following
standards:
Material Standards (Chapter 19)
Brass pipe ASTM B43
Copper or copper-alloy pipe ASTM B42; ASTM B302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing
(Type K, WK, L, WL, M or WM)
ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM
B251; ASTM 447
All water service pipe or tubing installed underground and outside
of the structure shall have a minimum working pressure of 160
pounds per square inch (psi) (1,000 kPa) at 73.4° F. (23° C.).
Where the water pressure exceeds 160 psi (1,100 kPa), piping
material shall have a minimum rated working pressure equal to
the highest available pressure.
(2) Table P-403.4 is hereby deleted.
I. Section P-403.5.
(1) P-403.5, entitled "Water distribution pipe," shall read as follows:
P-403.5 Water distribution pipe: Water distribution pipe shall
conform to NSF 61 listed in Chapter 19 and shall conform to the
following standards:
Material Standards (Chapter 19)
Brass pipe ASTM B43
Copper or copper-alloy pipe ASTM B42; ASTM B302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing
(Type K, WK, L, WL, M or WM)
ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM
B251; ASTM 447
§ 121-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 121-2
1:168
Cross-linked polyethylene/
aluminum/cross-linked
polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pipe
CSA CAN/CSA B137.10
Galvanized steel pipe ASTM A53
(2) Table P-403.5, Water Distribution Pipe, is hereby deleted.
J. P-405.3, entitled "Building storm sewer pipe," shall read as follows:
P-405.3 Building storm sewer pipe: Building storm sewer pipe shall
conform to one of the standards listed in Table P-405.3.
Table P-405.3
Building Storm Sewer Pipe
Material Standards (Chapter 19)
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
(ABS) plastic pipe
ASTM D2661; ASTM D2751;
ASTM F628
Asbestos-cement pipe ASTM C428
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A74; CISPI 301
Concrete pipe ASTM C14; ASTM C76; CSA
A257.1; CSA A257.2
Copper or copper-alloy tubing
(Type K, L, M or DWV)
ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM
B251; ASTM B306
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic
pipe (Type DWV, SDR26, SDR35,
SDR41, PS50 or PS100)
ASTM D2665; ASTM D3034;
ASTM F891; CSA CAN/CSAB182.2;
CSA CAN/CSA-B182.4
Vitrified clay pipe ASTM C4; ASTM C700
K. P-405.4, entitled "Subsoil drain pipe," shall read as follows:
P-405.4 Subsoil drain pipe: Subsoil drains shall be open jointed,
horizontally split or perforated pipe conforming to one of the standards
listed in Table P-405.4.
Table P-405.4
Subsoil Drain Pipe
Material Standards (Chapter 19)
Asbestos-cement pipe ASTM C508
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A74; CISPI 301
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe ASTM F405
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic
pipe (Type Sewer Pipe, PS25,
PS50 or PS100)
ASTM D2729; ASTM F891; CSA
CAN/CSA-B182.2; CSA CAN/CSAB182.4
Vitrified clay pipe ASTM C4; ASTM C700
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-2
1:169
§ 121-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall
L. Section P-505.0, entitled "Bituminized Fiber Pipe," is hereby deleted.
M. Section P-511.0, entitled "CPVC Plastic Pipe and Fittings," is hereby
deleted.
N. Section P-514.0, entitled "Polybutylene Plastic Pipe, Tubing and
Fittings," is hereby deleted.
O. Section P-515.0, entitled "Polyethylene Plastic Pipe, Tubing and
Fittings," is hereby deleted.
P. P-1606.2, entitled "Well locations," shall read as follows:
P-1606.2 Well locations: A potable groundwater source or pump
suction line shall not be located closer to potential sources of
contamination than the distances shown in Table P-1606.2. In the event
that the underlying rock structure is limestone or fragmented shale,
the Township shall be consulted on well site location. The distances in
Table P-1606.2 constitute a minimum separation and shall be increased
in areas of crevassed rock or limestone or where the direction of
movement of the groundwater is from sources of contamination toward
the well.
Table P-1606.2
Distance from Sources of Contamination to Private Water
Supplies and Pump Suction Lines
Source of Contamination
Distance
(feet)
Sewer 10
Septic Tank 25
Subsurface pits 50
Pasture 100
Subsurface disposal fields 100
Seepage pits 100
Barnyard 100
Farm silo 25
Pump house floor drain of cast iron
draining to ground surface
2
§ 121-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 121-3
1:170
any just or legal remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by
this chapter.
Chapter 124
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 118.
§ 124-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate businesses dealing in gold, silver
and/or gemstones within the Township so as to assure and safeguard the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents.
§ 124-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES — Any person or business
entity who, in the regular course of business, purchases for resale,
distribution to another or manufacture articles containing precious metals
and stones.
PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES — Any article containing gold, silver
or gemstones, including but not limited to diamonds, rubies, emeralds and
pearls.
§ 124-3. License required; records check.
§ 124-4. License term; fee. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
A license shall be issued for one year and shall be renewed prior to the
expiration of each licensing period. The fee for a license or its renewal shall
be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. No person or business entity shall engage in the business of a dealer in
precious metals and stones in the Township without first obtaining a
precious metals and stones dealer's license from the Township.
B. A license may only be issued or renewed if the application therefor is
reviewed by the Chief of Police after a complete records check is made
of the dealer and all employees and satisfactory evidence of good
character is submitted by the applicant.
C. A separate license shall be required for each location which the same
person or business entity may have within the Township.
§ 121-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-5
1:171
§ 124-5. Transaction record book.
§ 124-6. Restrictions.
§ 124-7. License revocation.
Any licensed dealer who violates any provision of this chapter, in addition to
the fine prescribed by this chapter, shall have his license revoked.
A. Every person or business entity conducting the business of a dealer in
precious metals or stones in the Township shall keep a book in which
shall be recorded at the time of purchase an accurate account and
description of the articles containing gold, silver and/or precious
gemstones purchased. Such record book shall also set forth the amount
of money paid for each article, the date and time of purchase, together
with a description of the person selling such articles, including the
name and address of the seller together with a legend of the photo
identification offered by the seller, such as a current driver's license
number, and a statement of the history of the person's ownership of
each item, including when and from whom it was acquired.
B. The record book provided for shall be subject to the inspection of the
Department of Police from time to time.
C. A copy of each entry in the record book hereinabove provided for shall
be sent to the Chief of Police each working day prior to 12:00 noon
showing all transactions entered on the previous day and setting forth
all information required under this chapter.
A. No dealer in gold, silver or precious gemstones shall sell any articles
purchased until the same have been in his possession at least 15 days.
Records shall be kept of the date and time of each sale and shall be
subject to inspection by the Department of Police from time to time.
B. No dealer under this chapter or his employee shall purchase any article
for which he is licensed by virtue of this chapter from any person under
the age of 18 years, any intoxicated person or any known or suspected
thief or receiver of stolen property.
C. No purchase shall be made from any person who does not present valid
photo identification to the dealer prior to the transaction of any
business.
D. All payments for the purchase of precious metals or stones subject to
this chapter shall be made solely by check payable to the former owner
of such property. In no event shall payments be made directly or
indirectly in cash for all or any portion of the purchase price.
§ 124-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 124-8
1:172
§ 124-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 127
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 127-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
secretary of the Township of Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
being marked and designated as the "2015 International Property
Maintenance Code" as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township
of Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, to regulate and govern the
condition and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures as
herein provided; and to provide the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy and use; and to provide
for the condemnation and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use; and to provide for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and to refer to, adopt, and make a part thereof
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes specified
in § 127-2 of this chapter.
§ 127-2. Amendments.
The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised
in the following respects:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting: "the Township of
Newtown" as the name of the jurisdiction.
B. Section 103.1, General, is amended by deleting it and replacing it with:
Section 103.1 General. The Township Code Enforcement
Department shall serve as the department of property maintenance
and the Zoning Officer as designated per Chapter 172, the municipal
code official as designated per Chapter 79, and other such persons as
designated by the Township Manager shall serve as the code officials
under this Chapter 127.
C. Section 103.5, Fees, is amended by deleting it and replacing it with:
§ 124-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-2
1:173
Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by
the Township in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall
be as indicated and set forth by the Township Fee Schedule adopted by
resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors.
D. The following sections are added:
105.7 Housing permit. No person or entity shall lease or rent any
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, motel unit or hotel unit in the
Township without first making application to and obtaining a permit
from the Township to rent or lease such dwelling unit or rooming unit.
105.7.1 Term. Housing permits shall be issued for one-year terms.
105.7.2 Periodic inspections. The Township will inspect all rental
units every five years. In addition, the Township may inspect rental
units and corresponding common and exterior areas upon a
complaint of a violation of the Property Maintenance Code or
International Fire Code by a tenant or neighboring property owner.
In addition, the Township may perform exterior and common area
inspections every two years. The inspection checklists to be used
for all inspections shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution.
105.7.3 Self inspections. In addition to the aforementioned
Township inspections, all rental housing permittees shall self-inspect
all rental units prior to a change of tenant(s) for that unit. The
inspection checklist shall be in the same form approved by the
Township for five-year inspections and shall be signed by the
individual performing the inspection. The signing and/or submittal
of the self-inspection form shall constitute a certification that the
inspection was performed and that the inspection results were
accurately recorded. A self-inspection shall be conducted, and the
corresponding form submitted, for every twelve-month period that
the unit remains vacant. Self-inspection forms shall be submitted to
the Township Manager no later than 10 days after the new tenant
takes possession of the unit. False certifications shall be considered
a violation of the Property Maintenance Code. Hotels and motels
shall perform the self-inspections and submit the self-inspection
certifications annually in lieu of upon change in tenancy.
§ 127-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 127-2
1:174
105.7.4 Permit application. A housing permit application, in the
form as shall be determined by the Township Manager, shall be
submitted annually to the Township for each rental unit. The
application shall set forth the name of the applicant and the name
of the owner if different, together with the address of the dwelling,
the dwelling unit (or units) or the rooming unit (or units) which
are or will be offered for rent and such other information as may
be required by the code official; such application will constitute an
agreement between the applicant and the Township for the faithful
compliance by the applicant and all agents, servants, employees
or representatives of the applicant with all ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Township now in effect or hereafter adopted
relating to the basic equipment, physical condition, maintenance and
occupancy of dwellings and dwelling units, motel and hotel units.
The owner, if different from the applicant, remains subject to all
provisions of Chapter 127. With the exception of hotels and motels,
a housing permit application shall also be submitted to the Township
upon every change of tenant.
105.7.5 Permit application fees. A housing permit application
fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of permit application
in accordance with the Township Fee Schedule. Fees for Township
inspections and reinspections as may be required under this section
shall be set by the Township Fee Schedule and shall be payable prior
to the issuance of any housing permit.
105.7.6 Owner or agent. A housing permit will not be issued or
renewed for any person or entity that does not either reside, or have
an office, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania unless that person
or entity designates, in writing, an agent in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the receipt of any notice issued with respect to this
code.
105.7.7 Permit issuance. Upon receipt of the permit application,
and after any applicable self-inspection, Township inspection, or
reinspection pursuant to Section 105.7.8, if the premises complies
with the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the
Township and the International Fire Code, and the proper fees have
been paid, the Code Official shall issue to the applicant a housing
permit.
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-2
1:175
105.7.8 Inspection failure. If, upon inspection, the premises fails
to comply with the applicable code provisions, the code official shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies within 10 days of
the inspection. The owner shall be given 30 days from the date of the
notice to correct the deficiencies and schedule a reinspection. If the
code official finds that a deficiency does not pose an imminent threat
to life or safety, a permit may be issued or retained by the applicant,
with the provision that the deficiency must be corrected within 30
days. The applicant may schedule reinspections as necessary, but
in no event shall the inspection and reinspection process exceed
120 days from the date of the initial inspection, after which time
the permit may be denied or revoked. Permit denials, revocations
or inspection failures may be appealed to the Newtown Township
Property Maintenance Appeals Board.
105.7.9 Exemptions. The permitting requirements of this chapter
shall not apply to:
a) All property owned by Newtown Township.
b) Hospitals, nursing homes, or similar institutions where such
facilities are subject to regular county, state or federal licensing
inspections.
c) Single-family dwellings where a parent, parent-in-law or adult
child of the owner remains in occupancy and no net income is
earned by the owner. However, this exemption does not apply
where the dwelling is not occupied by the owner and the dwelling
becomes subject to code violations, which, despite demand,
remain uncorrected.
d) Any residential unit occupied by the owner, provided the owner
provides proof of occupancy.
E. Section 106.4, Violation penalties, is amended by deleting it and
replacing it with:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person or entity who shall violate
a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be liable for fines and penalties
not exceeding $1,000, which fines and penalties may be collected by
summary proceeding or suit brought in the name of the Township
before a Magisterial District Judge. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. The Township may also seek
equitable or injunctive relief.
F. Section 106.5, Abatement of violation, is amended by deleting it and
replacing it with:
§ 127-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 127-2
1:176
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township from instituting
appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to
stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building,
structure or premises.
106.5.1 Self help. If a violation has not been corrected within
the time designated for such compliance by the code official and
the Board of Supervisors finds that a continuation of such violation
is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of
a building, structure, premises or surrounding community, or
constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, it may order the correction
of such violation using Township resources to accomplish such
corrections and may charge the cost thereof to the violator and
collect such cost by lien and/or otherwise as may be authorized by
law.
G. Section 111.1, Application for appeal, is amended by deleting it and
replacing it with:
111.1 Application for appeal. Housing permit inspection failures,
housing permit denials and housing permit revocations may be
appealed to the Newtown Township Property Maintenance Board of
Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within
20 days after the day of the decision or notice is served. An application
for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
An application for appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
H. Section 111.2, Membership of board, and Section 111.2.5,
Compensation of members, are amended by deleting them and
replacing them with:
111.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals under this
Chapter 127 shall be comprised of three adult individual residents of
the Township of Newtown, as appointed by the Board of Supervisors
for one-year terms, and shall be known as the "Newtown Township
Property Maintenance Board of Appeals." The initial terms of the
Board members will expire at the end of the first calendar year they
were appointed.
111.2.5 Compensation of members. Board members shall serve
without compensation.
I. Section 111.4.1, Procedure, is amended by deleting it and replacing it
with:
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-2
1:177
§ 127-3. Effect on prior actions and rights.
Nothing in this chapter and the 2015 International Property Maintenance
Code, hereby adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
111.4.1 Procedure. The Board shall adopt and make available to
the public through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing
will be conducted. The procedure shall not require compliance with
strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate only relevant information be
received.
J. Section 111.7, Court review, is amended by deleting it and replacing it
with:
111.7 Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board
of Appeals shall have the right to appeal that decision to an
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
K. Section 112.4, Failure to comply, shall be amended by deleting it and
replacing it with:
Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, with any of the requirements thereof, shall be liable
for fines and penalties not exceeding $1,000, which fines and penalties
may be collected by summary proceeding or suit brought in the name
of the Township before a Magisterial District Judge. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The Township
may also seek equitable or injunctive relief.
L. Section 302.4, Weeds, shall be amended by inserting "10 inches" for the
height limit of weeds.
M. Section 304.14, Insect screens, is amended by deleting it and replacing
it with:
Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from March 30 to
October 30, every door, window and other outside opening required
for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored
shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than
16 mesh per inch, and every screen door used for insect control shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition.
N. Section 602.3, Heat supply, is amended by inserting "October 15 to May
15" as the inclusive dates to maintain minimum temperature.
O. Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended by inserting
"October 15 to May 15" as the inclusive dates to maintain minimum
temperature.
§ 127-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 127-3
1:178
pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 130
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Plumbing — See Ch. 121.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Wastewater management — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
§ 127-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-3
1:179

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections and Use
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 921 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 130-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation of cooking and dispensing
of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
OCCUPIABLE BUILDING — Each single dwelling unit, household unit, flat
or apartment unit, condominium or cooperative unit, store, shop, office,
business, commercial or industrial unit or family unit contained within any
structure, erected, intended for and/or used for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or employment by human beings and from which
(including common facilities serving said unit) sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, or either, is or may be discharged.[Amended 2-28-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-1]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PROPERTY — Any separately deeded piece of ground upon which there
exists or can be erected an occupiable building, as herein defined.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial,
industrial and service establishments.
SANITARY SEWER — A conduit which is part of the sewer system and
which carries sanitary sewage and/or treated industrial wastes and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any devices and/or structures and
facilities used for treating of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, transporting,
treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwater,
surface water, drainage and some industrial water discharges, such as
cooling and air-conditioning waters, but excludes sanitary sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:181
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — An engineer employed by the Township or an
authorized member of his staff.
§ 130-2. Restricted acts.
§ 130-3. General regulations. [Amended 9-14-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-5; 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1; 3-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-01; 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01; 10-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-03]
A. No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary
manner upon public or private property within the Township sewage,
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. No person shall discharge sanitary sewage, industrial waste or polluted
water into any natural outlet within the Township unless the person so
doing is operating with the written approval of the Department of
Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. No owner of property who is required to connect to the sewer system
pursuant to § 130-3 hereof shall construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, cesspool or septic tank intended or used for the disposal of
sanitary sewage within the Township, except that in the case of existing
private homes which are so situated that existing basement fixtures
cannot be drained by gravity to the sewer system, the present on-site
system may be retained pursuant to Chapter 121, Plumbing.
A. Individual on-lot systems.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person owning any habitable building
on a parcel or lot abutting a sanitary sewer system or situated
within 150 feet of a sanitary sewer system to erect, construct or use
or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, used or
maintained any on-lot sewage system, including, but not limited to,
a privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank, or other receptacle for
receiving sewage.
(2) Any person who erects, constructs or maintains an on-lot sewage
system, including, but not limited to, a privy, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank, or other receptacle for receiving sewage on any
property abutting on or within 150 feet of a sanitary sewer system
in violation of this section shall be deemed and shall be declared to
be erecting, constructing or maintaining a nuisance, which
nuisance the Township may abate in any manner provided by law.
B. Connections required.
(1) Where properties abutting upon a sanitary sewer system are
assessable for a proportionate share of the cost of the sanitary
sewer system, all persons owning any habitable building now
§ 130-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-3
1:182
erected upon any parcel or lot abutting on the sanitary sewer
system shall, at their own expense, make connection with and
use the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the operator and the Township within 60 days after
notice to do so from the Township.
(2) All persons owning any parcel or lot abutting on a sanitary sewer
system upon which said parcel or lot a habitable building is
hereafter erected shall, at the time of the erection of such building
and at their own expense, make connection with and use the
sanitary sewer system in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the operator and the Township within 60 days after notice to do
so from the Township.
(3) All persons owning any habitable building upon any parcel or lot
which hereafter shall abut on a sanitary sewer system shall, at their
own expense, make connection with and use the sanitary sewer
system in accordance with the rules and regulations of the operator
and the Township within 60 days after notice to do so from the
Township.
(4) All persons owning any habitable building upon any parcel or lot
abutting on any public or undedicated road, private road, alley, or
right-of-way in which there has been constructed a sanitary sewer
system shall, at their own expense, make connection with and use
the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the operator and the Township within 60 days after
notice to do so from the Township.
(5) All persons owning any habitable building situated within 150 feet
of a sanitary sewer system shall, at their own expense, make
connection with and use the sanitary sewer system in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the operator and the Township
within 60 days after notice to do so from the Township.
(6) At any time, any property owner may file an application with the
operator to voluntarily make connection with and use a sanitary
sewer system in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
operator and the Township.
C. Connection deferment.
(1) Notwithstanding any requirement to connect an existing habitable
building to a sanitary sewer system, a property owner may elect to
defer connection for a period of up to 10 years from the date of the
official notice to connect, if the property owner complies with the
following conditions:
(a) The property owner shall, at the owner's expense, obtain a
certification from a registered professional engineer, or other
professional certified or licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and recognized to possess experience and
§ 130-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:183
expertise with respect to on-lot sewage systems, which states
that there is an existing on-lot sewage disposal system serving
the habitable building that has been inspected and found to be
in satisfactory working condition.
(b) The property owner shall submit the certification of a
satisfactory on-lot-sewage system to the Township within 30
days after the property owner receives written notice from the
Township to connect and, thereafter, the property owner shall
annually, at the owner's expense, cause an inspection and
certification to be obtained in accordance with the above
requirements and submit the same to the Township.
(c) In the event that a property owner fails to obtain or submit the
annual certification for an on-lot sewage system, or in the
event that an on-lot sewage system is found not to be in
satisfactory working condition, the property owner shall, at the
owner's expense, make connection with and use the sanitary
sewer system in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the operator and the Township within 60 days after notice to do
so from the Township.
(d) The property owner shall, upon request to do so, enter into an
agreement with the sanitary sewer system operator and the
Township to pay the owner's proportionate share of the capital
costs of the sewer system despite the deferred connection.
(2) Notwithstanding any proper deferment of the connection of a
habitable building to a sanitary sewer system, all persons shall, at
their own expense, connect a habitable building with a sanitary
sewer system prior to the sale or transfer of the property to a third
party, regardless of whether there is an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system that has been found to be in satisfactory working
condition if the Township has provided notice to the property owner
to connect to a sanitary sewer system.
(3) Notwithstanding any proper deferment of the connection of a
habitable building to a sanitary sewer system, all persons shall, at
their own expense, connect a habitable building with a sanitary
sewer system within 10 years after notice to do so from the
Township regardless of whether there is an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system that has been found to be in satisfactory working
condition.
D. Compliance with rules and regulations. No connection shall be made to
a sanitary sewer system except in compliance with the appropriate
rules and regulations of the Township and with such rules and
regulations of the operator and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all sanitary sewer
systems within the Township:
(1) Application for service line.
§ 130-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-3
1:184
(a) Persons desiring the introduction of a service line from a
sanitary sewer system to their premises must first make
written application as required by the operator.
(b) No person owning any premises connected with a sanitary
sewer system or tenant of such premises shall permit another
person or premises to use or connect with his service line,
except upon written authorization from the operator.
(2) Permit for connection. Before making any connection to a sanitary
sewer system, a permit must be obtained from the operator.
(3) Service connection. No sewer connection or disconnection shall be
made nor any lateral installed except in the manner and of a type
approved by the respective operator. The property owner is
responsible for the construction and maintenance of the lateral
connection from a building to the sewer system. The lateral line
shall be constructed at the owner's expense. All sewer connection
and disconnection work must be inspected and approved by the
operator.
(4) Sewage facilities planning. All construction projects that propose
new or expanded plumbing/sewage facilities require Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) review under the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537). No building permit, certificate of
occupancy, final subdivision or land development approval, or other
proposed construction approval may be issued until sewage
planning has been approved by DEP through the issuance of a
planning module approval or an exemption from planning, or until
DEP has issued a letter stating that sewage planning is not
required.
(5) Sewage discharge.
(a) No stormwater, roof drain, condensate line, cellar seepage,
surface or groundwaters, oils, grease, gasoline, combustible
gases or liquids, garbage or insoluble solids or any substance
which would impair or interfere with the sewer system or any
part thereof in any manner or with the function of the
processes of sewage treatment shall be connected or
discharged to a sanitary sewer system.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a
sanitary sewer system any ashes, cinders, sand, glass, straw,
mud, hay, shavings, metal, scraps, rags, feathers, plastics,
wood or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in a sanitary sewer system or
the processes of sewage treatment.
(c) All hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses and public eating
places, before draining into a sanitary sewer system, shall
§ 130-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:185
§ 130-4. Wastewater control and discharge restrictions. [Amended
9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-8; 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
install grease traps on the house drains of such character as
may be specified by the Township and/or the operator.
(d) Sewage shall not be discharged to storm sewers.
E. Inspections. The Township, the operator or their representatives shall
have the right of access at all reasonable times to all parts of any
industrial or commercial premises connected with a sanitary sewer
system and to examine and inspect the connections thereto and the
plumbing fixtures or any improper connection, installation,
maintenance or use. The Township and operator may make reasonable
charges for such inspections to users of the sewer system.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface drainage, ground drainage, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary
sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into
storm sewers, if available, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Township Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters shall be discharged into a storm sewer approved by the
Township Engineer or into a natural outlet if such storm sewer or outlet
is not available.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following into any sanitary sewer:
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Garbage.
(3) Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(4) Water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(5) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(6) Any substance capable of obstructing the flow in sanitary sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(7) Any substance having a corrosive, toxic or poisonous property in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any
hazard in the sewage treatment plant.
(8) Any material requiring unusual attention or expense at the sewage
treatment plant.
§ 130-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-4
1:186
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
(10)Water from a swimming pool.
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for outlets
connected with the sanitary sewers when, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All such interceptors shall be of a type, capacity and construction
approved by the Township Engineer, shall be located so as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
E. The admission into sanitary sewers of any industrial wastes is
prohibited unless the owner or occupant of the property producing such
waste first makes application to the Board of Supervisors to discharge
such waste into the sewer system and, if approved in compliance with
all existing agreements of the Authority and the Township relating to
treatment by other agencies, shall provide at his expense adequate
treatment facilities approved by the Township Engineer. Such facilities
shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
F. In lieu of introducing partially treated industrial wastes and polluted
waters into sanitary sewers, the owner of premises producing such
wastes may construct and operate at his expense private waste
treatment facilities, with the effluent discharged to a natural outlet,
provided that such facilities are constructed and operated in
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
which facilities shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
G. The Delaware County Regional Water Control Authority's (DELCORA's)
Standards, Rules and Regulations of 2011, and the City of
Philadelphia's Sewer and Wastewater Control Regulations, as amended
September 30, 2010, are hereby collectively adopted as the Wastewater
Control Regulations for the Township of Newtown.26 Where any conflict
exists between any portions of these regulations, the most protective of
public health and safety and the environment of the portions in conflict
shall apply.
H. The DELCORA Local Limitations for the Eastern Service Area (the
"Eastern Limitations") and the DELCORA Local Limitations for the
Western Service Area (the "Western Limitations"), as set forth in
DELCORA Resolution 2011-01, are hereby adopted as the Local
Limitations for all discharges of wastewater in the Township of
26.Editor's Note: Copies of said regulations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 130-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:187
§ 130-5. Damage to system or connection without permit.
No person shall willfully or negligently damage, destroy, deface, tamper
with or connect without a permit to any structure or equipment which is
part of the sewer system. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
§ 130-6. Inspection; sampling; testing.
The Township Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the
Township bearing proper credentials and bearing proper identification shall
be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 130-7. Violations and penalties.
Newtown.27 All such discharges of wastewater shall comply with the
Eastern Limitations.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article other than § 130-5
shall be served by the Township with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof, the notice provided in § 130-3A being
deemed to be notice of a violation for this purpose in respect of
violations of such section. The offender shall, within the period of time,
if any, otherwise forthwith stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
B. Any person who violates § 130-5 or fails to connect his property to the
sewer system after notice, as provided in § 130-3A, within the time
prescribed in such notice or who continues any violation beyond the
time limit fixed as provided for in Subsection A hereof shall be subject
after summary conviction to a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000
for each violation. A new and separate violation shall be deemed
committed each day any violation continues beyond such time limit.
[Amended 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
C. All fines and penalties imposed for violation of any provision of this
article shall be paid to the Township Treasurer for use of the Township.
Default in payment of the fine and costs shall make the defendant liable
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. [Amended
2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to
becoming liable for a fine and penalty, shall become liable to the
Township for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Township
by reason of such violation.
27.Editor's Note: Copies of said limitations are on file in the Township offices.
§ 130-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-7
1:188
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-10]
§ 130-8. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Newtown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or store, office or other
unit thereof intended to be used wholly or in part for the purposes of
carrying on a trade, business or profession or for social, amusement,
religious, educational, charitable or public use.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or separate unit thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or
article.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — Any structure intended to be
occupied as a whole by one family or an apartment intended to be occupied
by one family or any other one-family living unit.
PROPERTY — Any separately deeded piece of ground upon which there
exists or can be erected a building.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities leased by the Township from the Authority
or by agreement with adjoining municipalities for the collection,
transportation, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage. This shall
include any sewage facilities located in the area known as the "Valley View
Sewer District."[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-9]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
WATER COMPANY — Aqua, Pennsylvania, Inc., or other private water
company distributing water in any part of the area served by the sewer
system.[Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 130-9. Imposition of rents.
There is hereby imposed upon each property having a building thereon,
located within the Township and served by the sewer system, sewer rents
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:189
or charges at the rates and payable as hereafter provided by resolution for
the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer system.
§ 130-10. Rates.
§ 130-11. Determination of water consumption.
A. Basis of sewer rent and rate. The annual sewer rents or charges
required hereunder shall be based upon the quantity of water supplied
to each private dwelling or living unit or industrial establishment or
commercial establishment, as the case may be, as evidenced by the
applicable water meter readings of the water company and/or the
readings of water meters installed pursuant to provisions of this article
or, in certain cases where only on-site water supplies exist, as
determined by the Township in accordance with provisions of this
article. Such sewer rents and charges shall be established by
resolution.
B. Minimum sewer rent. Regardless of the actual water consumption, a
minimum annual sewer rent for each private dwelling, living unit,
industrial establishment or commercial establishment shall be charged
as set forth by resolution.
C. Sewer rent for multiple use properties. In each case of an assemblage
of two or more private dwellings or living units, commercial
establishments or industrial establishments, or any combination
thereof, on one property having the use of the sewer system, each such
private dwelling or living unit, commercial establishment and industrial
establishment shall be charged separately the above-prescribed sewer
rents and charges. If each such unit or establishment is not provided
with an individual water meter, the annual sewer rent for the
assemblage shall be based on the total water used by the assemblage,
and the minimum sewer rent chargeable to the assemblage shall be the
minimum rent multiplied by the number of individual dwelling or living
units, commercial establishments and industrial establishments
thereon. In cases where multiple contiguous dwelling units in common
ownership are served by separately metered public water supply, upon
request of the property owner, the Township shall group all water meter
readings and all unit minimums together to generate a single sewer
rental charge. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-15]
A. Properties having only water company service. In each case where all
the water used on a property is supplied by the water company, the
Township shall secure from the water company, by February 28 of each
year a statement of the total water consumption by each of its
customers connected to the sewer system for a period of 12 consequent
months as closely proximate in time to the prior calendar year as meter
readings of the water company shall permit. Reasonable compensation
shall be paid by the Township to the water company for supplying this
information.
§ 130-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-11
1:190
§ 130-12. Measuring devices. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
All meters or measuring devices used under the provisions of this article,
except those provided by the water company, shall be furnished and
installed by the property owner at the property owner's expense. All such
meters or measuring devices, except those provided by the water company,
shall be approved and shall be under the control of the Township and
may be tested, inspected or repaired by Township employees whenever the
Township shall deem necessary. The owner of the property upon which any
such meter or measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its
maintenance, inspection and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be
made by the property owner, at the property owner's expense, whether such
repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. A
schematic drawing shall be provided by the property owner to document for
Township records the physical location of the meter or measuring device.
These devices shall be available for inspection by Township employees at all
times.
§ 130-13. Billing procedures.
B. Properties having on-site water supply.
(1) In each case where a single-family structure has only on-site water
supply, the sewer rents or charges for any calendar year shall be in
an amount equal to the average of the annual rents or charges
incurred in that calendar year by 100 other single-family structures
connected to the sewer system and receiving water only from the
water company, such structures to be chosen at random by the
Township, who shall average their rents for the purpose thereof.
(2) In all cases other than single-family structures and in all cases with
both on-site and water company water supply, a meter or meters
shall be installed, as provided in § 130-12, to meter the quantity of
the water supplied by the on-site source. The total amount of water
consumed as shown by such meters and by the water company
meter shall be used in computing the sewer rents or charges to be
paid.
C. Properties where part of the water supplied does not enter the sewer
system. Whenever water is used which is not discharged into the sewer
system and the quantity of water so used is measured by a meter
approved by the Township and installed and maintained without cost to
the Township, then readings from such meters shall be submitted to the
Township, on a form approved by the Township Manager, along with a
legible photograph of the meter reading, which is due by February 28 of
each year. A fee, which shall accompany the form, shall be established
by resolution. Using the information submitted, a credit shall be
calculated and applied to the property owner's account. [Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
§ 130-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-13
1:191
§ 130-14. Delinquent payments. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-02]
All bills shall be payable on the date received. All sewer rental charges
billed and unpaid shall be a lien against the property serviced by the sewer
system until paid. If such bills are not paid within 30 days after the date they
are mailed, but no earlier than June 30, a penalty of 10% thereof shall be
added. It shall be the duty of the Township during and after the sixth month
following the month in which the bills were mailed to certify the unpaid bills
to the Township Solicitor, who shall proceed to collect such delinquent bills,
together with interest at 6% per year, penalties and costs accrued thereon
either by action at law or by filing a lien or liens for the same in the office
of the Prothonotary of the County Court of Common Pleas, and such liens,
together with interest, penalty and costs accrued thereon, shall be filed and
collected in accordance with law. All persons connected to the sewer system
shall give the Township their correct address. Failure to receive bills shall
not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the
period during which bills are payable.
§ 130-15. Use of sewer revenue.
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the connection
charges imposed by the Authority and to be collectible by the Township
as its agent, from sewer rentals and charges and all penalties thereon, as
herein provided for, any fines collected by the Township in connection with
the sewer system and any other funds received in connection with the sewer
system shall be segregated in a separate fund to be designated "Sewer
Revenue Account No. 2" and shall be used only for the purposes of defraying
the expenses of the Township in the operation, maintenance and repair of
the sewer system or other expenses in relation to such sewer system and for
such payments as the Township may be required to make under any lease
or agreement it may enter into for and of or, in connection with such sewer
system, with the Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.28).
A. Bills for sewer rents or charges for each calendar year shall be
prepared and mailed by the Township as soon as possible after receipt
of meter readings from the water company and shall be based on the
previous year's total water consumption pursuant to § 130-11.
B. If any property shall be connected to the sewer system after the start of
the calendar year, the bill for sewer rents or charges for the next
succeeding year shall be based on the actual water consumption
following connection projected over a full calendar year.
28.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 301 et seq. was repealed 6-19-2001 (P.L. 287, No. 22). See
now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 130-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-16
1:192
§ 130-16. Collection of rents; records.
The Township Manager is hereby charged with the duties of collecting all
sewer rents and charges and connection charges imposed by the Authority.
He is authorized to adopt such regulations with respect to the subject
covered in this article as may, in his discretion, seem fit and proper. He
shall also keep full, accurate and complete records of all sewer rentals
or charges, bills, receipts, payments and transmittals of money to the
Township.
§ 130-17. When effective; amendments.
The rates and any rules and regulations hereunder shall become effective
on the date of their enactment and adoption respectively and shall be
applicable to all properties as soon as they respectively become connected
with and have the right to use the sewer system. The Township reserves
the right to make such changes from time to time as in its opinion may
be desirable or beneficial and to amend this article or to change the rates
or charges in such manner and at such times as in its opinion may be
advisable.
§ 130-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-17
1:193

ARTICLE III
On-Lot and Community Systems; Grinder Pumps; Holding Tanks
[Adopted 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
§ 130-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 PLAN — The Newtown Township's Official Plan as defined in
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535
(1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1-750.20a ("Sewage Facilities
Act" or "Act 537").
AUTHORITY — The Newtown Township Delaware County Municipal
Authority.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Township Codes Enforcement Officer, a
sewage enforcement officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, or
any other qualified or licensed person who is duly authorized to function
within specified limits as an agent of Newtown Township to administer and/
or enforce the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM (COLSS) — Any system, whether
publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage of a liquid nature
from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on
one or more of the lots or at any other location for final disposal in whole or
in part into the soil. This includes land application by spray irrigation.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric motor driven, submersible pump capable
of macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary sewage,
including reasonable amounts of objects, such as plastics, sanitary napkins,
disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry, and pumping this
material through a small diameter discharge.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any parcel of real estate located within Newtown
Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and
from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
LOT — A parcel of land under single and separate ownership or described
by an approved and still valid subdivision plan recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County.
§ 130-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-18
1:195
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into
surface waters of this commonwealth, backs up into a building connected
to the system or in any manner causes a nuisance or poses a danger to
the health, safety, and welfare of the public or causes pollution of surface
or groundwater, including the contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any
condition noted above occurs for any length of time during any period of the
year.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the Newtown Township Act 537
Plan to provide for additional or newly identified future or existing sewage
facilities needs, as defined fully in Section 1 of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35
P.S. § 750.1.
ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, treatment tanks, or
other facilities serving a single lot and collecting, treating and disposing
of sewage into a subsurface absorption area or spray irrigation system,
including drip dispersion.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal, equitable,
sole or partial, of any property located in Newtown Township.
RETAINING TANK (also called a HOLDING TANK) — A watertight
receptacle, which receives and retains sewage and which is designed and
constructed to hold sewage pending the ultimate disposal of the sewage at
another location, site, or area.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the fecal waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
or any noxious or deleterious substances that may be harmful to the public
health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act of
June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394) known as "The Clean Streams Law," as
amended.29
UPDATE REVISION — A comprehensive revision to the Act 537 Plan
required when the Department of Newtown Township determines the
official plan or one or more of its parts is inadequate for existing
or future sewage facilities needs of the Township or its residents or
landowners.
A.
SPECIAL STUDY — A study, survey, investigation, inquiry, research
report or analysis which is directly related to an update revision. The
studies provide documentation or other support necessary to solve
specific problems identified in the update revision.
B.
REVISION FOR NEW LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to the Act
537 plan resulting from a proposed subdivision as defined in the Act.
C.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 130-18 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-18
1:196
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Individual appointed, as such, by
the Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township.
TOWNSHIP — Newtown Township, Delaware County, Pa.
TREATMENT TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge
of sewage from a house or building sewer line and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of settleable solids from the liquid
digestion of the organic matter by detention and discharge of the liquid
portion into a distribution system or pit for underground dispersion or
elevated sand mound, individual spray irrigation or similar disposal
techniques. Treatment tanks include septic tanks, cesspools, aerobic units
and the like.
§ 130-19. Requirements.
The requirements of this article shall be effective throughout the entire
Township.
§ 130-20. Inspections.
Any owner of a property with a treatment tank system, retaining tank,
stream discharge system, community on-lot disposal system, holding tank or
cesspool must obtain and provide to the Township annually, at the owner's
expense, a certification which states that the existing system on the
property has been inspected and found to presently be in satisfactory
working condition, in accordance with the septic systems guidelines of
the Pennsylvania Septic Management Association (PSMA), adopted April 6,
1989, or as thereafter amended by PSMA. The inspection shall be conducted
by a member of the PSMA, and the certification shall be on the form known
as the "PSMA Septic System Inspection Checklist," dated March 1992, or as
amended by PSMA.
§ 130-21. On-lot/COLDS maintenance.
A. The operation, maintenance and repair of an individual on-lot sewage
system shall be the responsibility of the property owner; however, that
maintenance and repair shall be subject to the continuing surveillance
and inspection by the Township, its authorized agent and/or the Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of the lot which
utilizes an on-lot sewage disposal system to have it pumped in
accordance with the schedule set forth in § 130-21 and to make such
other repairs and/or replacements that are necessary in order to
prevent the malfunctioning of the system.
C. The construction, repair and/or replacement of individual on-lot
disposal systems shall be subject to the issuance of appropriate permits
by the Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 130-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-21
1:197
A. Treatment tank systems: The property owner of a lot, which uses a
treatment tank system as a means of sanitary sewage disposal, must
have the tank(s) pumped out and the contents disposed of at a licensed
sewage disposal facility at least once every three years or more often if
necessary. The contractor performing such work must be a licensed
septic tank contractor under the regulations of the PaDEP. Every owner
of a treatment tank system existing on any lot on the effective date of
this section shall maintain proof of the required pumping and disposal
to be made available to the Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer or
his/her designated representative upon request in the form of a
receipted bill issued by the contractor or such other proof as shall be
acceptable to said Sewage Enforcement Officer. Such requests shall not
be unreasonably made. If a system has been pumped within 12 months
of the effective date of this section, that system will then fall into the
next three-year pumping schedule. The property owner of a system
installed after the effective date of this section shall henceforth pump
his system in accordance with schedule determined by the Township.
B. Retaining tanks: The property owners of a lot utilizing a retaining
tank(s) or a sewage treatment system designed or operated as a
retaining tank on the effective date of this section shall enter into a
written contract with a PaDEP-licensed septic tank contractor requiring
periodic pumping and disposal of the tank's contents in accordance
with the schedule required by the permit which authorized the
installation and use of the retaining tank system. A copy of the contract
shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be in effect and
valid for a period of at least one year. Upon request of the Sewage
Enforcement Officer, the property developer shall provide true and
correct copies of the contract or, in the alternative, shall allow review
and inspection of the contract by the Sewage Enforcement Officer. Any
such requests shall not be unreasonably made.
C. Stream discharge systems: The property owner of a lot on which a
stream discharge sewerage system approved and permitted by the
PaDEP has been installed shall register the system with the Township
within 90 days following the effective date of this section by filing a
copy of the current PaDEP permit, together with any other information
required by the Sewage Enforcement Officer to verify the current
validity of the permit and copies of any tests verifying the system's
operational integrity performed during the 12 months immediately
preceding the registration. The property owner of a system installed
after the effective date of this section shall register the system with the
Township within 90 days of such installation. The Codes Enforcement
Officer or other authorized agent shall arrange for periodic inspections
by the Sewage Enforcement Officer as required.
D. Community on-lot disposal (COLDS): The operator(s) of any COLDS
system shall submit annual reports to the Township in the PaDEP
format for waste management (Chapter 94) and discharge management
report.
§ 130-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-21
1:198
§ 130-22. Grinder pumps.
E. Compliance: Failure to comply with the provisions of Subsection A
through D of this § 130-21 shall constitute a violation of this Code,
subjecting the owner of the property on which the system is installed to
the enforcement and penalty provisions of §§ 130-25, 130-26 and
130-27 of this article.
F. Change of ownership: Prior to the conveyance of any lot which is
subject to the provisions of this section, the sewage system installed on
such lot shall be pumped and its contents disposed of as required by
this § 130-21, unless the property owner has filed with the Township a
receipt issued by a licensed septic tank contractor proving that the
system was pumped out within the immediately preceding six-month
period. Following any conveyance of the lot, the new property owner
shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
G. Classification: If the type of on-lot sewage system is unknown, it shall
be classified as a cesspool.
H. Promulgation of regulations and required proof: In addition to the
requirements specific in this § 130-21, the Board may, by resolution,
promulgate such forms and regulations for the administration and
enforcement of this article as it shall determine necessary. Failure of a
lot owner to receive or secure any required form shall not constitute a
defense to the enforcement or penalty provisions of this article.
A. Planning requirements. The connection of proposed new land
development or a proposed new improved property to an existing or
proposed sewerage system through the use of sewage grinder pumps,
their associated force mains, or low-pressure laterals shall occur only
after an official plan revision to the Act 537 Plan, approved by both the
Newtown Township and the Department, designates that the proposed
properties be served by such a connection, unless an exemption to such
a requirement is approved by the Township and the Department. All
existing improved properties containing a grinder pump prior to the
passage of this section are exempt from the provisions contained
herein.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Township.
(1) The Township shall exercise its powers and legal authority set forth
herein, and under all applicable statutes, ordinances, and other
laws to affect the purposes of this article.
(2) The Township shall require an approved application and discharge
permit with each property owner proposing to install a sewage
grinder pump or low-pressure sewer system to assure the short and
long-term operation, maintenance, use, service, repair or
replacement of such systems.
§ 130-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-22
1:199
(3) The Township shall require that all grinder pumps and lowpressure
sewer systems (and the installation, use, operation,
maintenance, service, repair and replacement thereof) shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the Township, Authority
and the Department in effect from time to time.
(4) The Township shall require that all grinder pumps and lowpressure
sewer systems shall be connected to the Township/
Authority's sewerage collection and conveyance system in full
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Township in effect
from time to time.
(5) The Township shall review the type of grinder pump used and
assure that the property owner has provided documentation that
full service capacity is available locally on short notice in case of
malfunction.
(6) The Township and Authority shall bear no responsibility for the
purchase, installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair,
or replacement of the grinder pump and/or its low-pressure sewer
systems and low-pressure force main or lateral, except as
otherwise set forth herein.
C. Duties and responsibilities of others.
(1) Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating,
maintaining, servicing, repairing and replacing his/her grinder
pump and/or its low-pressure force main or lateral, unless
otherwise set forth herein.
(2) Where the low-pressure force main or lateral is shared between
property owners, they shall submit to Newtown Township a
declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in recordable
form setting forth the agreement of each benefited property owner
with respect to the installation, use, operation, maintenance,
service, repair and replacement of the low-pressure sewer system,
which agreement shall bind all future property owners. Following
the approval of the low-pressure sewer system by all applicable
agencies, the Township will not issue a permit for its installation,
until evidence is presented that the agreement has been recorded
in the Office for the Recording of Deeds, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
(3) Each property owner shall annually renew, for life of the grinder
pump a system contract with an authorized maintenance
contractor (hereinafter the "maintenance contractor"). The
maintenance contractor shall be a private, independent contractor,
who has been given special training by the original equipment
manufacturer and is authorized by the manufacturer to service the
grinder pump and all appurtenances.
§ 130-22 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-22
1:200
§ 130-23. Holding tanks.
(4) After the first month of operation of the grinder pump, and annually
thereafter, or more frequently if the manufacturer of any
component parts recommends more frequent servicing, the
property owner shall have the maintenance contractor provide the
property owner with copies of a report signed by the maintenance
contractor certifying that the grinder pump is operational in
accordance with the permit. The inspection and maintenance
program will include, at a minimum, the manufacturers'
recommended services and inspections for each separate
component of the system. The maintenance contractor's report
shall include the average daily flow from water meter readings, if
available. The report shall also indicate resolution of any
deficiencies noted in the maintenance contractor's inspection or
any service or alarm call during the past year. If a revision or
modification is made to the system, an amended and revised
drawing detailing the revision or modification shall be provided to
the property owner and the Township. The property owner is
responsible for obtaining any required permits from the Township
for any revision or modification to the grinder pump and all
appurtenances to it and the low-pressure system.
(5) The property developer shall be responsible for maintaining all
maintenance records, reports and drawings as required and set
forth hereinabove. The property developer shall provide to the
Township and/or Authority true and correct copies of any such
maintenance records, reports and drawings upon request of the
Township and/or Authority, which request shall not be
unreasonably made. In the alternative, the property developer shall
allow such maintenance records, reports and drawings to be
reviewed and inspected by the Township and/or Authority upon
request, which request shall not be unreasonably made.
A. Duties and rights of Township.
(1) The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank may be directed and controlled by
the Township, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such
site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) The Township will receive, review and retain pumping receipts
from permitted holding tanks owners, operators or service
providers.
(3) The owner is required to provide annual inspection reports for each
permitted holding tank.
B. Duties of improved property owner. The owner of any improved
property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 130-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-23
1:201
§ 130-24. Reporting.
When the Township becomes aware of a violation(s) of this article or the
Township regulations and/or PaDEP regulation related to sewers, it shall be
reported to the Township and/or PaDEP and become subject to their rules
and regulations.
§ 130-25. Enforcement and appeals.
§ 130-26. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner who violates any provision of this article or who fails
to comply with any of its provisions or regulation promulgated hereunder
or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful notice, order or direction
of the Code Enforcement Officer or authorized agent issued pursuant to
this article shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction by a
District Justice, shall pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000
together with the costs of prosecution, and upon default in payment for the
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the County Prison for
a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day during which any violation of this
(1) Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law,
and the rules and regulations of the Township and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Permit the Township or its agent to inspect holding tanks as
requested.
(3) Permit only the qualified and appropriately licensed service
providers to collect, transport, and dispose of the contents therein.
A. The Township's Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power and
authority to determine all issues relating to compliance with the
provisions of this article, and to bring and prosecute in the name of the
Township enforcement and penalty proceedings for violations of its
provisions.
B. Appeals from the Code Enforcement Officer's determinations or
interpretations of the provisions of this article shall be taken to the
Board within 30 days from the date of such determination or
interpretation. Appeals shall be heard and determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Agency Law. The Board may request
documentation and consult with the Township Engineer or other
competent authorities as it determines necessary for just resolution of
the appeal, and may impose the reasonable costs thereof upon the
appellant; provided, however, the Board shall have no jurisdiction to
hear or determine any appeal from the action of the Code Enforcement
Officer and/or Sewage Enforcement Officer in prosecuting a violation of
this article in a summary proceeding before a District Justice.
§ 130-23 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-26
1:202
article continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine
or imprisonment.
§ 130-27. Other remedies.
In the event of the property owners' failure to perform under this article
or any subsequent agreements resulting herefrom, the Township shall have
the right, but not the obligation to perform the property owner's obligations
under this article and/or to pursue whatever legal or equitable remedy they
shall deem appropriate, including but not limited to, bringing an action for
specific performance against the property owner to compel compliance with
this article or any subsequent agreement resulting herefrom. The property
owner shall reimburse the Township for all costs incurred by the Township
in doing so, including legal fees and court costs. The Township shall also
have the right to file a lien against the property to secure to the Township
any reimbursement of costs due to the Township as well as any and all rights
and remedies as allowed by law.
§ 130-28. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 130-21C and § 130-21D above shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the Township and/or Authority by either seeking mitigation of
the nuisance or appropriate equitable relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 130-29. Fee schedule.
The Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, adopt a fee schedule for the
administration of this article. Said schedule shall be kept on file by the
Township Manager and shall be reviewed and revised as necessary.
§ 130-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-29
1:203

ARTICLE IV
Grease Traps
[Adopted 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
§ 130-30. Scope and purpose.
To aid in the prevention of contributions, discharges, and accumulation
of fats, oils and greases into the public sewage system from industrial or
commercial facilities, including but not limited to, food preparation and
serving facilities and automobile service stations which may result in the
delivery of exceptional strength wastewater to the system, to regulate
such contributions, discharges and accumulations through a permitting
process; and to properly assess the costs associated with the monitoring
and regulation of such facilities, and the treatment of fats, oils and greases
delivered to the system.
§ 130-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCEPTIONAL STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater which, at the
time it enters the system, exceeds one or more of the following strength
parameters:
FOOD SERVICE FACILITY — A facility or establishment, other than a single
family residential dwelling, regularly engaged in activities of preparing or
serving or otherwise making food available for consumption which uses
one or more of the following preparation techniques: cooking by frying
{all methods); baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking,
broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching.
Also included as a technique and for purposes of this definition are infrared
heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity which
produces a nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires
washing. These facilities include restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels,
hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches,
camps, caterers, concessions, manufacturing plants, or any other industrial
or commercial establishments, except residential establishments, which
discharge, or are likely to discharge, grease into the system.
GREASE — Material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease from animal
or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and grease may be used
interchangeably in this article under this single definition.
GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR — A device for separating and retaining
waterborne grease and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting
the trap and entering the system. These devices also serve to collect
A. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): 230 mg/l.
B. Suspended solids (SS): 250 mg/l.
C. Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TJN): 44 mg/l.
§ 130-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-31
1:205
settable solids, generated by and from food preparation and other activities
which discharge grease, prior to water exiting the trap and entering the
system. The grease trap/interceptor shall be properly sized to handle the
expected flow from the facility.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device that is specifically designed and
manufactured to separate oil from water, and permits the oil to be collected
and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being discharged into
the system. The oil/water separator shall be properly sized to handle the
expected flow from the facility.
OPERATION — Any activity which results in the discharge by a regulated
facility of any wastewater into the system.
REGULATED FACILITY — Any food service facility and any other
commercial establishment within the Township, except residential, which
contributes, discharges or accumulates grease which enters the system, or
which discharges waste into the system of the types described in Township
Codified Ordinances.
SYSTEM — Any public sanitary sewage collection system used in Newtown
Township.
USER — Any person or establishment including those located outside the
jurisdictional limits of Newtown Township who or which contributes,
causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the
system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile
sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
§ 130-32. Industrial waste discharge permits.
A. When required.
(1) Existing facilities. Each regulated facility shall obtain an industrial
waste discharge permit from Township in accordance with the
requirements as described in the Township pretreatment ordinance
or to be in acceptance by the wastewater treatment facility's
requirements. This permit, if not sooner obtained, shall be acquired
by each such user no later than June 30, 2017. From and after June
30, 2017, no entity as described in this paragraph shall discharge
into the system without a valid unrevoked permit for each
regulated facility.
(2) Renovated and altered facilities. Each regulated facility which is
altered or renovated in a manner which in any way affects the
nature or composition of its sewage discharge, or which alters its
sewage discharge lines or facilities, or any monitoring or collection
devices associated therewith, shall be required to obtain a new
industrial waste discharge permit.
(3) New facilities. From and after June 30, 2017, no use which when
placed in operation will constitute a regulated facility may
commence operation without an industrial waste discharge permit.
§ 130-31 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-32
1:206
§ 130-33. Grease traps required.
§ 130-34. Sampling port required.
B. Transfer of permits. Any changes in control or ownership of a regulated
facility will require the issuances of a new permit before the
commencement of operations under such new control or ownership.
Each new user or operator shall be responsible for notifying Township
of a change in control or ownership.
C. Duration. An industrial waste discharge permit shall, if not revoked,
expire three years after the issuance date. Permits may be revoked for
noncompliance with the provisions of this or any other Township
ordinance, or for nonpayment of user fees, monitoring costs, industrial
waste surcharges, or service fees.
D. Cost. The cost of an industrial waste discharge permit shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
The initial permit fee shall be $300. Permit fees shall be adequate to pay
the reasonable cost to the Township of the monitoring, sampling flow
measurement, testing and inspection required by § 130-34 of this
article, and of administering the Township permitting program.
Regulated facilities which operate without an industrial waste
discharge permit at any time subsequent to June 30, 2017, shall be
assessed and shall pay a minimum service charge of $100 for each day
of unpermitted operation up to $1,000 per day. See § 130-7B of
Newtown Code.
E. Property rights. Each issuance of a permit does not convey any property
right to the permittee.
A. Each food service and regulated facility which operates more than 15
days in any calendar month shall install, regularly dispose of material
from, and properly monitor grease traps for damage to assure that they
properly function. Any regulated facility which does not utilize a
properly functioning grease trap as of the date of the adoption of this
article shall install such a grease trap on or before June 30, 2017.
Unless determined to be infeasible by the Township and/or Municipal
Authority, any grease trap installed subsequent to the adoption of this
article shall be located outside the portion of the facility in which
grease is introduced into sanitary sewer discharge lines, shall be
separate from the regular sanitary sewage discharge line/lateral, and
shall be accessible through a manhole with a minimum diameter of 24
inches with a readily removable cover. A separate monitoring location
shall be provided downstream of the grease trap. Grease trap/
interceptors shall be properly sized to handle the expected flow from
the facility.
B. No regulated facility shall be renovated, altered, opened or reopened
after the date of this article without a grease trap which meets the
criteria of this section.
§ 130-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-34
1:207
§ 130-35. Sampling, flow measurement, testing and inspection.
A. Each regulated facility which operates more than five days in a calendar
month shall install or provide a sampling port on the discharge side of
each grease trap installed and maintained in accordance with the prior
section of this article. Any regulated facility which does not possess a
sampling port which adequately permits the sampling, flow
measurement, testing and inspection required by § 130-35 of this
article, shall install such a sampling port on or before June 30, 2017.
The sampling port must permit the collection of representative samples
of the wastewater discharge of each regulated facility before the
samples reach the system, and in a manner which provides sufficient
volume for thorough chemical analysis.
B. No regulated facility shall be renovated, altered, opened or reopened
after the date of this article without a sampling port which meets the
criteria of this section.
A. Generally. The permittee of each regulated facility which operates more
than five days in any calendar month shall sample its wastewater
discharge in accordance with this section, and shall provide a discharge
monitoring report to Township not less frequently than semiannually,
with reports to be submitted no later than June 30 and December 31 of
each calendar year. Each discharge monitoring report shall specify the
date and time of sampling. Each regulated facility shall meet the
sampling and reporting requirements of this section not later than June
30, 2017.
B. Standards. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for Examination of Water and Waste Water," published by the American
Public Health Association and shall be determined at the sample port
provided by the required facility, upon suitable samples taken at such
sample port. In the event that no sample port has yet been installed, the
sampling location shall be the nearest downstream manhole in the
system to the point at which the regulated facility sewer is connected.
In the event that a system manhole is used as the sampling site, the
manhole may be used by permittees for such sampling only, but no
permittee or representative of permittee may physically enter the
system. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods
to reflect the effect of discharged materials upon the system and the
applicable receiving wastewater treatment facility and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analysis
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all
outfalls of a regulated facility are appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples must also be taken.
C. Joint and several responsibility. Both the owner and the operator of
each regulated facility connected to the system shall be jointly and
severally responsible to provide Township and its representatives and
§ 130-34 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-35
1:208
agents the opportunity of access at any time to any part of any
regulated facility served by the system as shall be required for purposes
of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing and for performance
of other functions relating to service rendered by Township in regard to
the system.
D. Sampling requirements. All sampling shall be accomplished and all
discharge monitoring reports shall be submitted by qualified
individuals acceptable to Township. Well defined chain-of-custody and
record keeping methods acceptable to Township shall be employed.
E. Discharge reports. Discharge reports shall not only characterize the
nature of wastewater samples taken, but shall also describe the
condition of, and cleanliness of each grease trap. At no time may the
combined grease and settled solids of any grease trap exceed 25% of
the depth of the grease trap. Discharge reports shall also identify each
date and time material was removed from a grease trap since the last
report. The report shall state with specificity the qualified and licensed
person or entity who or which disposed of material from the grease
trap, shall include written certifications as to what was removed, the
lawful disposition of the materials removed, and the location of their
disposal.
F. Removal and disposal. Material shall be removed from grease traps
before the combined grease and settled solids accumulate to a depth of
25% of the total depth of the grease trap, and not less frequently than
once every 90 days. Disposal of all removed material shall be
accomplished by a qualified and licensed person or entity. Cleaning
shall include removal of all floating material, wastewater, grease and
settled solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the
grease trap, or otherwise into the system, is prohibited.
G. Maintenance log. A maintenance log regarding the cleaning of each
grease trap shall be maintained by each regulated facility for a period
of at least the prior 36 consecutive months. The log shall include the
date, time, amount pumped, the identity of the hauler and the disposal
location, and shall be made available to the Township and/or Municipal
Authority promptly upon request.
H. Monitoring costs. To the extent that permit fees do not fully compensate
Township and/or Municipal Authority for their monitoring of the
information to be supplied by permittee, and for independent sampling
and testing, if any is accomplished by Township, such costs will be
assessed against the permittee as monitored. Permittees may be
assessed progressively higher charges for monitoring, testing and
sampling accomplished following each instance in which a permittee is
noncompliant with Township regulatory requirements including
introducing exceptional strength wastewater into the system. Such
progressive charges shall be established by Township and/or Municipal
Authority from time to time by separate ordinance.
§ 130-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-36
1:209
§ 130-36. Sand, soil, and oil interceptors.
All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car and truck
maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility equipment shops, and other
facilities identified by Township and/or Municipal Authority as likely sources
of sand, soil and oil shall install effective sand, soil and oil traps,
interceptors, and/or oil/water separators. These separators shall be sized
to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at expected flow rates. These
separators shall, at the user's expense, be regularly cleaned or pumped
to prevent any adverse impact upon the system. Users whose systems are
deemed to be ineffective by Township and/or Municipal Authority shall
change the cleaning frequency or shall increase the size or methodology
of the separator. Owners or operators of washing facilities are required to
prevent the inflow of detergents and rainwater into the system. Sampling
locations shall be provided by all such users no later than June 30, 2017.
§ 130-37. Excess strength charges.
Excess strength charges shall be levied by Township and/or Municipal
Authority against any owner or operator of any operation which discharges
exceptional strength wastewater into the system. The Township charge
shall be equal to the exceptional strength load determined through
monitoring, times the estimated quarterly rates charged by the Newtown
Township or Newtown Township Municipal Authority plus an administrative
fee of 10%.
§ 130-38. Alteration of control methods.
Township and/or Municipal Authority reserves the right to request
additional. control measures if existing control, sampling, measurement,
testing or inspection systems are determined by Township and/or Municipal
Authority to be insufficient to protect the system from damages due to
grease, sand, soil, oil or other discharges, or if a permittee's efforts to
eliminate excess strength discharges are unsuccessful.
§ 130-39. Noncompliance.
Any owner or operator which refuses or fails to comply with the
requirements of this article shall, following a thirty-day notice of its
noncompliance, either cease all wastewater discharges into the system,
or shall, at the option of Township and/or Municipal Authority, suffer a
discontinuance of water services, or shall be subject to all other remedies
available to Township and/or Municipal Authority at law or in equity, or
both. Such owner or operator may also be subject to fines and penalties
levied by the Township and/or Municipal Authority. Each owner and
operator of a regulated facility shall be deemed to have joint and severable
liability and responsibility under the provisions of this article.
§ 130-36 NEWTOWN CODE § 130-39
1:210
Chapter 134
SLOPE CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
138.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
§ 134-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to expand upon the community development
objects associated with environmental protection and the preservation of
natural resources adopted in Article II of Chapter 172, Zoning. Further, the
provisions of this chapter are designed to encourage the sensitive treatment
of hillsides and the related soil and vegetation resources in an effort to
minimize adverse environmental impacts. The following objectives serve to
complement these specific purposes and the overall purpose of this chapter:
A. To conserve and protect slopes from harmful land disturbances such as
excessive grading, landform alteration and extensive vegetation
removal.
B. To avoid potential hazards to property and the destruction of ecological
balance which may be caused by increased runoff, flooding, soil erosion
and sedimentation, blasting and ripping of rock, landslide and soil
failure.
C. To encourage the use of slopes for open space and other uses which are
compatible with the preservation and protection of natural resources.
D. To combine with other zoning requirements, as an overlay of the
existing zoning ordinance30 as it may be amended from time to time,
certain restrictions for slopes to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township.
E. To permit only those uses that are compatible with development of
slope areas in order to avoid accelerated erosion, soil failure,
accelerated seepage or other conditions which may create a danger to
life and/or property.
F. To promote the ecological balance among those natural system
elements, such as wildlife, vegetation and aquatic life, that could be
adversely affected by inappropriate development of steep slope areas.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Zoning.
§ 130-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-1
1:211
§ 134-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, addition, alteration, demolition,
disturbance or removal of any building, structure or geographic feature.
DISTURB — To remove, strip, relocate, grade, excavate, cover, fill or
otherwise directly or indirectly alter or destroy existing vegetative ground
cover.
PERMISSIBLE DISTURBED AREA — That area which has been delineated
on an approved subdivision, land development or conditional use plan as
being land which may be disturbed subsequent to the plan approval upon
issuance of a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit.
PERSON — Natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association or other organization or entity.
STEEP SLOPE AND VERY STEEP SLOPE MEASUREMENT — Steep slopes
shall be measured between three consecutive two-foot contour interval
lines. The resultant slope is the ratio of the change in elevation to the
horizontal distance as determined and measured between the above
G. To prevent development that would cause excessive erosion and a
resultant reduction in water-carrying capacity of the watercourses
which flow through or around the Township with the consequences of
increased flood crests and flood hazards within the Township and to
both upstream and downstream municipalities.
H. To protect individual and adjacent landowners in the Township and/or
other municipalities from the possible harmful effects of inappropriate
grading and development on steep slope areas.
I. To protect those individuals who choose, despite apparent dangers, to
develop or occupy land with steep slopes.
J. To promote the provision of safe and reliable accessways, parking areas
and utility systems serving development on or around steep slope areas,
where more sensitive grading and siting is essential.
K. Pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., to
assist in the implementation of pertinent state laws concerning erosion
and sediment control practices, specifically Chapter 102 of the Clean
Streams Law, P.L. 1978,31 and any subsequent amendments thereto,
and to implement Article 1, Section 27, of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which declares the right of the
commonwealth's residents to clean air, pure water and to the
preservation of the natural scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the
environment.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 134-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-2
1:212
referenced three consecutive contour lines.[Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-7]
WOODED AREA — That area of land on which sufficient tree masses grow
such that the branches of trees intertwine.
§ 134-3. Land use in Slope Conservation District.
No person shall use or alter any land in a Slope Conservation District
if the intended use or alteration requires approval as a subdivision or
land development conditional use or as a special use under Chapter 148,
Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 172, Zoning, without first
applying for and obtaining approval for such use as provided in § 134-12.
After being so approved, no land within a Slope Conservation District
shall be used without compliance with such approval and other applicable
regulations.
§ 134-4. Conflicts with other provisions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
zoning or subdivision regulations or land development regulations,
easements, covenants or deed restrictions, except that to the extent this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. Furthermore, nothing contained in this chapter shall repeal, alter or
impair in any way the provisions of Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control; the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Clean
Streams Law, Chapter 102,32 pertaining to soil erosion control; or any other
applicable Township, county, state or federal laws and regulations.
§ 134-5. Slope Conservation District.
A. An accurate topographic survey using elevation and distance based on
an actual field survey by a registered engineer or surveyor and
presented on a plan showing two-foot contour intervals with a
horizontal scale of no more than 50 feet per inch shall be required of
the applicant to more accurately define the district as specified in §
134-6. Slope classifications and their mapping in the soil survey shall be
used to determine when the more accurate topographic survey shall be
required as part of a subdivision, land development or conditional use
plan. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
B. The steep slope areas shall be comprised of areas with a difference of
elevation over 7 1/2 feet over a horizontal distance of 50 feet based on a
topographic survey showing two-foot contours.
C. The very steep slope areas shall be comprised of areas with a difference
of elevation over 12 1/2 feet over a horizontal distance of 50 feet based
on a topographic survey showing two-foot contours.
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 134-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-5
1:213
D. The Slope Conservation District Map shall be considered an overlay to
the Township Zoning Map. The following provisions shall apply in a
Slope Conservation District:
(1) The district will have no effect on the permitted uses within the
underlying zoning district, except where such uses, intended to be
located within the boundaries of the Slope Conservation District,
are in conflict with the use regulations set forth in § 134-7, in which
case the latter shall apply.
(2) Should the Slope Conservation District boundaries be revised as a
result of a legislative action or judicial decision, thereby removing
lands from such district, the zoning requirements applicable to the
land in question shall revert to the requirements of the underlying
zoning district(s) without regard to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Should the zoning classification(s) of any parcel or any part thereof
within which the Slope Conservation District is an overlay be
changed as a result of legislative action or judicial decision, such
change(s) in classification shall have no effect on the boundaries of
the Slope Conservation District.
E. If any area of steep or very steep slopes shall have been determined to
be created by a prior earthmoving activity, including construction,
development, agricultural or industrial operation, such man-made steep
or very steep slope shall not be subject to compliance with the
provisions of § 134-7 of these General Laws, nor the disturbance
limitations provided in § 134-8. The applicant and/or property owner
shall carry the burden of establishing that the steep or very steep slopes
were man-made and must submit historic documentation or a soil
report in support. Such a determination shall be made by the Township
Engineer. Slopes will be considered to be man-made if documentation
meeting one of the following criteria can be provided: [Added
11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
(1) A plan of sufficient detail which clearly depicts the construction of
the steep or very steep slope which currently exists.
(2) Sufficient documentation that the steep or very steep slope was
constructed for the purpose of supporting an existing or previously
existing structure.
(3) A report from an independent certified soil scientist or professional
geotechnical engineer that indicates that at least 70% of the in-situ
soil within the proposed limit of disturbance and to a depth of three
feet below the lowest proposed elevation has a soil classification of
"made land" as defined by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in the Soil Survey of
Chester and Delaware Counties, and has not been naturally
deposited.
§ 134-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-5
1:214
§ 134-6. Contour map; boundaries.
§ 134-7. Permitted uses.
Where this chapter is applicable as stated in § 134-3, the following uses
shall be permitted in Slope Conservation Districts:
(4) The final determination regarding the existence of man-made
slopes will be made by the Township Engineer.
A. The soil classification maps referred to in § 134-5A shall be used as a
guide for determining the boundaries of the Slope Conservation
District.
B. Any application for subdivision, land development or special use of land
in a Slope Conservation District shall include a contour map with twofoot
contour intervals on a horizontal scale of no more than 50 feet to
the inch. The map shall separately delineate slopes less than 15%,
between 15% and less than 25%, and slopes greater than or equal to
25%. The contour information on such map shall be derived from actual
field topographic surveys which shall be referenced in the application.
C. The contour map described in Subsection B hereof shall be reviewed by
the Township Planning Commission and the Township Engineer. The
applicant shall be required to follow all regulations of this chapter for
those areas which reflect steep slope and very steep slope conditions in
conjunction with review of an application for use in a Slope
Conservation District as provided in § 134-12.
A. Areas of very steep slope (25% or greater).
(1) Uses permitted by right:
(a) Agricultural uses that do not require cultivation, construction
or the use of structures.
(b) Conservation and recreational uses not requiring construction
or the use of structures, such as parks; hiking and bridle paths,
woodlands; nature sanctuaries, refuge and conservation areas;
and, other such noncommercial conservation and passive
recreational activities.
(c) Utility easements and rights-of-way, including the installation
of underground utilities. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-01]
(d) Front, rear and side yard setbacks required by the underlying
zoning district on any lot or tract.
(2) Uses permitted when authorized as a conditional use.
(a) Conservation and recreational uses, including those requiring
construction or the use of structures.
§ 134-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-7
1:215
(b) Cultivation and agricultural uses, including those requiring
construction or the use of structures.
(c) Sealed water supply wells.
(d) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to uses
described in Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) hereof.
(e) Road or access driveways to provide access to a permitted use
if the Board of Supervisors determines no alternative
alignment or location is feasible.
(f) Swimming pools. [Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(3) Prohibited uses and structures.
(a) Cut and fill, other than in association with any uses identified
in Subsection A(1) hereof and in Subsection A(2) when
authorized as a conditional use.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction.
(c) Removal of topsoil.
(d) On-lot sewage disposal systems.
(e) Road and access driveways, except that roads and access
driveways existing on the date of adoption of this chapter and
access driveways for any lot in a subdivision which was
recorded before the adoption date of this chapter shall be
permitted.
(f) 33Dumps, junkyards and other outdoor storage of refuse
material and discarded or abandoned vehicles.
(g) Any use not specifically identified in Subsection A(1) hereof or
in Subsection A(2) hereof when authorized as a conditional
use.
B. Areas of steep slope (15% to less than 25%).
(1) Uses permitted by right in Subsection A(1) of this section and
swimming pools. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
(2) Uses permitted when authorized as a conditional use.
(a) Any use or structure identified in Subsection A(2) hereof.
(b) Structure permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(c) Stormwater management facilities.
33.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3)(f), Swimming pools, was repealed 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-7. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(3)(g) and (h) as
Subsection A(3)(f) and (g), respectively.
§ 134-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-7
1:216
§ 134-8. Disturbance of ground cover.
Where this chapter is applicable as stated in § 134-3, the following shall
apply:
(d) Sanitary sewer and sewage pumping stations.
(e) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any uses described in
this subsection; and accessory uses customarily incidental to
any uses permitted in Subsection B(1) hereof.
(f) Road or access driveways to provide access to a permitted use
if the Board of Supervisors determines no alternative
alignment or location is feasible.
(3) Prohibited uses and structures.
(a) Cut and fill, other than in association with any uses related to
Subsections B(1) and (2) hereof.
(b) Soil, rock and mineral extraction.
(c) Removal of topsoil.
(d) Dumps, junkyards or other outdoor storage of refuse materials
and discarded or abandoned vehicles.
(e) 34Any other use(s) or structure(s) not specifically identified in
Subsections B(1) and (2) hereof.
A. Permissible disturbed area.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, no person shall directly
or indirectly disturb vegetative ground cover on more than the
following percentages of each classification of land within the
Slope Conservation District of the subdivision, land development or
conditional use when taken as a whole:
Slope Classification
Maximum Permissible Disturbed
Area
Steep 15%
Very steep 5%
(2) The above-referenced allowable percentages of disturbance do not
apply if the area of steep slope disturbance is less than 500 square
feet or the area of very steep slope disturbance is less than 200
square feet. [Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-7]
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3)(e), Swimming pools, was repealed 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-7. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(3)(f) as
Subsection B(3)(e).
§ 134-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-8
1:217
§ 134-9. Grading; earthmoving.
Where this chapter is applicable as stated in § 134-3, the following shall
apply:
§ 134-10. Use regulations.
All uses within the Slope Conservation District shall be subject to the
following:
B. The restrictions in Subsection A hereof shall not apply to disturbances
of soil for agricultural or food production purposes.
C. No person shall disturb vegetative ground cover in any Slope
Conservation District without first having submitted to the Township
and having obtained the Township's approval of a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan which satisfies the requirements of Chapter
138, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, of this Code. Any person
permitted to disturb vegetative ground cover pursuant to this section
shall keep the amount of disturbed vegetative ground cover to an
absolute minimum, consistent with the objectives of other Township
ordinances and regulations.
D. In no event shall the Township give approval to disturb vegetative
ground cover in any Slope Conservation District in an amount greater
than the percentages set forth in Subsection A hereof or when located
outside the permissible disturbed area.
A. No person shall undertake grading, disturbing or earthmoving of land
within a very steep slope district except as provided in this chapter.
Grading or earthmoving within the steep slope district shall be
permitted, provided that such grading or earthmoving does not create
earthcuts or fills with a vertical dimension in excess of 10 feet, unless
grading or earthmoving is a necessary element of any approved overall
landscape plan for providing visual screening by earth berms or where
it is required for the construction of retention ponds or similar
environmental protection uses.
B. Finished slopes of all earthmoving shall not exceed a slope of three
horizontal to one vertical unless the applicant demonstrates that such
slopes can be adequately stabilized and maintained as part of an
application filed pursuant to § 134-12.
C. Prior to construction, suitable fencing must be in place at the limits of
disturbance. [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
A. Uses shall be laid out so that the grading, vegetation removal and other
site preparation shall be kept to an absolute minimum.
B. Where grading is essential, shape and grade of the land affected shall
complement the natural landform.
§ 134-8 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-10
1:218
§ 134-11. Subdivision lots.
§ 134-12. Application for approval.
C. Use of any parcel or tract of land shall be conducted in such a manner
that no area in excess of 3,000 square feet shall have disturbed
vegetative ground cover during the period from November 15 to April 1
except where protective measures including jute matting or other
approved techniques are used as approved by the Township Engineer.
D. All paving shall be completed within 10 working days after grading is
completed, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer that such paving cannot practically be completed in such
time, whereupon the Township Engineer shall authorize such additional
period of time for completion of paving as has been demonstrated to be
necessary and reasonable.
E. Land around all structures erected shall be landscaped so as to blend
them with the natural landscape.
F. All reasonable measures to minimize erosion and sedimentation and to
limit increase in stormwater runoff shall be taken.
A. No lot which is, in whole or in part, included within a Slope
Conservation District shall be created by subdivision if no principal use
permitted by the underlying zoning district can be made consistent with
both the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district and the
requirements of this chapter.
B. All lots created by subdivision shall comply with one of the following:
(1) They shall have an area bounded by and enclosed within setback
lines called the "building envelope," which shall be of sufficient size
and dimension to permit the utilization of the area for a principal
use or uses with the underlying zoning district without an
encroachment upon the Slope Conservation District.
(2) If construction is to take place within a Slope Conservation District,
the minimum lot area (non-residential) shall be three acres.
A. All applications for approval for use of land which is included in whole
or in part within the Slope Conservation District pursuant to this
chapter shall include submission of the following materials and
information:
(1) Location, dimension and elevation of the property.
(2) Existing and proposed uses and development including access
drives.
(3) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. (See § 134-6.)
§ 134-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-12
1:219
(4) Location and boundaries of steep slopes and very steep slopes as
described hereinabove.
B. The following additional information shall be submitted as deemed
necessary by the Township Planning Commission, Township Board of
Supervisors or the Township Engineer for the evaluation of the impact
of the proposal:
(1) Typical cross sections and elevations of the property and proposed
structures at intervals described on a horizontal scale of 50 feet per
inch and a vertical scale of five feet per inch.
(2) A description of existing land cover characteristics of that portion
of the property within the Slope Conservation District; such
description shall indicate wooded areas, open nonwooded areas
and the ground cover type in any areas with impervious surfaces.
Proposed modifications to existing land cover shall also be
indicated.
(3) Soil types of the land to be used for those portions of the land
included within the Slope Conservation District; soil types shall be
further qualified relative to the subsurface horizons of the soil. The
applicant may be required to consult the United States Soil
Conservation Service35 for its comments and submittal to the
Township.
(4) Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and topography of
areas within the Slope Conservation District.
(5) A report describing the slope, soil and vegetation characteristics of
that portion of the property within the district. Such report shall
also describe the proposed type and method of proposed building
construction, the type of foundation systems to be employed, the
proposals for landscaping, sewage disposal and water supply.
Further, the report shall describe all sediment and soil control and
stormwater management measures to be used as required by
Newtown Township, the United States Soil Conservation District
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
any and all additional engineering and conservation techniques
designed to alleviate environmental impacts which may be created
by proposed development activities.
(6) Such information as may be sufficient to meet the information
needs of the Township of uses and slopes within 200 feet adjoining
the property involved, as well as sufficient information to evaluate
the integration of usage(s) within the Slope Conservation District
with the underlying zoning district.
35.Editor's Note: The Soil Conservation Service is now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS).
§ 134-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-13
1:220
§ 134-13. Amendments to permissible disturbed area.
After approval, no change in ownership or use and no resubdivisions of
land shall increase directly or indirectly the permissible disturbed area
contained within a lot previously approved under provisions of this chapter.
The locations of the permissible disturbed area, if not already disturbed,
may be relocated as an amendment to the original subdivision, land
development or conditional use approval.
§ 134-14. Approval of conditional use.
A. In determining whether to grant a conditional use for a structure or use
of land located in a Slope Conservation District, the Board of
Supervisors shall take into consideration the factors set forth in
§§ 172-13 and 172-14 and the following:
(1) The relationship of the proposed use to the specific objective(s) set
forth in § 134-1.
(2) The standards set forth in other sections of this chapter.
(3) Whether abutting properties shall be adversely affected by possible
runoff or erosion from the proposed use.
B. No conditional use for a structure or use of land in a Slope Conservation
District shall be granted unless it has been demonstrated by the
applicant that:
(1) The proposed use or structure is of proper engineering design and
that the footings are designed to extend to stable soil and/or
bedrock.
(2) Proposed on-lot sewage disposal facilities shall be designed and
installed in conformance with all pertinent standards of the
Township and of the Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Proposed nonagricultural displacement of soil shall be undertaken
only for purposes consistent with the goals and objectives of this
chapter and shall be executed in a manner that shall not cause
excessive erosion or create other unstable conditions.
(4) Surface runoff of water shall not create unstable conditions,
including erosion. Stormwater drainage facilities and/or systems
shall be constructed where the proposed use shall or is likely to
create conditions requiring such facilities.
(5) No other alternative location is feasible or practical for the
proposed use.
(6) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal shall be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate the proposed uses
and structures and in the manner that shall limit as far as practical
surface runoff, erosion or sedimentation or unstable soil conditions.
§ 134-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-14
1:221
§ 134-15. Certificate of occupancy; use permit.
§ 134-16. Disclaimer of liability.
The granting of a zoning permit(s), certificate of occupancy or approval of a
subdivision or land development plan for land located within proximity to a
Slope Conservation District shall not constitute a representation, guaranty
or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official or employee
thereof as to the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create
no liability upon or estoppel of the Township, its officials or employees.
The degree of erosion and sediment control protection intended to be
provided by this chapter was determined to be reasonable for the regulatory
purposes of this chapter and is based upon engineering and scientific
methods of study. This chapter does not imply that areas not included within
the Slope Conservation District boundaries or land uses permitted within
such district shall be free from adverse effects of erosion.
§ 134-17. Construal of provisions.
No provision of the zoning, subdivision or any other ordinance shall be
construed as defining any term of this chapter or modifying any provision
hereof; nothing in this provision, however, shall be construed as limiting
the independent effect of any other ordinance except to the extent provided
herein.
Any and all reasonable mitigation techniques and procedures shall
be utilized.
A. No land located within the Slope Conservation District and no building
located on such land subject to this chapter hereafter shall be occupied,
used or changed in occupancy or use unless and until a certificate of
occupancy or use permit, as appropriate, has been applied for and
obtained by the person proposing to so occupy, use or change the
occupancy or use of such land or building.
B. The applicant for such certificate or permit shall, as part of the
application for such certificate or permit, submit to the Township a
certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, as
appropriate, that the construction or physical modification of any
structure and any grading or filling (or earthmoving or ground cover
removal) of such land was performed in compliance with the plans
approved according to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Township shall issue such certificates of occupancy or use permit,
as appropriate, in conjunction with the Building Inspector, Township
Zoning Officer, Township Engineer and/or other Township officials,
when compliance with all Township ordinances has been accomplished.
§ 134-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 134-18
1:222
§ 134-18. Action upon noncompliance.
In the event that any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used or occupied or any hedge, tree, shrub or other vegetative
growth is maintained in violation of the terms of this chapter or any
regulations made pursuant thereto, the appropriate Township authorities
may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute appropriate
action or proceedings in a court of equity in order to prevent such unlawful
activity to restrain, correct or abate such a violation, to prevent the
occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act,
conditions, business or uses in or about such premises.
§ 134-19. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 138
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Slope conservation — See Ch. 134.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such
violation has been committed or exists and the lessee or tenants of the
building or premises in a part of which such violation has been
committed or exists and the general agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other person who knowingly commits, takes part or
assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises
in which any such violation exists shall be liable, on conviction, for a
violation of this chapter. Whenever such a person has been officially
notified by a Township official or by service of a summons in a
prosecution or in any other manner that he is committing a violation of
this chapter, each day that he continues such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine
or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or
penalties are now collected by law.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5]
§ 134-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-19
1:223
§ 138-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the modification of the natural
terrain, the alteration of drainage and the maintenance of artificial
structures and surfaces within Newtown Township so as to assure and
safeguard health, safety, terrain, ecology and general welfare in the
Township.
§ 138-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-5]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan of a system
of coordinated devices to prevent the dislocation and transportation of soil
during a period of time when natural vegetation is disturbed.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling water runoff
so that it will not cause erosion or flooding and for minimizing the effects of
impervious areas on water runoff.
§ 138-3. Activities requiring permit.
§ 138-4. Permit application; fee; plan design criteria.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall pave, except for single-family
driveways, fill, strip, grade or regrade any land within the Township
without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall disturb, modify, block, divert or
affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater within the
Township without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, erect or install any
drainage dam, ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other structure
or obstruction affecting the drainage of any premises in the Township
without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a permit as provided in § 138-3 shall apply for a permit by
written application on a form furnished by the Township.
B. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the
property showing as a minimum: [Amended 9-10-1979 by Ord. No.
1979-5]
(1) The property boundaries of the site on which the work is to be
performed.
(2) The topographic features of the site both existing and proposed.
§ 134-19 NEWTOWN CODE § 138-4
1:224
(3) The topographic features surrounding the site or property which
are of importance to the proposed development and its drainage
consideration.
(4) The soil types on the site.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures proposed for the
work as well as permanent stormwater management features
which will be incorporated into the finished topography.
C. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee computed in
accordance with a schedule to be established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord.
No. 1978-6]
D. In addition to the above, unless waived by the Township, the application
shall be accompanied by a detailed soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan and a permanent stormwater management plan
conforming to the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 143,
Stormwater Management, and as follows: [Amended 9-10-1979 by
Ord. No. 1979-5; 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-3; 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-8; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
(1) On-site ameliorating measures shall be incorporated into the final
plan to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer. These measures
shall serve to eliminate any increase whatsoever in the rate of
runoff from proposed impervious areas.
(2) Silt retention devices shall be removed, and permanent,
maintenance-free drainage structures shall be constructed upon
the complete restabilization of soil as determined by the Township
Engineer.
(3) All drainage facilities shall be designed in the most practicable
fashion to carry surface water in such a manner as to prevent
erosion or uncontrolled overflow.
(4) No slopes deeper than two horizontal to one vertical shall be
permitted. Slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be peg-sodded or seeded
and covered with jute matting or similar material.
(5) The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be in accordance with
guidelines as may be established from time to time by the Soil
Conservation Service36 of the United States Department of
Agriculture and the Township Engineer.
(6) All graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded and/or planted or
otherwise protected as required in Subsection D(4) hereof from
erosion as soon as practicable and shall be watered, tended and
36.Editor's Note: The Soil Conservation Service is now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS).
§ 138-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-4
1:225
§ 138-5. Permit issuance; renewal.
§ 138-6. General regulations.
maintained until growth is well established at time of completion
and final inspection. The disturbed area and duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(7) All trees in areas of extreme grade change shall be removed unless
protected with suitable tree wells or mounds. However, extreme
precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary removal of
trees.
(8) When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Township.
(9) When required, the applicant shall agree to the granting and
recording of easements for drainage facilities, including
acceptance of the discharge water on the property of others,
provisions for maintenance of slopes and swales and access for the
maintenance of anti-erosion facilities.
A. Upon the submission of a complete application which conforms to the
provisions of this chapter, the Township Manager or his designee shall
issue the necessary permit. [Amended 6-12-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-5]
B. Except in the case of a new single-family home, where the scope of a
permit requires that it is extended longer than one year, the permit
shall be renewed annually with additional fees paid. No permit shall be
issued for longer than three years without the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-12]
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any condition of the
permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to
other property or personal injury, as well as sedimentation pollution
which may be affected by the activity requiring a permit. [Amended
9-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-5]
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade
or regrade land in any manner so close to a property line as to endanger
or damage any adjoining street, sidewalk, alley or any other public or
private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sediment or other physical damage or
personal injury which might result.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any
other material whatsoever or cause such to be thrown or placed in any
drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct
free flow.
§ 138-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 138-6
1:226
§ 138-7. Inspections; costs.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain in good
operating order any drainage facility on his or its premises. All drainage
ditches, culverts, drain pipes and drainage structures shall be kept
open and free-flowing at all times.
E. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant
to a permit granted under this chapter shall continuously maintain and
repair all graded surfaces and anti-erosion devices, retaining walls,
drainage structures or means and other protective devices, plantings
and ground cover, installed or completed.37
A. The applicant, in any activity requiring a permit and which involves 10
or fewer single-family residences, after commencing initial operation
shall request, in writing, inspection by the Township Engineer:
(1) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil and
disposal of all unsuitable material, but prior to beginning any other
preparation of the ground.
(2) Upon completion of preparation of the ground to receive fill, but
prior to beginning any placement.
(3) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(4) Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities, including established ground covers and planting,
and all other work done under the permit.
B. The applicant, in all other cases other than that referred to in
Subsection A hereof, after commencing initial operations shall request,
in writing, inspections by the Township Engineer at the following stages
in the development of the site or of each subdivision thereof:
(1) Prior to commencement of grading operations to determine the
suitability of all proposed fill materials.
(2) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil and
disposal of all unsuitable material, but prior to beginning or any
other preparation of the ground.
(3) Upon completion of preparation of ground to receive fill, but prior
to beginning or placement, an inspection of proof rolling.
(4) Upon completion of structural fill placement such that the following
earthfill procedures are assured:
37.Editor's Note: Original Subsections (f) through (l), which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 9-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-5.
§ 138-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-7
1:227
(a) Prior to placing fill in any area, grading should be performed as
required to provide for drainage. Ditching or filling around the
area should be performed to intercept or divert all surface
water. Within the area on which fill is to be placed, the ground
should be graded so as to provide for unobstructed drainage
from every point to some disposal point.
(b) The area should be closely examined to determine whether
excessive wetness, springs or other seepage of water can be
observed. If such conditions exist, drainage shall be provided
before placement of fill is undertaken.
(c) When the fill area has been prepared as specified, the existing
ground surface should be compacted by the specified method
for compacting fill.
(d) Fill should begin at the lowest section of the area. Fill should
be spread in six-inch layers prior to compaction. Each layer
should be approximately horizontal, but slight slopes can be
permitted in order to provide for surface water runoff.
(e) Each layer of fill shall be inspected prior to compaction. All
roots, vegetation or debris should be removed. Stones larger
than six inches in diameter should be removed or broken. The
moisture content of each layer should be determined to be
suitable for compaction.
(f) The compaction of the fill should be done with a sheepsfoot
roller, rubber-tired roller or a vibratory roller. Other
compaction equipment should be used only after it has
demonstrated that satisfactory results can be obtained with it.
(g) Each layer of compacted fill should be tested to determine its
dry density as per ASTM D 1556. The density of each layer
should not be less than 95% of maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D 1557. The moisture content of the
compacted layer should be not more than 4% less or 2%
greater than the optimum moisture as determined by ASTM D
1557.
(h) Only when the compacted layer has been shown to be as
specified should other layers of fill be placed above it.
(i) Visual inspection of borrow material should be made
periodically to assure that no variation in the fill material has
occurred.
(5) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
§ 138-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 138-7
1:228
§ 138-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2; 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not
more than 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 141
SOLID WASTE
(6) Upon completion of trench backfilling operations so that testing
can be performed as specified in Subsection B(4) hereof.
(7) Upon completion of final grading, permanent drainage and erosion
control facilities, including established ground covers and planting,
and all other work done under the permit.
C. All applicants, except those applying for permits in relation to the
construction of a new single-family housing unit, shall bear all the costs
of inspections required hereunder and shall deposit with the Township
such sum as shall be determined by the Township Engineer to cover the
cost of such inspections. [Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-6]
§ 138-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-8
1:229

ARTICLE I
Dumping, Littering and Garbage Collection
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 1105 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 141-1. Restricted acts.
§ 141-2. Separate containers for collection.
§ 141-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
A. No person shall throw, deposit, dump, keep, accumulate or permit to
remain upon public or private property any garbage, bottles, cans,
paper, rubbish, wire, glass, cardboard, wood, cartons, boxes or other
similar rubbish material except in leakproof containers provided with a
tight-fitting lid or cover.
B. No person shall dump, place or deposit any loose papers, rubbish or
waste matter in or upon any public highway of the Township.
C. No person shall dump, place or deposit any papers, rubbish, ashes,
empty cans or other trash or garbage on any private property in the
Township. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-238]
D. No person shall burn any rubbish or waste material within the
Township. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. No person shall place any wastepaper, rubbish, ashes or other waste
material on any sidewalk or in or at the side of any public street or
highway in the Township unless the same is placed there temporarily
for collection and disposal by either the Township or its agent or
contractor or for collection by a private contractor engaged to collect
such material by the owner or occupant of the premises in front of
which the material is placed, and unless all ashes are placed in a
separate container and unless all solid waste and recyclables are
separated and placed in containers as required by the Township.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
B. For purposes of this section, all containers and/or separate containers
shall be equipped with and effectively sealed by a lid or other suitable
device so as to prevent and prohibit the contents thereof from leaving
the confines of the same.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of original Section 1105.05,
dealing with the permit application for a public dump, which immediately followed this
subsection.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-3
1:231

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Collectors
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 1109 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 141-4. Permit required.
No person shall collect, remove or transport within the Township, either by
himself or by his agent, servant or employee, any trash, waste materials,
junk, rubbish or garbage without first obtaining a permit from the Township
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 141-5. Permit application; issuance; fee; term. [Amended
7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-11; 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Applications for permits to collect, remove or transport trash, waste
materials, junk, rubbish or garbage shall be made on the form to be supplied
by the Township, and a permit for such collection shall be issued by the
Township Manager or his designee upon the approval of the collector's
application and the payment of a permit fee in the amount set by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors. The permit shall be issued for the balance of
the calendar year, and no permit shall be good for more than one year.
Permits shall be on the form prepared by the Township Manager or his
designee, and all permits issued are personal and are not transferable or
assignable. The use of a permit by a person other than the permittee shall
be cause for revocation of the permit. The permit shall be carried by the
holder thereof at all times when trash, waste materials, junk, rubbish or
garbage is being collected, removed or transported.
§ 141-6. Truck requirements; insurance.
No permit to collect, remove or transport trash, waste materials, junk,
rubbish or garbage shall be issued until:
A. The applicant has available a truck properly equipped so that it will
prevent the trash, waste materials, junk, rubbish or garbage from being
scattered, blown away or dispersed.
B. The trucks used by applicants for the removal of trash, waste materials,
junk, rubbish or garbage shall have metal bodies and be watertight and
free from odors at all times and shall be provided with appropriate
covers that will entirely cover the truck bodies at the times they are
transporting refuse through, in and about the Township.
C. The trucks used by the applicant under the required permit shall have
prominently placed on each side, not less than three inches high, the
name of the owner of the vehicle and a truck number.
D. The applicant shall file with the Township Manager or his designee
certificates from an approved insurance company showing that the
applicant has: [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:233
§ 141-7. Restrictions.
No person shall collect, remove or transport trash, waste materials, junk,
rubbish or garbage in the Township:
§ 141-8. Examination of vehicle.
Every holder of a permit, upon demand by a police officer in uniform, shall
permit an examination of the contents of his vehicle or any receptacles
therein.
§ 141-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(1) Automobile insurance of not less than $1,000,000 of combined
single-limit liability coverage;
(2) General liability insurance of $1,000,000 (combined single-limit);
and
(3) A standard worker's compensation policy to cover any employee
that the applicant may have.
A. After sunset or before sunrise, and in no event before 7:00 a.m. or after
7:00 p.m. local time; and/or
B. In trucks or vehicles which do not comply with the provisions of § 141-6.
§ 141-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-9
1:234
ARTICLE III
Compliance with County Solid Waste Management Plan
[Adopted 7-13-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-8]
§ 141-10. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or
the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Newtown.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as
set forth in the Act39 and which the county, Authority or contractor,
by its ordinance or regulations, is willing to accept at the plant, but
excluding:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or the contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge.
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste.
(2)
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling.
(3)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county
ordinances.
(4)
39.Editor's Note: The word "Act" refers to the Act of 1980, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq.
§ 141-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-10
1:235
§ 141-11. Designation of nuisances.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 141-12. Plant operations; charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations and also that the contractor and/
or county will impose reasonable charges which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 141-13. Requirements for collectors.
§ 141-14. Approval required for dumps, transfer stations and
landfills.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills,
resource recovery plants and transfer stations.
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals of Ordinance
No. 1987-8.40
A. Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within
the municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be
responsible for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the
municipality pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality
and/or contracts between them and the owners or occupants of
properties.
B. All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste
collected within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated
by the county subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation
thereof as may be established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery
and disposal at any other place shall be a violation of this article and
cause for revocation of the collector's license, except in special
circumstances approved in advance by the municipality and the county
and/or contractor. All collectors shall comply in their operation with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations pertaining to the collection
and transportation of municipal solid waste.
40.Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ord. No. 1987-8, including the recitals, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 141-10 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-14
1:236
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
§ 141-15. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 141-19 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which, in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality, shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 141-16. Further regulation; amendments.
§ 141-17. Joint cooperation agreement.
A. The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the
disposal thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and
regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Newtown, including but without
limitation regulations as to the form of license application, the amount
of fee to be charged for said licenses and the terms of the licenses and
license issuance procedures; provided, however, that no such rules and
regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this article, the county
solid waste plan or applicable law.
B. The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at
any time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the
designated solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste
from the municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the
prior express written approval of the county during the term of the
contract between the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for
the construction and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a
term of 25 years. For the purposes of securing the contractor's
financing, such requirement shall be deemed to be a contract between
the county, the contractor and the municipality, which the municipality
(subject to the terms of the joint cooperation agreement set forth in
§ 141-17 below) agrees to enforce so that the municipal solid waste
from the municipality will be available to provide a source of energy for
the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but in the future it
becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid waste so
collected to the plant.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
§ 141-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-17
1:237
§ 141-18. Adoption of solid waste management plan.
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on the date when the county advises the
municipality that the plant is operational. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Protection for their
own plan under the Act, or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that (upon
any such termination of this agreement by the municipality) the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 141-18 of this article.
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Protection has recommended that
the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act41 can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis.
B. The municipality authorized the county to prepare the solid waste
management plan on the municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of the municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects the
municipality, have found the plan acceptable and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 141-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-18
1:238
§ 141-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District
Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days, and each day's continuance of a violation of this article,
as well as each truckload of illegally delivered trash, shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 141-20. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon the date of enactment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the municipality shall have neither the right
nor the obligation to dispose of its municipal solid waste at the plant which
is contemplated under this article until said plant is constructed and fully
operational.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to the Department
of Environmental Protection for the final approval on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 141-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-20
1:239

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-1]
§ 141-21. Word usage; definitions.
A. As used in this article, words in the singular include the plural, and
those in the plural include the singular. Words in the present tense
include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender include
the feminine and neuter. The word "person" may include corporation,
unincorporated association and partnership, as well as an individual.
B. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
indicated below:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food
containers, excluding products such as pie pans and aluminum foil.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage cans consisting of steel
and aluminum.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily
for commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling
residential buildings containing more than four dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or
private agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs,
bazaars, socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200
or more individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or
beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, light bulbs, automotive glass, blue
glass, porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and
computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or
serve groups of people such as hospitals, public and private schools,
day-care centers and nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residue, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever, but not newsprint.
§ 141-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-21
1:241
§ 141-22. Recycling program established.
There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory
separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the Township of
Newtown. The Township Board of Supervisors or its agent is empowered to
designate the day(s) of the month on which recyclables shall be collected,
removed and disposed of from a particular area of the Township.
§ 141-23. Separation and removal of recyclables.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Rental properties having
more than four dwelling units within the exterior walls of a single
building regardless of whether fire walls separate the dwelling units,
if owned and operated by a single owner/operator.[Amended
11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-6]
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities, including public and private schools.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon
news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of
public interest. Expressly excluded are glossy advertising inserts often
included with newspapers, magazines, telephone directories and
periodicals.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences,
commercial or institutional establishments.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated recyclable materials,
including, at a minimum, materials listed in § 1501 of Act 10142 and
materials identified by the Township by resolution to be recycled.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Single-family or multifamily dwellings
having four dwelling units or fewer within the exterior walls of the
building, separately owned or maintained.[Amended 11-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-6]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and
which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise
disposed. The term does not include source-separated recyclable
materials or material approved by the Department for beneficial use.
A. Residential dwellings. Effective May 1, 1990, all persons occupying
residential dwellings shall, unless exempted, separate aluminum cans,
bimetallic, ferrous and glass containers and newspapers from other
waste generated at their residential dwellings and store such material
42.Editor's Note: Act 101 refers to the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act. See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 141-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-23
1:242
until collection by the Township or its agent. Recyclables shall be
placed at the curb to be collected at times designated by the Township.
The Township may, by resolution, designate other materials from
residential dwellings to be separated from waste.
B. Commercial, industrial and municipal establishments.
(1) Effective September 1, 1990, all persons shall separate from the
waste stream high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper
and leaf waste generated at commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments and from community activities and shall store the
materials until collection. The Township may, by resolution,
designate other materials generated at commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments to be separated from waste.
Commercial, municipal or institutional establishments shall
provide written documentation to the Township of the total number
of tons recycled and the total number of tons of waste generated
annually.
(2) Persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments shall be exempt from the requirements of this
article if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of
materials required by this article to recycle, if they so inform the
Township prior to September 1, 1990. To be eligible for an
exemption, a commercial or industrial solid waste generator must
annually provide written documentation to the Township of the
total number of tons recycled and the total number of tons of waste
generated annually. An exempt person may give up an exemption at
any time upon 10 days' notice to the Township, but shall be liable
for compliance until such date on a prorated basis.
C. Multifamily housing properties.
(1) Effective September 1, 1990, an owner, landlord or agent of an
owner or a landlord of multifamily rental housing units of four or
more units shall separate aluminum cans, bimetallic, ferrous and
glass containers and newspapers from other waste and provide a
collection system for these recyclable materials at each property.
The collection system must include suitable containers for
collecting and sorting material, easily accessible locations for the
containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning
the use and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords
and agents of owners or landlords who comply with this section
shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their
buildings.
(2) Owners, landlords or agents of owners or a landlord of four-family
or more multifamily residential housing units shall advise the
Township of their plan prior to September 1, 1990, and annually
provide written documentation to the Township of the total number
§ 141-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-23
1:243
§ 141-24. Disposal of leaf waste.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of leaf waste from any property in the
Township with residential, commercial or institutional waste.
§ 141-25. Unauthorized collection of recyclables.
§ 141-26. Existing recycling operations.
Recycling operations in existence on the date this article was approved may
continue, provided that this article shall control if there is any inconsistency.
Persons operating recycling operations in the Township shall be required to
obtain a permit from the Township.
§ 141-27. Disposal of recyclables.
No persons shall dispose of recyclables with ordinary municipal waste.
Recyclables shall be taken to a recycling facility. It shall be a violation of
this article to dispose of recyclables in landfills or incinerators except with
the written permission of the Township.
§ 141-28. Requirements for waste collectors.
§ 141-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000. In default of
such payment of the fine, such person, the responsible members or officers
of tons recycled annually and the total number of tons of waste
generated annually by October 31 of each year.
A. Recyclables shall become the property of the Township or its authorized
agent from the time of placement of recyclables at the curb. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Township to
collect or pick up or cause to be picked up or collected any such items.
Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of waste
which contains recyclables.
A. Private refuse collection firms registered under Article II of this chapter
shall, as a requirement of licensing, provide to the Township on an
annual basis the amount of waste collected in the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any waste collector to collect, remove or
transport recyclables without written permission from the Township.
§ 141-23 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-29
1:244
of such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be imprisoned
for not more than 30 days in the county jail. Each day's continuance of a
violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 141-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-29
1:245
Chapter 143
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Plumbing — See Ch. 121.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
138.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Wastewater management — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
§ 141-29 NEWTOWN CODE § 141-29
1:246
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 143-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Newtown Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance" or interchangeably, "Chapter 143, Stormwater
Management, of the Code of the Township of Newtown."
§ 143-2. Statement of findings.
A. Inadequate management of increased rate and volume of stormwater
runoff from land development increases stream flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and
downstream communities, upsets the hydrologic cycle, particularly the
reduced infiltration, and threatens public health, safety and welfare.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff can harm
surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of stream
beds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying
aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and
loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, and pathogens.
C. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
D. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment, and activities
causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare, and the
protection of the environment.
E. Stormwater is an important natural resource that replenishes
groundwater supplies and baseflow of streams through infiltration,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
F. Negative effects of stormwater runoff can be minimized by using
project designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain
high water quality, infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design that minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive
areas (i.e., stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and considers
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component of successful stormwater management.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:247
§ 143-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within Newtown Township by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimizing the impacts described herein through provisions
designed to:
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities, including
Newtown Township, to implement a program of stormwater controls.
These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater
discharges from their municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s)
under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
I. Nonstormwater discharges to a municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by
Newtown Township.
A. Promote alternative land development and building construction
designs and layouts that minimize the negative impacts on surface and
groundwater from stormwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs) for
stormwater management.
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces that encourage stormwater runoff.
E. Manage rate and volume of stormwater runoff, erosion and
sedimentation, and infiltration of stormwater at its source by regulating
activities that cause stormwater runoff problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, through
reliance on natural drainage processes and discouragement of
structural control measures.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain stream base flow, to
prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
J. Protect steam base flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under federal and state law,
including regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 93.4a, requiring protection and
maintenance of "existing uses" and maintenance of the level of water
quality to support those uses in all streams, and the protection and
maintenance of water quality in "special protection" streams.
§ 143-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-3
1:248
§ 143-4. Statutory authority.
Newtown Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the
authority of:
§ 143-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from land
development sites.
M. Provide standards to meet NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
N. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges into municipal separate storm
sewer systems (MS4s).
O. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent accelerated scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream
channels.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-wide stormwater management planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs within Newtown
Township.
S. Protect existing water quality by prohibiting nonstormwater discharges
to ground surfaces for both existing and proposed developments.
A. Stormwater Management Act, Act 167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as "the Act" or "Act 167");
B. Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 6501 et seq.;
C. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as "the MPC").
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of Newtown Township.
B. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including but not limited to land development, redevelopment,
and earth disturbance activity located within the Township, are subject
to regulation by this chapter.
C. This chapter contains stormwater management performance standards
and design criteria that are necessary from a watershed-wide
perspective. Local stormwater management regulations and design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.) may be found in other chapters of
the Township Code, including Subdivision and Land Development,43 and
applicable federal and state regulations.
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-6
1:249
§ 143-6. Exemptions.
A. A stormwater management exemption shall not relieve a landowner,
developer or other applicant for a land use or building permit from
implementing requirements of other applicable Township regulations or
from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect public
health, safety, and property.
B. An exemption shall not relieve a landowner, developer or other
applicant from complying with the special requirements for watersheds
draining to identified high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters
or any other current or future state or Township water quality
protection requirements.
C. If a drainage problem is documented or known to exist downstream of,
or is expected from the proposed activity, then the Township may
withdraw exemptions listed in Table 143-5.1 and require the applicant
to comply with all requirements of this chapter.
D. Even though an applicant may be exempt, he is not relieved from
complying with other Township chapters or regulations.
E. General exemptions.
(1) Table 143-5.1 summarizes the exemptions from certain provisions
of this chapter. Exemptions are for the items noted in Table 143-5.1
only, and shall not relieve a landowner, developer or other applicant
from other applicable sections of this chapter.
(2) Any regulated activity that is exempt from some provisions of this
chapter is exempt only from those provisions.
(3) If development is to take place in phases, the developer is
responsible for implementing the requirements of this chapter as
the impervious cover/earth disturbance threshold is met.
(4) The date of the Township enactment of these provisions shall be the
starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in
which future subdivisions and respective impervious area and
earth disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered.
(5) Exemption shall not relieve a landowner, developer or applicant
from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect
health, safety, and property. For example:
(a) If a property owner proposes a one-hundred-fifty-square-foot
shed after adoption of the Township stormwater management
chapter, that property owner would be exempted from water
quality and quantity requirements of the chapter as noted in
Table 143-5.1 of the chapter. If, at a later date, the property
owner proposes to construct a four-hundred-ninety-nine-
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 143-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-6
1:250
square-foot room addition, the applicant would be required
to comply with the requirements for the Simplified Method
for the full 649 square feet of impervious cover created since
adoption of the Township chapter. If an additional sevenhundred-
square-foot swimming pool/patio is proposed later,
the property owner would be required to implement the full
stormwater quantity and quality control submission
requirements of this chapter for the total 1,349 square feet of
additional impervious surface added to the original property
since adoption of the Township chapter.
Table 143-5.1
Exemptions
Proposed Impervious
Surface Earth Disturbance
Requirement
Type of
Project
0 to
499
square
feet
500 to
999
square
feet
1,000+
square
feet
0 to
4,999
square
feet
disturbance
5,000
square
feet to
< 1 acre > 1 acre
SWM site
plan
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Modified1 Not
exempt
Nonstructural
project
design
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
Infiltration
volume
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
Water
quality
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Modified2 Modified2 Not
exempt
Stream
bank
erosion
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
Stormwater
peak rate
control
and
management
districts
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-6
1:251
Table 143-5.1
Exemptions
Proposed Impervious
Surface Earth Disturbance
Requirement
Type of
Project
0 to
499
square
feet
500 to
999
square
feet
1,000+
square
feet
0 to
4,999
square
feet
disturbance
5,000
square
feet to
< 1 acre > 1 acre
Erosion
and
sediment
pollution
control
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the Pa. Code and
other applicable state and Township codes, including the
Clean Streams Law.
Not
exempt
NOTES:
• "Proposed impervious surface" in Table 143-5.1 includes new, additional, or
replacement impervious surface/cover as part of development or redevelopment.
• Exempt: Exempt from specified provision only; SWM site plan submission may
still be required if other provisions are applicable.
• Modified1: Modified SWM site plan need only consist of those items requested by
the Township Engineer and related supportive material needed to determine
compliance with the intent of this chapter.
• Modified2: Modified SWM site plan need only consist of items and related material
requested by the Township Engineer
• Simplified approach: Must comply with provisions of Appendix B of this chapter.44
• Redevelopment: See alternate stormwater peak rate control criteria.
F. Exemptions for specific activities.
(1) Use of land for gardening or growing vegetables for home
consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan, or erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved by the Delaware County Conservation District,
including activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling
soil, and grazing animals. For agriculture with an approved
conservation plan, installation of new or expansion of existing
farmsteads, animal housing, waste storage, and production areas
having impervious surfaces that result in a net increase in
impervious surface of between 500 and 999 square feet shall apply
the simplified approach, and net increases in impervious surface of
44.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-6
1:252
§ 143-7. Repealer.
Any provision of the Newtown Township Code or other chapter resolution
or regulation that is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this and other
federal and state regulations with respect to stormwater management are
hereby preempted to the extent of the other provision is less protective of
public health, safety and welfare, and the environment than the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 143-8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 143-9. Compatibility with other laws and regulations.
greater than or equal to 1,000 square feet shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry," are operating
under an approved erosion and sedimentation plan, and must
comply with the stream buffer requirements in § 143-17C.
(4) Repaving without reconstruction.
(5) Emergency exemption: Emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare.
(a) A written description of the scope and extent of any emergency
work performed shall be submitted to Township no later than
two calendar days after the commencement of the activity.
(b) If Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the
work shall cease immediately, until a stormwater site-plan in
accordance with this chapter is submitted and approved by the
Township.
(6) Maintenance exemption: Any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Township Engineer.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve a landowner,
developer or other applicant of the responsibility to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable law
or regulation.
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-9
1:253
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of Newtown
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The
requirements of this chapter shall supersede any conflicting
requirements in other Township regulations.
§ 143-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-9
1:254
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 143-10. (Reserved)
§ 143-11. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 143-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activity and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing, nursery
and sod operations, excluding greenhouse structures, and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
F. Words defined in other chapters or by law or regulation shall have the
meaning and shall be interpreted in the context of the other chapters or
the specific law or regulation.
§ 143-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:255
APPLICANT — A landowner or other person who has filed an application
with Newtown Township for approval to engage in any regulated activity
defined in this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by a
landowner, developer or contractor as a project is constructed and upon
which the actual locations of building components and changes to the
original plans and specifications are documented. These documents, or a
copy of same, are turned over to the Township Engineer at the completion
of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater from regulated
activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote infiltration,
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs
are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to a project site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CAPTURE — Collection of runoff to be stored for reuse or allowed to slowly
infiltrate into the ground.
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting of
channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Delaware County Conservation District.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:256
CONVEYANCE — A facility or structure used for the transportation or
transmission of something from one place to another.
CULVERT — A structure, with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semi-fluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill, or structure for
highway, railroad, or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semi-fluid.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer, landscape architect, professional land surveyor or
professional geologist trained to develop SWM site plan, or any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems and facilities.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Delaware County Planning Department,
Delaware County Conservation District, and/or agent of the Board of
Supervisors involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
soon after a precipitation event and become dry until the next precipitation
event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — The prevention of, or to prevent, the
immediate discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater
runoff into surface waters by temporary storage or other control measures.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities in Newtown Township.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity is planned, conducted, or maintained.
DEVELOPMENT, LAND — Any human-induced change to improved or
unimproved real estate, whether public or private, including, but not limited
to, land development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building
or other structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site
alteration such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving,
parking or storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As
used in this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:257
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter of a
tree at breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above the forest
floor on the uphill side of the tree.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater
management facility or defined flow of stormwater.
DISTURBED AREA — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of a
lot, tract, or parcel of land, located such that stormwater runoff from the
property would be directed towards it by gravity.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff, including ditches, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by Newtown Township after a
stormwater management site plan has been approved and in conjunction
with a soil erosion permit.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction or other human activity
that disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands,
diminishes, or enters the course, current, or cross-section of a watercourse,
floodway, or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin, or
other point of interest.
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water, such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (see "peak discharge").
B.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:258
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is designed
to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan must be
submitted to and approved by the Delaware County Conservation District
and the Township Engineer before construction can begin.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE (EV) WATERS — Surface waters of high quality
which satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate a lower curve number or Rational "c" value, such as
forested lands.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP — A situation where a reasonable return on
investment cannot be fully realized from development/redevelopment of
a given parcel of land due to added costs or burdens associated with
the design, construction, and/or maintenance of stormwater structures,
facilities, buffers and/or setbacks.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or as delineated by the applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area. See Chapter 172 for
further definition.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest lands. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:259
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GRADE —
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells,
springs, and stream base flow and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from chiefly through the infiltration of
stormwater runoff.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used
to model the Darby-Cobbs and Crum Creek watersheds during the Act 167
plan development and is the basis for the standards and criteria of this
chapter.
HIGH QUALITY (HQ) WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code
Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in a drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents or greatly diminishes
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but
are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs.
Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:260
as impervious surfaces. Swimming pools are not considered impervious
cover for stormwater management purposes but are impervious with
respect to limitations on lot coverage for zoning purposes.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to collect
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely
developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure
and does not require an extension of water, sewer, or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct stormwater
runoff into groundwater (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INFLOW — The flow entering a stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, drain, sewer,
channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land; or
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
C.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:261
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A land development and construction
approach that uses various land planning, design practices, and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems, and reduce infrastructure costs.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in watershed-specific hydrologic models.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
stormwater impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL — (Document Number 363-0300-002) (December 2006) The Best
Management Practices Manual published by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection. The manual is to supplement federal and
state regulations and the Department of Environmental Protection's
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy that emphasizes effective
site planning as the preferred method of managing stormwater runoff while
also providing numerous examples of BMPs that can be employed in
Pennsylvania to further avoid and minimize flooding and water resource
problems.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious. Land surface area
that permits the infiltration of stormwater.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Newtown
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — The period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:262
functioning, and all proposed improvements in an approved land
development plan are completed.
PRECONSTRUCTION — The period prior to the commencement of
construction activities.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they
enter the stormwater management system, but not necessarily designed to
meet water quality or volume requirements.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
Newtown Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — See "design professional (qualified)."
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REACH — Any stream segment or other stormwater conveyance used in the
watershed-specific hydrologic models.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the Engineer to the client. The
Engineer reviews the contractor's as-built drawings against his/her own
records for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or
transfers the information to a set of reproducible documents, in both cases
for the client's permanent records. Also, site plans recorded with the
Delaware County Recorder of Deeds establishing the approved location of
buildings and structures and required site improvements on a lot.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff, including redevelopment.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE — Activity involving earth disturbance
subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapters 92 or 102, or
the Clean Streams Law.45
45.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:263
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Resurfacing of an impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and not
released during a storm event. Retention basins are often designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in pond, depression or stormwater management
facility; examples include systems which discharge by percolation to
groundwater, and/or evaporation processes and which generally have
residence times of less than three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to 1)
reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering, and
converting sediments, nutrients, and other chemicals, and 2) supply food,
cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from a structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof
drains in building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT — Soil or other material transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:264
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
sediment transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which stormwater is directed for
infiltration.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Township streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow ruts or furrows prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated by DEP as EV or HQ waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.46
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years (see "return
period").
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that collects and
conveys stormwater but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:265
STORMWATER — Drainage from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation, including snow and ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared
by a landowner or other applicant indicating how stormwater runoff will
be managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter, and
including all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that this chapter's requirements have been
met, hereafter referred to as "SWM site plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas of a
watershed in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan
requirements and the goals of Act 167.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan for managing
stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm
Water Management Act." See also "watershed stormwater management
plan."
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream
essential to maintaining water quality (see also "riparian buffer").
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT — Subdivision and Land
Development Chapter.47
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-12
1:266
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel crosssection
at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Natural condition (see also
"predevelopment condition").
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
VOID RATIO — The ratio of the volume of void space to the volume of solid
substance in any material.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A watershed plan
for managing stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted as required by
the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known
as the "Storm Water Management Act" (e.g., Chester Creek, Ridley Creek,
Crum Creek, Darby-Cobbs Creeks). See also "stormwater management
plan."
WELLHEAD —
A. A structure built over a well.
§ 143-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-12
1:267
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — A natural groundcover with more than one viable tree of a DBH
of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet which existed within three
years of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have
been assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients
have been assigned.
§ 143-13. through § 143-15. (Reserved)
B. The source of water for a well.
§ 143-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-13
1:268
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 143-16. General requirements.
A. Landowners or other applicants proposing regulated activities in the
Township that do not fall under specified exemption criteria shall
submit a stormwater management site plan consistent with this chapter
and the applicable watershed stormwater management plan to the
Township for review. The stormwater management criteria of this
chapter shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
B. No regulated activity within the Township shall commence until the
Township issues approval of a SWM plan that demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
C. For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance equal to or
greater than one acre where, after a close evaluation of alternative site
designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet the mandatory minimum
volume and infiltration control standards of this chapter onsite, the
Township may approve measures other than those in this chapter after
consultation with and evaluation by DEP that the alternate site design
meets state water quality requirements and does not conflict with state
law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.48
D. For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance that is less than
one acre in an area where, after a close evaluation of alternative site
designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet any one or more of the
mandatory minimum standards of this chapter onsite, the Township
may approve measures other than those in this chapter.
E. The design of any site with proposed earth disturbance must minimize
surface discharge of stormwater and the creation of impervious
surfaces in order to maintain, as much as possible, the natural
hydrologic regime.
F. A SWM site plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions specified by this chapter to ensure maintenance of the
natural hydrologic regime, to promote infiltration, and to protect
groundwater and surface water quality and quantity.
G. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to preserve natural
flow conditions to the maximum extent practicable.
H. Existing drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered
in any manner without written permission from, and a maintenance
access agreement with, the affected property owner(s). Such discharge
shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this
chapter and still must meet the requirements of Act 167.
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 143-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-16
1:269
I. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If diffused
drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
J. Where a development site is traversed by a stream, drainage easements
of 25 feet shall be provided on either side of, and conform to the line of,
such streams.
K. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged where soil
conditions permit in order to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
L. All stormwater runoff from new development or redevelopment shall be
pretreated for water quality prior to discharge to surface or
groundwater. Rooftop runoff may go directly to an infiltration BMP or
be evapotranspirated.
M. All regulated activities within Newtown Township shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
N. BMPs shall be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet state
water quality requirements and any other more stringent requirements
as determined by Newtown Township.
O. Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by this chapter.
P. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required.
Q. All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements and any more stringent
requirements as set forth by Newtown Township.
§ 143-16 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-16
1:270
R. Techniques described in Appendix E (Low-Impact Development)49 of
this chapter shall be considered because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
S. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, a
landowner or other applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site's soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property values.
T. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems. The Township reserves the
right to disapprove any design that would result in construction in or
continuation of a stormwater problem area.
U. A landowner or other applicant may meet the stormwater management
criteria through off-site stormwater management measures as long as
the proposed measures are in the same subwatershed as shown by
Appendix A.50
49.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-16
1:271
V. Stormwater hotspots. Stormwater runoff from hotspots shall be
pretreated prior to surface or groundwater infiltration to prevent
pollutant runoff. Industrial sites referenced in 40 CFR 125 are examples
of hotspots.
(1) Below is a list of examples of hotspots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification
Codes.
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance areas).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Contaminated sites/brownfields.
(n) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries (which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan).
(3) While streets and highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT)
greater than 30,000] are not considered stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management
§ 143-16 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-16
1:272
§ 143-17. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
§ 143-18. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
facilities are designed to adequately protect receiving streams and/
or groundwater.
(4) The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES stormwater
program requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
W. The following standards for protection of downgradient properties from
off-site conveyance must be accomplished:
(1) For any location where a new concentrated discharge of
stormwater from any frequency rainfall event, up to and including
the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour event, will flow onto a
downgradient property, the following are required.
(a) A drainage easement (or other legal agreement/approval) must
be obtained for conveyance of discharges onto or through
adjacent properties.
(b) The conveyance must be designed to avoid erosion, flooding, or
other damage to the properties through which it is being
conveyed.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on or
discharging to a state highway right-of-way, or require access to or from
a state highway shall be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until the Township receives an approval from DEP in
§ 143-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-18
1:273
§ 143-19. Nonstructural project design process.
The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to minimize
stormwater impacts to reduce the surface discharge of stormwater, reduce
the creation of unnecessary impervious surfaces, prevent the degradation of
waters of the commonwealth, and maintain as much as possible the natural
hydrologic regime of the site:
compliance with 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102 of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities if applicable.
B. DEP regulations regarding erosion and sediment control under 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 shall be followed.
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from DEP or the County Conservation District must be
provided to the Township. The issuance of an NPDES construction
permit [or permit coverage under the statewide general permit
(PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of Subsection A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP, shall be available on the project site at all
times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
At a minimum, they shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire drainage area contributory to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
A. Low-impact development (LID) methods such as those listed in
Appendix E51 shall be applied provided that use of this method does not
conflict with other local codes.
B. The design process shall follow the sequence noted below. The goal of
the sequence is to minimize the increases in stormwater runoff and
impacts to water quality resulting from the proposed regulated activity:
(1) The following items shall be addressed prior to development of
other stormwater management site plan design elements:
51.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-18 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-19
1:274
(a) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, vernal pools, stream buffers, hydrologic soil
groups, and other existing recharge areas. Land development
shall also be included.
(b) Establish stream buffer boundaries.
(c) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding identified sensitive
areas.
(d) Identify site-specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas, and hydrologic soil groups A
and B (areas conducive to infiltration).
(e) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
[1] Minimize earth disturbance.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces.
[3] Break up large impervious surfaces.
(f) Determine into what management district the site falls (see
Appendix A),52 and conduct an existing conditions runoff
analysis.
(2) The following items in this subsection may be addressed in any
order provided that all items in Subsection B have been completed.
(a) Satisfy infiltration objectives and provide for stormwater
pretreatment prior to infiltration.
(b) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with
applicable water quality requirements.
(c) Provide stream bank erosion protection in accordance with
application stream bank erosion requirements.
(d) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth
disturbance and impervious surfaces, and, to the maximum
extent possible, to ensure that the remaining site development
has no surface or point discharge.
(e) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the
final design that meets the management district requirements.
(f) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge through
detention, bioretention, direct discharge, or other structural
control.
52.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-20
1:275
§ 143-20. Infiltration volume requirements.
A. Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider infiltration
to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when the
ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created.
B. If infiltration cannot be physically accomplished, then the design
professional shall be responsible for demonstrating to the satisfaction
of the Township Engineer that infiltration cannot be physically
accomplished on the site (e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting
zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc., rather than a financial hardship). If
infiltration can be physically accomplished, the volume of runoff to be
infiltrated shall be determined depending on demonstrated site
conditions, and shall be the greatest volume that can be physically
infiltrated.
C. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed or
redeveloped areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and
site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the top of the limiting zone.
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater volume and dewater completely as determined by
field tests conducted by a design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely draining
the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) within three days (72
hours) from the end of the design storm.
(2) The size of the infiltration facility and Rev shall be based upon the
following volume criteria:
(a) Modified Control Guideline One (MCG-1) of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices (PA BMP) Manual -
the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) to be captured and
infiltrated shall be the net two-year twenty-four-hour volume.
The net volume is the difference between the postdevelopment
runoff volume and the predevelopment runoff
volume. The post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation shall not be increased. For modeling
purposes, existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious
areas must be considered meadow in good condition or its
equivalent, and 20% of existing impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow in good condition.
§ 143-20 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-20
1:276
(b) Infiltrating the entire Rev volume may not be feasible on every
site due to site-specific limitations such as shallow depth to
bedrock or the water table. If it cannot be physically
accomplished, then the following criteria from Modified
Control Guideline Two (MCG-2) of the PA BMP Manual must be
satisfied:
[1] At least the first one inch of runoff from new or
replacement impervious surfaces shall be infiltrated.
Rev = 1 (inch) * impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12
(inches) = cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
(c) Only if infiltrating the entire Rev volume cannot be physically
accomplished, then the following minimum criteria from
Modified Control Guideline Two (MCG-2) of the PA BMP
Manual must be satisfied:
[1] Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be
designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire water
quality volume (WQv) (§ 143-17A); however, in all cases at
least the first 1/2 inch of the WQv shall be infiltrated. The
minimum infiltration volume (Rev) required would,
therefore, be computed as:
Rev = I * impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12 (inches) =
cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
Where:
I = The maximum equivalent infiltration amount
(inches) that the site can physically accept or
0.50 inch, whichever is greater.
[2] The retention volume values derived from the methods
specified by this chapter is the minimum volume the
applicant must control through an infiltration BMP facility.
If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions
of the impervious area, the infiltration volume for the
remaining area should be increased an equivalent amount
to offset the loss.
[3] Only if the minimum of 0.50 inch of infiltration
requirement cannot be physically accomplished, a waiver
from infiltration volume requirements is required from
Newtown Township.
D. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional and at minimum address
§ 143-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-20
1:277
§ 143-21. Water quality requirements.
soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev)
volume based on field-determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by a design
professional, it must be demonstrated to the Township Engineer
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
E. Infiltration facilities should, to the greatest extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants via groundwater, and be in
conformance with an approved source water protection assessment or
source water protection plan.
F. Roadway drainage systems should provide an opportunity to capture
accidental spills. Road deicing material storage facilities shall be
designed to avoid salt and chloride runoff from entering waterways and
infiltration facilities. A qualified design professional shall evaluate the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration
facility and perform a hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
G. The antidegredation analysis found in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 shall be
applied in HQ or EV streams.
H. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. The Township may
require a detailed hydrogeologic investigation.
I. The applicant should provide safeguards against groundwater
contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination
should there be a mishap or spill.
A. A landowner or other applicant shall comply with the following water
quality requirements of this chapter.
B. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated
activities and conform to state water quality requirements, BMPs which
§ 143-20 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-21
1:278
replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions
must be provided in the site design such that post-construction
stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical, or
biological characteristics of the receiving waters. This may be achieved
by the following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions; and
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to provide filtering
of chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff;
and
(3) Stream bank and stream bed protection: management of volume
and rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
C. Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities
necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration
volume computed under § 143-16 may be a component of the water
quality volume if the applicant chooses to manage both components in a
single facility. If the calculated water quality volume (WQv) is greater
than the volume required to be infiltrated as described by this chapter,
then the difference between the two volumes shall be treated for water
quality by an acceptable stormwater management practice(s). The
required water quality volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to
capture and treat a portion of stormwater runoff from the developed
areas of the site. To achieve this requirement, the following criterion is
established:
(1) From Control Guideline (CG-1) in the PA BMP Manual, the water
quality volume shall be the net two-year twenty-four-hour volume.
The net volume is the difference between the post-development
runoff volume and the predevelopment runoff volume. The postdevelopment
total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation shall not be
increased. For modeling purposes, existing (predevelopment)
nonforested pervious areas must be considered meadow in good
condition or its equivalent, and 20% of existing impervious area,
when present, shall be considered meadow in good condition.
(2) This volume requirement can be managed by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Where appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality
control and shall follow the guidelines of the PA BMP manual
referenced in Appendix G.53
(3) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert
of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
53.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-21
1:279
§ 143-22. Stream bank erosion requirements.
design of the facility shall provide for protection from clogging and
unwanted sedimentation.
D. The temperature of receiving waters shall be protected through the use
of BMPs that moderate temperature.
E. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through, or a waterbody
(i.e., lake, pond, wetland) is present on the site, the landowner shall
create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet to either side of
the top-of-bank of the channel, lake, or wetland. The buffer area shall be
planted with native vegetation and maintained in a vegetated state
(refer to Appendix B, Pennsylvania Native Plant List, contained in the
PA BMP Manual).
(1) The following provisions also apply to riparian buffers on lots in
existence at the time of adoption of this chapter:
(a) If the applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet,
the buffer width may be reduced to 25% of the setback or 25
feet, whichever is greater.
(b) If a stream traverses a site in a manner that significantly
reduces the use of the site, the buffer may be either:
[1] Reduced to 25 feet on either side, with Township approval;
or
[2] Reduced to 10 feet with Township waiver.
(2) Permitted uses within the buffer include the following, subject to
Township approval and provided that they comply with all federal,
state, and local regulations:
(a) Recreational trails. See Appendix J, Riparian Buffer Trail
Guidelines.54
(b) Utility rights-of-way.
(c) Bridges.
(d) Other uses subject to Township approval.
F. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant,
easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the
existing buffer shall be maintained.
A. In addition to controlling water quality volume (in order to minimize the
impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion), the
primary requirement to control stream bank erosion is to design a BMP
to detain the proposed conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour design
54.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-22
1:280
§ 143-23. Stormwater peak rate control.
storm to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS Type
II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding
a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) to release the
proposed conditions one-year storm for a minimum of 24 hours from a
point in time when the maximum volume of water from the one-year
storm is stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., the maximum water surface
elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the
invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to the BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. When the
calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or other
methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to the
Township Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function. All facilities shall make use of measures to extend the
flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
A. Each watershed has been divided into either stormwater management
districts or release rate districts as shown on the respective
Management District or Release Rate Maps in Appendix A.55
(1) In addition to the watershed-specific requirements for each of the
watersheds specified by the tables in this section, the erosion and
sedimentation control, the nonstructural project design, the
infiltration, the water quality, and the stream bank erosion
requirements shall be implemented.
(2) Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in a watershed
for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year
design storms are shown in tables in this section. Development
sites located in each of the management/release rate districts must
control proposed conditions runoff rates to existing conditions
runoff rates for the design storms in accordance with the tables.
B. General: Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map (Appendix A)56 and this section.
55.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-23
1:281
C. District boundaries: The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspection at
the Township and County Planning offices. A copy of the official map at
a reduced scale is included in Appendix A.57 The exact location of the
stormwater management district boundaries as they apply to a given
development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using
the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate data required)
provided as part of the SWM site plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district or watershed: For a proposed
development site located within two or more stormwater management
district subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet
the management district criteria for which the discharge is located. The
natural hydrology of each respective subarea shall be maintained, and
drainage shall not be redirected from one subarea to another. Under
circumstances where the landowner or other applicant shows this
cannot be accomplished, a waiver is required from the Township.
Table 143-23.1
Peak Rate Control Standards in the Crum Creek Watershed
District Proposed Condition Existing Condition
Design Storm Design Storm
A 2 year 1 year
5 year 5 year
10 year 10 year
25 year 25 year
50 year 50 year
100 year 100 year
B 2 year 1 year
5 year 2 year
10 year 5 year
25 year 10 year
50 year 25 year
100 year 100 year
57.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-23 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-23
1:282
Table 143-23.2
Peak Rate Control Standards by Stormwater Management
District in the Darby-Cobbs Creek Watershed
District
Proposed Condition
Design Storm
Existing Condition
Design Storm
A 2 year 1 year
5 year 5 year
10 year 10 year
25 year 25 year
100 year 100 year
B-1 2 year 1 year
10 year 5 year
25 year 10 year
50 year 25 year
100 year 100 year
B-2 2 year 1 year
5 year 2 year
25 year 5 year
50 year 10 year
100 year 100 year
C Conditional Direct
Discharge District
(1) Conditional Direct Discharge District: In District C, development
sites that can discharge directly to the Darby-Cobbs Creek main
channel, major tributaries, or indirectly to the main channel
through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e., storm sewer
or tributary) may do so without control of the proposed conditions'
peak rate of runoff greater than the five-year storm. Sites in
District C will still have to comply with the groundwater recharge
criteria, the water quality criteria, and stream bank erosion
criteria. If the proposed conditions' runoff is intended to be
conveyed by an existing stormwater drainage system to the main
channel, assurance must be provided that such system has
adequate capacity to convey the flows greater than the two-year
existing conditions' peak flow or will be provided with
improvements to furnish the required capacity. When adequate
capacity in the downstream system does not exist and will not be
provided through improvements, the proposed conditions' peak
rate of runoff must be controlled to the existing conditions' peak
rate as required in District A provisions (i.e., ten-year proposed
conditions' flows to ten-year existing conditions' flows) for the
specified design storms.
§ 143-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-23
1:283
E. Off-site areas: Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
F. Site areas: Where a site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the peak rate control standards noted above.
Unimpacted areas for which the discharge point has not changed are
not subject to the peak rate control standards.
G. Hardship option for regulated activities less than one acre: There may
be certain instances where the peak rate criteria are too restrictive for
a particular landowner or applicant. The existing drainage network in
some areas may be capable of safely transporting slight increases in
flows without causing a problem or increasing flows elsewhere. This
must be demonstrated in order for the hardship option to be
considered. If an applicant or homeowner cannot meet the stormwater
standards due to lot conditions or if conformance would become a
hardship to an owner, the hardship option may be applied. The
applicant would have to plead his/her case to the Board of Supervisors
with the final determination made by the Township. Any landowners
pleading the hardship option will assume all liabilities that may arise
due to exercising this option. Cost or financial burden cannot be
considered as a hardship. A landowner or other applicant may consider
off-site management controls or making a contribution to the Township
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund as long
as the stormwater management controls are within the same
subwatershed.
H. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis: Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year storm event within
their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels
from erosion. Velocities shall be based upon criteria and
methodologies acceptable to the Township Engineer.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year storm event runoff without creating any
increased hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other hydraulic facilities
which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be
designed in accordance with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 regulations
(if applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-fiveyear
storm event runoff.
§ 143-23 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-23
1:284
§ 143-24. Calculation methodology.
(4) Water quality requirements defined herein must be met.
(5) Other than the water quality requirements in Subsection H(4)
above, post-construction peak rates shall not exceed the existing
peak rates for the respective subarea.
I. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites: For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions as
determined by the Township Engineer:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by this section; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%;
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface. In this case, calculations must be
provided that show the peak rate has not increased.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 143-24.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods.
The method selected by the design professional shall be based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for
drainage areas greater than five acres shall be permitted only upon
approval of Newtown Township.
Table 143-24.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS USACE Applicable where use of a full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to 5 acres if
approved by Newtown
Township and/or the
Township Engineer
§ 143-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-24
1:285
Table 143-24.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed by Applicability
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
Newtown Township and/or
Township Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms. Rainfall depths shall be according to
NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series. When
stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or water
quality functions, the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
C. The following criteria shall be used for peak rate runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used in determining the existing conditions flow rates shall
be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." Portions of a site having more than one viable tree
measuring a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or
greater per 1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded
where such trees existed within three years of application.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site including agriculture, bare
earth, and fallow ground shall be considered as "meadow in
good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates a
lower curve (CN) number or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods) as
listed in Tables F-1 or F-2 in Appendix F of this chapter.58
(2) For redevelopment sites, the ground cover used in determining the
existing conditions flow rates for the developed portion of the site
shall be based upon actual land cover conditions.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration (duration) and
storm events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14
partial duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times-of-concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
58.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-24 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-24
1:286
§ 143-25. Other requirements.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table F-1 in Appendix F of this chapter.59
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table F-2 in Appendix F
of this chapter.60
G. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5).
Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open channels
shall be consistent with methods and computations contained in the
Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15). Values for
Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table F-3
in Appendix F of this chapter.61
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using an acceptable
method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a
calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. Newtown
Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
A. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with
the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix H, DEP document
363-0300-001 "Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring," or
contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center
(www.wetlands.psu.edu/) or the Penn State Cooperative Extension
Office (www.extension.psu.edu/extmap.html).
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and
including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment must provide a minimum 1.0 feet of freeboard above the
59.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-25
1:287
§ 143-26. through § 143-30. (Reserved)
maximum pool elevation computed for the one-hundred-year proposed
conditions inflow through the emergency spillway. Freeboard is the
difference between the design flow elevations in the emergency
spillway and the top of the settled basin embankment. Should any
stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam
safety. Chapter 105 may require the passing of storms larger than onehundred-
year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the
drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year storm
event. The larger events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year) must also be
safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating
additional damage to any drainage structures, nearby structures, or
roadways.
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management
requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016)
and the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
(Publication No. 363-2134-008).
§ 143-25 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-26
1:288
ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Requirements
§ 143-31. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner, applicant, or
his/her agent has received written approval of a stormwater management
(SWM) site plan from Newtown Township and an adequate erosion and
sediment control plan review by the Delaware County Conservation District
unless the project qualifies for an exemption.
§ 143-32. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including sequencing items, calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the
maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and sediment
control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and
erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps by
title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to Newtown
Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized;
otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for review and shall be
returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the SWM
site plan, when applicable:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Delaware County Conservation
District.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution
controls.
(6) The SWM site plan application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee (Appendix C-1).62
(7) The SWM site plan checklist (Appendix C-2).63
62.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
63.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-32
1:289
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch-
by-thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that
meets the requirements for recording with the Recorder of Deeds of
Delaware County. If the Township's subdivision and land development
requirements are more stringent than this chapter, then the more
stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the map(s) shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, Township
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of slopes greater
than 25%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 25%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
§ 143-32 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-32
1:290
(17) Location of all open channels.
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan must be approved by
Newtown Township, and that a revised erosion and sediment
control plan must be submitted to the Delaware County
Conservation District for a determination of adequacy.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"I, (design engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Newtown Township Stormwater Management
Chapter." [Note: license stamp should be included here]
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the Township:
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with this
chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
Township stormwater system or facility that may receive runoff
from the project site.
§ 143-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-32
1:291
§ 143-33. SWM site plan submission.
The Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) District
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, loading ratios (guidelines presented
in the PA BMP Manual), and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan, if
applicable:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) DEP permits as needed:
(a) DEP joint permit application.
(b) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(c) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).
(3) PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
(4) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the Township subdivision and land development review process.
The process implementing the provisions in this chapter is illustrated in
Appendices D-1 and D-2.64
C. For projects that require subdivision or land development, the SWM
site plan shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary
plan submission where applicable for the regulated activity.
64.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-32 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-33
1:292
§ 143-34. SWM site plan review.
D. For regulated activities that do not require subdivision or land
development approval, see § 143-31, General requirements.
E. Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for
review in accordance with established criteria and procedures:
(1) Two copies to Newtown Township accompanied by the requisite
Township review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the Delaware County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Township Engineer.
F. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
A. SWM plans shall be submitted to the Township for review by the
Township Engineer for consistency with this chapter, other applicable
laws and regulations, and the respective Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan. Any plan found incomplete may not be accepted for
review and may be returned to the applicant. The Township Engineer
will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or land development
against the Township subdivision and land development provisions65
not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. The applicant shall respond to the Delaware County Conservation
District comments on the SWM site plan prior to being considered for
final approval by Newtown Township.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer will
notify the applicant and the Township in writing, with a copy to the
Building Code Official, within 30 calendar days, whether the SWM site
plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(1) If the Township Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter, the Township Engineer will forward a
letter of consistency to Newtown Township, and to the landowner
and other applicant.
(2) If the Township Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with the stormwater management
chapter, the Township Engineer will forward a letter to Newtown
Township, with a copy to the landowner and other applicant citing
the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the inconsistency or
noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 143-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-34
1:293
§ 143-35. SWM site plan revision.
compliance with the stormwater management plan. Any SWM site
plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised and
resubmitted when consistent with this chapter.
D. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Township
Engineer's letter stating that the SWM site plan is consistent with the
stormwater management chapter to the Delaware County Conservation
District. DEP and the Delaware County Conservation District may
consider the Township Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
E. Newtown Township will not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found by the Township Engineer
to be inconsistent with the stormwater management chapter. All
required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision or land development.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in this chapter
will be approved by the Township if the SWM site plan has been found
to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the Township
Engineer and Delaware County Conservation District, or without
considering the comments of the Township Engineer and Delaware
County Conservation District. All required permits from DEP must be
obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
G. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for final
approval. In no case will Newtown Township approve the record
drawings until Newtown Township receives a copy of an approved
declaration of adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable
permits or approvals from DEP or the Conservation District. The above
permits and approvals must be based on the record drawings.
H. Newtown Township's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that Newtown
Township signs the approved SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if constructed, record drawings of these facilities
have not been approved within this five-year time period, then
Newtown Township may consider the SWM site plan inconsistent or
noncompliant and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant by Newtown
Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with this chapter.
§ 143-34 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-35
1:294
§ 143-36. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plan.
An inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site plan may be resubmitted with
the revisions addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented
in writing. It must be addressed to Newtown Township, distributed
accordingly, and be subject to review as specified by this chapter. The
applicable Township review and inspection fee must accompany a
resubmission of an inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site plan.
§ 143-37. through § 143-40. (Reserved)
A. A revision to a submitted SWM site plan under review by the Newtown
Township for a development site that involves the following shall
require a resubmission to the Newtown Township of a revised SWM site
plan consistent with this chapter and be subject to review as specified
by this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities, or
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the SWM site plan as determined by the Township Engineer.
B. A revision to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant SWM
site plan shall be submitted to the Newtown Township, accompanied by
the applicable Township review and inspection fee. A revision to a SWM
site plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the Township
shall be submitted to the Township accompanied by the applicable
Township review and inspection fee.
§ 143-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-37
1:295

ARTICLE V
Inspections and Fees
§ 143-41. Inspections.
§ 143-42. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or other Township designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities as deemed appropriate by the Township
Engineer.
B. During any stage of work, if the Township Engineer or other Township
designee determines that permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan, the Township may revoke any
existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease-and-desist order
until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, as specified in
this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
shall be conducted by the Township Engineer or other Township
designee to confirm compliance with the approved SWM site plan prior
to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
A. A landowner or their developer shall be responsible for providing asbuilt
plans of all SWM BMPs included in an approved SWM site plan for
activities involving proposed impervious surfaces 1,000 square feet or
greater and for earth disturbances 5,000 square feet or greater. The asbuilt
plans and explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the Township within 90 days of the
completion of construction of the SWM BMPs.
B. As-built plans shall show the location and as-built conditions of all SWM
BMP structures and include the following information: impervious
surfaces included in the approved SWM site plan; topographic
contours; and existing, proposed, and built impervious surfaces shown
in the as-built drawings.
C. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a design professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications.
D. The Township Engineer will review the as-built submission for
consistency with the approved SWM site plan as well as actual
conditions at the project site. After receipt of the completion
certification by Newtown Township, the Township will conduct a final
inspection.
§ 143-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-43
1:297
§ 143-43. Township SWM site plan review and inspection fee.
§ 143-44. through § 143-45. (Reserved)
A. Fees have been established by the Township to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the Township. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of SWM site plan submission. A review
and inspection fee schedule has been established by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors based on the size of the regulated
activity and based on the Township's costs for reviewing SWM site
plans and conducting inspections. The Township may periodically
update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review
costs are adequately reimbursed.
B. The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
(1) Administrative costs (including solicitor's fee if applicable).
(2) Review of the SWM site plan by the Township and the Township
Engineer.
(3) Site inspections.
(4) Inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
(5) Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 143-43 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-44
1:298
ARTICLE VI
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 143-46. Performance guarantee.
§ 143-47. Operations and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater
controls and BMPs.
A. For all activities requiring submittal of a SWM site plan, the applicant
shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required facilities; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for by the Township's
subdivision and land development regulations.66
B. For other regulated activities, the Township may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. O&M plan.
(1) The SWM site plan shall include a BMP operations and
maintenance plan that describes how the permanent (e.g., postconstruction)
stormwater controls and BMPs will be properly
operated, inspected, and maintained.
(2) Establish access easements that include all significant stormwater
controls, conveyances, and BMPs, and indicate a fifteen-foot
perimeter area surrounding these features that will provide the
Township sufficient ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
(3) The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan, as applicable:
(a) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the
requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County, shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch-
by-thirty-six-inch sheets. The contents of the map(s) shall
include, but not be limited to:
[1] Clear identification of the location and nature of
permanent stormwater controls and BMPs;
[2] The location of the project site relative to highways,
Township boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks;
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 143-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-47
1:299
[3] Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or
others as appropriate;
[4] Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water
within the project site area;
[5] Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
[6] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of
the project site;
[7] Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
that would be added;
[8] Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings; and
[9] Access easement boundaries.
(b) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and
BMP will be operated and maintained;
(c) The identity and contact information associated with the
person(s) responsible for operations and maintenance;
(d) The name of the project site, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan; and
(e) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered
or removed only after approval by Newtown Township.
(4) The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan
for the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls
and BMPs, as follows:
(a) If a plan includes structures or lots that are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
controls and BMPs may, at the Township's discretion, also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Township;
(b) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
owner or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, the operations and
maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the landowner.
§ 143-47 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-47
1:300
(5) The Township will make the final determination on continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Township
reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and
maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls
and BMPs.
B. Township review of a stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
(1) The Township will review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with this chapter
and any permits issued by DEP.
(2) The Township will notify the applicant in writing whether or not the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
(3) The Township will require an as-built plan showing all constructed
stormwater controls and BMPs and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the approved operations and maintenance plan.
C. Adherence to an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
permanent stormwater control and BMP required by an approved
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
D. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately owned
stormwater controls and BMPs.
(1) Prior to final approval of the site's SWM site plan (including plans
for private facilities constructed under the simplified method), the
applicant shall sign and record an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Township covering all stormwater controls and
BMPs that are to be privately owned (refer to Appendix I).67 The
maintenance agreement shall be transferred with transfer of
ownership in perpetuity. The agreement shall be substantially the
same as the agreement in Appendix I of this chapter.
(2) Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township.
E. Stormwater management easements.
67.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-47
1:301
(1) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used
for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the
Township.
(2) Stormwater management easements shall be dedicated to the
Newtown Township by the landowner inspection and/or
maintenance access, the preservation of stormwater runoff
conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas, and for other
stormwater controls.
F. Recording of an approved stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
(1) The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls
and BMPs will be placed, constructed, implemented, or
permanently maintained, as described in the stormwater control
and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall record the
following documents with the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for
Delaware County, within 15 days of approval of the stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Township:
(a) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(b) Operations and maintenance agreements; and
(c) Required easements.
(2) The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to
comply with this section.
G. Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
(1) Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Control and
BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of
periodic inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the
deposit shall be determined as follows:
(a) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic
inspections performed by the Township, as estimated by the
Township Engineer, for a period of 10 years. The funds are to
be paid in a manner specified by the Township. After that
period of time, inspections will be performed at the expense of
the Township.
(b) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and
maintained by the Township, the deposit shall cover the
estimated costs for maintenance and inspections for 10 years.
§ 143-47 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-47
1:302
§ 143-48. through § 143-50. (Reserved)
The Township will establish the estimated costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant.
(c) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Township shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(d) If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as
a recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the Township
may reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund
deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreational
purpose.
(2) If at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether
publicly or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of
storm sewers or other storage facility, the unused portion of the
maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning
or demolishing the facility and connecting to the storm sewer
system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after
the costs of abandonment or demolition will be used for inspection,
maintenance, and operation of the receiving stormwater
management system.
§ 143-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-48
1:303

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 143-51. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater discharges into the
Township's municipal separate storm sewer system that are not
composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection C
below, and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including water line and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
(5) Air conditioning condensate;
(6) Water from routine individual residential car washing (excessive
mud, engine grease and grime, and similar pollutants are
prohibited in car wash water);
(7) Springs and water from crawl space pumps;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Lawn watering;
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
D. In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Township will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
§ 143-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-51
1:305
§ 143-52. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided above: Any
drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows
any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, wash
water entering the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks.
§ 143-53. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 143-54. Alteration of BMPs.
§ 143-55. (Reserved)
E. Upon notice provided by the Township to cease a discharge, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township,
to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by
the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
federal or state law.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
B. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to streets, storm
sewers, or roadside ditches except on a case-by-case basis as permitted
by the Township.
C. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas or
vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater management facility or BMP unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program without the written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater management facility or BMP or within a drainage
easement that would limit or alter the functioning of the facility or BMP
without the written approval of the Township.
§ 143-51 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-55
1:306
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 143-56. Right-of-entry.
§ 143-57. Enforcement.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the Township to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management facility or BMPs with respect to any aspect governed by
this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any stormwater control or BMP in the
Township such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
C. If the property owner or representative does not grant access to the
Township within 24 hours of notification, it will be a violation of this
chapter.
A. The Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding
compliance with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the
Township or its designee.
(1) A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file and
available for viewing at the site throughout the duration of
construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the
Township or its designee during construction.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for in the approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove
any control structure required by the SWM site plan pursuant to
this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to the approved SWM site plan.
(3) At the completion of a project and as a prerequisite for the release
of a performance guarantee, the owner shall:
(a) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer,
architect, surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all
stormwater facilities have been constructed according to the
plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(b) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings as required.
§ 143-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-57
1:307
§ 143-58. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
(4) After receipt of the certification by Newtown Township, a final
inspection shall be conducted by Newtown Township or its
designee to certify compliance with this chapter.
(5) An occupancy permit will not be issued unless the certification of
completion has been secured. The occupancy permit shall be
required for each lot owner and/or applicant for all subdivisions
and land developments in Newtown Township.
B. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
C. A notification of violation shall set forth the nature of the violation(s)
and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township or designee, and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
§ 143-57 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-58
1:308
§ 143-59. Violations and penalties.
§ 143-60. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, and the Township chooses to pursue enforcement action, the
Township will provide written notification of the violation. Such notification
will state the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified
will subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life, health, or property of
others.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the Board of Supervisors shall schedule a hearing to discuss
the noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health,
or property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Township Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit in accordance
with this chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine as established by the Township for each violation, recoverable with
costs.
D. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense
and the applicable fines are cumulative.
E. The Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 143-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-60
1:309
penalties will be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township
from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to
occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions
of this chapter.
§ 143-61. Appeals.
§ 143-62. through § 143-65. (Reserved)
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee
relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the Township
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Board of
Supervisors relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the
Delaware County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the
Township decision.
§ 143-60 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-62
1:310
ARTICLE IX
Appendixes
§ 143-66. Appendixes.
The following appendixes are incorporated into this Chapter 143 as
follows:68
Appendix A - Map
Appendix B - Simplified Approach to Stormwater Management for Small
Projects
Appendix C-1 - Sample Stormwater Management Site Plan Application
Appendix C-2 - Township Stormwater Management Site Plan Checklist
Appendix D - Implementation Flow Charts
Appendix E - Low Impact Development (LID) Practices
Appendix F - Stormwater Management Design Criteria
Appendix G - References
Appendix H - West Nile Virus Guidance
Appendix I - Stormwater Controls and Best Management Practices
Operations and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix J - Riparian Buffer Trail Guidelines
68.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 143-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-66
1:311
Chapter 145
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streetlight district — See Ch. 42.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 72.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 165.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 143-66 NEWTOWN CODE § 143-66
1:312
ARTICLE I
Curb and Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 905 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 145-1. Specifications.
§ 145-2. Notice to construct; failure to comply. [Amended 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. A uniform system of curbs, gutters and sidewalks along both sides of all
public highways in the Township is hereby established, such gutters to
be of a width of not less than 24 inches and such sidewalks to be of a
width of not less than four feet unless otherwise prescribed by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Such sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters shall be graded and constructed
by the owners of lots fronting thereon in accordance with such
specifications and at such grade as shall be prescribed by the Township
Engineer with the approval of the Board of Supervisors. No person shall
hereafter lay out, construct or build any such sidewalks, curbs and/or
gutters except in compliance with the terms of this article and at the
grade and in accordance with the aforesaid specifications.
C. The sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters so designated shall be graded and
paved at the grades and in accordance with the aforesaid specifications,
and such specifications and grades shall be kept on file in the office of
the Township Manager for the inspection of all persons interested
therein. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. Whenever the grading and paving of any such sidewalks, curbs and/or
gutters shall be prescribed by resolution in accordance with the
authority granted to the Board of Supervisors, written notice shall be
given by the Township Manager to the owners of the property affected
thereby, to grade and construct the sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in
front of their respective properties within a period of not more than 60
days from the service of the notice. Such written notice shall state and
contain the grade, lines and aforesaid specifications. The notice
provided for in this section may be served on the property owner or on
the known agent of the owner or upon the occupant of the property, or if
there is no agent or occupant known, the notice shall be posted on the
most public part of the property in front of which the sidewalks, curbs
and/or gutters are to be installed.
B. It shall be the duty of each owner to construct the sidewalk, curb and/or
gutter with such grading and filling as is necessary in front of the
respective properties within the period prescribed in § 145-2. Should
any property owner fail to comply with the requirements of this article
within the time specified in the notice, the Board of Supervisors shall
cause the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter in front of such property to be
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-2
1:313
§ 145-3. Notice of assessment; collection.
The cost of construction of such sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters, including
repairs thereto, shall be assessed by the Township Engineer. The Township
Secretary shall cause 30 days' written notice of the assessment to be given
to each party assessed by either service on the owner or on the known agent
or upon the occupant of the property, or if there is no agent or occupant
known, then the notice of assessment shall be posted on the most public
part of the property. If any assessment remains unpaid at the expiration of
the notice, it shall be the duty of the Township Solicitor to collect the same,
with interest from the time of completion of the same and a penalty of 10%
thereon, by action of assumpsit, or by a lien to be filed and collected in the
same manner as municipal claims. When an owner has two or more lots
against which there is an assessment for the same improvement, all of such
lots shall be embraced in one claim.
§ 145-4. Repair; costs.
All owners of property abutting upon public highways are hereby required
to keep the sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters in front of, along and upon
the premises or lots owned by them in good order and repair and at all
times to keep level with the sidewalks all water, gas, sewer or drain stop
boxes or vent boxes and to keep the sidewalk at all times free and clear
from obstruction for safe and convenient passage. In the event of failure
of the owner to do so, the Board of Supervisors may, upon notice of such
conditions, cause such sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters to be repaired or
any obstruction to be removed therefrom, and the cost and expense thereof,
together with a penalty of 10%, shall be charged against such property
owner in accordance with § 145-3.
§ 145-5. Grading and paving; notice. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
When the particular sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters are required from time
to time to be graded and paved under the authority granted by the Second
Class Township Code69 or any other law of the commonwealth, they shall
be designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and it shall be
the duty of the Township Manager to notify all owners of property affected
thereby, in accordance with the provisions of this article and such resolution
or resolutions.
§ 145-6. Permit required; fee; application.70
constructed in accordance with the requirements hereof, and the entire
expense of the construction thereof, including the grading and filling,
shall be charged against such properties.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: The curb and sidewalk permit form is on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
§ 145-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-6
1:314
§ 145-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
A. No sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters shall be laid, constructed, relocated
or repaired in front of any property abutting upon any highway or street
without first obtaining from the Board of Supervisors a permit therefor
before such work is begun, except where a sidewalk, curb and/or gutter
is directed to be laid and constructed or relocated by order of the Board
of Supervisors as hereinbefore provided. Before such permit is issued
and the work begun, a written application shall be filed with the
Township Manager, setting forth the character and the location of the
proposed sidewalk, curb and/or gutter. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
B. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property for whom
such work is to be done, and the applicant for a permit shall pay, before
the issuance of the permit, a permit fee in accordance with the fee
schedule set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
C. Before a permit is issued, the Township Engineer shall fix and establish
the location, grade and specifications of such sidewalk, curb and/or
gutter and deliver the same to the owner. When the permit is issued, the
owner of the property shall construct the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter
in accordance with the location, grade and specifications furnished as
aforesaid.
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-7
1:315

ARTICLE II
Street Opening and Excavation
[Adopted 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0771]
§ 145-8. Permit compliance.
§ 145-8.1. Permit application.
A. Except for emergencies, it shall be unlawful for any person,
partnership, association or corporation to open, break or excavate the
surface of the ground within the boundaries of any public highway,
street, sidewalk or other right-of-way for any purpose, including the
laying of pipes, sewers, drains, conduits, wires, cable, or other facilities
of any description, or for making connections therewith or repairs
thereto, or for the setting or planting of telegraph, telephone, trolley,
electric, light, antenna, or similar poles, or for repairs thereto, or for
any other purpose without first obtaining from the Township a street
opening permit and complying with the requirements of the permit, this
article, and all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
B. Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require that
emergency repairs be made, and the procurement of a permit prior to
the commencement of work is impracticable, an application for a street
opening permit must be filed and the proper fee paid within 48 hours
from the time when the emergency work first commenced, and
provided further that any person, partnership, association or
corporation performing the emergency work shall do so as though an
application for a permit had been filed.
A. Application for a street opening permit shall be on a form prescribed by
the Township and submitted to the Township in triplicate.
B. The application shall clearly state the purpose of the opening or
excavation and provide a schedule with the beginning and ending dates
of all planned work.
C. The application shall include a drawing indicating the location,
including depth, of any underground facility and/or the height of any
aboveground facility and showing the dimensions of the location of any
intended facilities, width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines,
and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
D. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the
schedule of fees established by the Township and any financial security
established by the Township to guarantee restoration of the right-ofway.
71.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. II, Street
Excavations, adopted 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-7, as amended.
§ 145-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-8.1
1:317
§ 145-8.2. Permit issuance.
§ 145-9. Construction standards.
E. The application must be signed by a person or by an authorized agent or
officer of a partnership, association or corporation, who shall have filed
with the Township financial security in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor to guarantee completion of the work and to save
harmless the Township from any and all damages to person or property
accruing by reason of the work for which a permit may be issued, and
who also shall have filed with the Township a certificate showing that
liability insurance is carried in the amount of $1,000,000. Upon
completion of the work, financial security shall be filed to guarantee
maintenance of the highway for a period of one year after closing the
opening or excavation.
F. Each application for a street opening permit shall be accompanied by
an application for a right-of-way permit as applicable per Article V of
this chapter.
A. Upon submission of all required application information, the Township
shall review such information and either grant or deny a street opening
permit within 30 days. The Township may impose conditions on the
permit regulating the times, locations, and manner of work to preserve
effective traffic flow, prevent hazardous road conditions and/or
minimize noise impacts.
B. A permit shall be valid for no more than 60 days from the date of issue
but may be extended by the Township upon request.
C. By the acceptance of a permit, the applicant agrees to assume any and
all liability for all or any damages to person or property accruing to the
public or to the Township which may or might result from the opening
or excavation.
D. The issuance of a street opening permit for the laying of pipe, conduit,
cable, wire, or other facility, or the erection of telegraph, telephone,
trolley, electric, light, antenna, or similar poles, shall constitute an
agreement on the part of the applicant that it will at any time thereafter,
upon notice from the Township, at its own expense, make such change
in location or construction of such facility as may be required.
E. The applicant agrees to file, upon completion of the work, as-built plans
in a form acceptable to the Township Engineer.
A. Longitudinal openings or excavations of a public highway, street,
sidewalk or other right-of-way shall require full depth restoration of the
trench and, at a minimum, milling and overlay of the cartway from the
curb (or edge of road) to the center line of the road. Additional milling
and paving up to the full width of the road may be required by the
Township, depending on the extent of the disturbance to the road.
§ 145-8.1 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-9
1:318
B. When three or more openings are made in a street within 100 linear
feet, the permit holder shall complete the permanent restoration of the
street for the entire length of the road between the ends of the furthest
openings, extending a minimum of the curbline (or edge of road) to the
center line of the road.
C. Unless otherwise specified, permanent highway pavement restoration
shall consist of, at a minimum, an eight-inch-thick bituminous concrete
base course and a two-inch-thick wearing course, in accordance with
the most recent Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards.
Additionally, edges of the excavation shall be cut back in binder and
wearing courses 12 inches, and the finished edges shall be hot-sealed
with an application of AC-20 bituminous sealer after placement of the
wearing course.
D. Except for emergencies, excavations are not permitted in streets that
have been built or overlaid within the previous three years, unless the
applicant agrees to overlay the full width of the excavated section with
1 1/2 inches of ID-2 or similar Superpave. In the case of transverse
crossings, the overlay shall extend a distance of 100 feet on either side
of the excavation.
E. No public highway, street, sidewalk or other right-of-way shall be
tunneled or undermined without written approval from the Township
Engineer.
F. All openings and excavations shall be backfilled and closed, to the
approval of the Township Engineer. All suitable excavated materials
shall be placed back in the opening without raising the surface of the
highway, street, sidewalk or right-of-way, due allowance being made for
any facilities placed in the opening or excavation.
G. All backfilling must be done with suitable materials, thoroughly
compacted, in uniform layers, not exceeding six inches in depth, and all
surplus material must be removed from the site.
H. The surface of the highway, street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way
shall be restored and a satisfactory guaranty shall be furnished, in
writing, guaranteeing that the restoration is done in accordance with
the requirements of the Township Engineer and will be maintained for a
period of one year from the date of completion of permanent
restoration. The restoration and maintenance shall be to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
I. Before commencing any work on a street opening or excavation, a
street opening permit holder shall fully comply by registering with
Pennsylvania's One Call System pursuant to 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., as may
be amended from time to time.
J. Each permit holder shall perform construction activity in a manner
consistent and in compliance with the detailed plans it submitted to the
§ 145-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-9
1:319
§ 145-10. Completion inspection.
§ 145-11. Violations and penalties.
Township and all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
K. All street openings or excavations made or obstructions created must
be properly marked by barricades and flashing amber lights so placed
as to indicate from the roadway in both directions the exact location
and limits of said work or obstruction.
L. Whenever a permit holder damages a public right-of-way or Township
property in the right-of-way, the permit holder shall restore such rightof-
way or property within a period of 30 days.
M. A street opening or excavation, any facilities installed, and any
equipment, materials or methods engaged in the work shall not
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the
Township.
N. All operating, maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be
thoroughly trained in the safe use of all equipment and materials and in
the safe operation of vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety
procedures required by applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
O. The permit holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all work areas so
that conditions that could develop into safety hazards are corrected
before they become a hazard.
P. Except in the case of an emergency, at least seven days prior to the
commencement of any street opening or excavation, the permit holder
shall notify nearby residents of such construction activity in a manner
which is satisfactory to the Township. The name of the permit holder
shall be clearly disclosed to such residents.
Q. All facilities shall be installed, where possible, parallel with existing
sewer, water, gas, electric, telephone, cable and other utility lines.
A. Upon completion of work on a street opening or excavation, the permit
holder shall give written notice of completion to the Township.
B. Upon notice of work completion, the Township shall inspect the work
and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions,
restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit. Where any
settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the permit holder fails to
rectify any such settlement or other defect within 30 days after written
notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and
shall impose upon the permit holder the cost thereof.
§ 145-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-11
1:320
A. Any person, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with
the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
pay a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000 for each and every offense.
B. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
for each day that a violation exists.
C. All fines and penalties imposed by this article are recoverable by
summary proceedings before any District Justice in the Township, and
all suits or actions at law instituted for the recovery thereof are to be in
the name and for the use of the Township.
§ 145-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-11
1:321

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Snow Removal
[Adopted 10-14-1974 as Article 733 of the Codified Ordinances of
Newtown Township 1973]
§ 145-12. Requirements; failure to comply; costs.
§ 145-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered as a separate violation and punishable as
such. Such fine and costs of prosecution shall be in addition to any costs
and expenses and additional amounts authorized by law which are imposed
as provided in § 145-12C.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of every property abutting or fronting
upon or alongside of any of the streets in the Township is hereby
required to remove or cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in
front of or alongside such property all snow or ice thereon fallen or
formed within 24 hours after the same has ceased to fall or to form, as
herein set forth. The following shall be responsible for conforming to
the requirements of this section: [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
(1) The owner where such property is occupied by such owner, in
whole or in part, or is unoccupied or is vacant.
(2) The owner or tenant or occupant thereof, where such property is
occupied by such tenant or occupant only.
(3) The owner thereof, where the property is a multiple-business or
multiple-dwelling property occupied by more than one tenant or
occupant.
B. For the purposes of this article, it shall be sufficient for a sidewalk to be
cleared for a path having a width of two feet.
C. In any case where any owner, occupant or tenant fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of Subsections A and B
within the time limit prescribed therein, the Township, by its proper
officials, may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the
sidewalk of such delinquents and to collect the costs and expenses
thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from such owner,
occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which sum shall be in addition
to any fine or penalty imposed under § 145-13.
§ 145-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-13
1:323

ARTICLE IV
Leaves and Vegetative Matter
[Adopted 9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-9]
§ 145-14. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant and/or occupant of any property
adjoining any street in the Township to do or allow any of the following on
the pavement of such street:
§ 145-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
A. The placement and/or piling of leaves, refuse and/or other vegetative
matter.
B. The burning of leaves, refuse and/or other vegetative matter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, shall be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. Such fine shall be issued in the form of a citation issued by a Township
police officer. The police officer issuing the citation shall deliver it to the
property owner or tenant having responsibility for the property, lawfully
present on the premises at which the violation is occurring at the time
the citation is issued; but if no person is lawfully present on the
premises at such time, then the police officer shall have a summons
sent by the Magisterial District Judge to the premises. Such citation
shall provide for the maximum fine described above for each offense
under § 145-14, recoverable in the proceeding before the Magisterial
District Judge. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation of this article.
§ 145-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-15
1:325

ARTICLE V
Right-of-Way Occupation and Obstruction
[Adopted 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0772]
§ 145-16. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this article, whether or not capitalized, shall be as follows:
CONSTRUCTION — The building, erection, or installation in, on or under
a right-of-way. It does not include maintenance or repair of equipment in
a right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the right-ofway.
When the construction activities include drilling, boring, driving or
tunneling or trenching under, across or through any improved right-of-way,
all work (including restoration as set forth in this article) shall be done
in accordance with the standards and provisions set forth in 67 Pa. Code
§ 459.8, as amended. Likewise, any aboveground construction shall be in
accordance with 67 Pa. Code § 459.9. All references in the foregoing code
sections to the "District Office," the "Department of Transportation" or
similar references shall be deemed to be references to the Township.
EMERGENCY — An interruption of service or a condition that poses a clear
and immediate danger to life or health or a significant loss of property.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION — The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good or better than its condition before
construction. (See the reference to 67 Pa. Code § 459.8 under
"construction" above.)
RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY — The surface and space in, on, above and below any
real property in which the Township has an interest in law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, any public highway, street, watercourse,
bridge, park, green space, or any other place.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT — A written authorization granted by
the Township to an applicant for use of the public rights-of-way in the
Township for the laying of pipes, sewers, drains, conduits, wires, cable,
or other facilities of any description, or for making connections therewith
or repairs thereto, or for the setting or planting of telegraph, telephone,
trolley, electric, light, antenna, or similar poles, or for repairs thereto, or for
any other purpose.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The services involving the
transmission of video, data and/or voice communications and/or content,
both active and interactive, and associated usage.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system used or to be used to
provide telecommunications services and, where permitted by Chapter 172,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown, shall also include towers,
cellular and wireless towers, facilities and equipment, as defined therein.
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. V, Right-of-Way
Permit, adopted 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05.
§ 145-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-17
1:327
§ 145-17. Permit compliance.
§ 145-18. Permit application.
A. Except for emergencies, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons,
partner, association or corporation to occupy or obstruct any portion of
a public highway, street, sidewalk, or other right-of-way with
equipment, facilities, supplies, goods, refuse, debris, or other materials,
or to allow the branches of trees, shrubs or hedges overhanging or
adjacent to the same to obstruct a clear passage of not less than 14 feet
above the traveled portion of the highway or street, of not less than 8
feet above the sidewalk, or of not less than the full width of any highway
or sidewalk, or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the
Township a right-of-way permit and complying with the requirements of
the permit, this article, and all applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations.
B. Whenever the exigencies of public health or safety require emergency
use of a right-of-way, and the procurement of a permit prior to such use
is impracticable, an application for a right-of-way permit must be filed
and the proper fee paid within 48 hours from the time when the
emergency use first commenced, and provided further that any person,
partnership, association or corporation conducting the emergency use
shall do so as though an application for a permit had been filed.
C. Any obstruction of a public highway, street, sidewalk or other right-ofway
shall be removed promptly by the owner of such obstruction or by
the adjacent property owner whenever written notice to remove the
same is given by the Township. If the owner fails to comply with such
notice, the Township shall remove the obstruction and charge the cost
thereof to the owner. In default of prompt payment, the Township may
file a municipal claim in the amount of such charges.
A. Application for a right-of-way permit shall be on a form prescribed by
the Township and submitted to the Township in triplicate.
B. The application shall clearly state the purpose and location of the
proposed or actual physical use or occupation of a right-of-way.
C. The application shall provide a description of the facilities to be
installed, work to be performed, or the use of the right-of-way; specific
information regarding the equipment to be placed or currently
maintained in the right-of-way; and whether the equipment will or does
have a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the right-ofway.
The Township may require such additional information as is
necessary to enable it to make a determination regarding the physical
use and occupation of the right-of-way by the applicant.
D. The applicant shall agree to assume all liabilities for all or any damage
to persons or property accruing to the public or to the Township which
§ 145-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-18
1:328
§ 145-19. Permit issuance.
may or might result from the occupying of a public highway, street,
sidewalk or other right-of-way.
E. The application must be signed by a person or by an authorized agent or
officer of a partnership, association or corporation, who shall have filed
with the Township financial security as shall be approved by the
Township Solicitor to save harmless the Township from any and all
damages to person or property accruing by reason of the work for
which a permit may be issued, and who also shall have filed with the
Township a certificate showing that liability insurance is carried in the
amount of $1,000,000.
F. The applicant for a right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and all
other regulatory approvals, permits or authorizations from the
appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required. The
applicant shall submit written evidence of its receipt of all such
approvals, permits or authorizations.
G. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances
or regulations of the Township or the Township's right to require
prospective or current right-of-way permit holders to secure and remit
payment for any and all required permits or authorizations, and nothing
herein shall be construed as permission or authorization to establish
telecommunications systems in any right-of-way in contravention of the
provisions of Chapter 172, Zoning.
A. Upon submission of all required application information, the Township
shall review such information as follows:
(1) For new applicants, the Township shall grant or deny applications
within 30 days. The Township may impose conditions on the permit
regulating the times, locations, and manner of work or construction
to preserve public safety.
(2) For existing permit holders in good standing applying for renewal
of a permit, the Township shall grant or deny such applications
within 15 days. The Township may impose conditions on the permit
regulating the times, locations, and manner of work or construction
to preserve public safety.
B. The Township shall review applications to determine whether a use
would have a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to a rightof-
way or would place an undue physical burden on a right-of-way.
C. In considering an application, the Township may use such outside
experts as it deems necessary. In the event the Township deems it
necessary to employ an outside expert with respect to a particular
application, the reasonable cost of such expert shall be borne by the
applicant.
§ 145-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-19
1:329
§ 145-20. Permit term; renewal; suspension.
D. By the acceptance of a right-of-way permit, the applicant agrees to
assume any and all liability for all or any damages to person or property
accruing to the public or to the Township which may or might result
from the opening or excavation.
E. The issuance of a right-of-way permit for the laying of pipe, conduit,
cable, wire, or other facility, or the erection of telegraph, telephone,
trolley, electric, light, antenna, or similar poles, shall constitute an
agreement on the part of the applicant that it will at any time thereafter,
upon notice from the Township, at its own expense, make such change
in location or construction of such facility as may be required.
F. The applicant agrees to file, upon completion of the work, as-built plans
in a form acceptable to the Township Engineer.
A. With the exception of temporary occupations or permits associated with
street openings of limited duration, a right-of-way permit shall be
issued for a period of one year. Permit holders shall apply for a renewal
of a right-of-way permit at least 30 days prior to its expiration.
B. The term of a right-of-way permit issued for a temporary occupation
shall be established by the Township based on the applicant's requested
duration as expressed in the application.
C. The term of a right-of-way permit issued in conjunction with a street
opening permit shall run with the term of the street opening permit.
D. The Township may suspend a right-of-way permit in the event any one
or more of the following has occurred:
(1) The permit holder shall have caused damage to Township property
or the right-of-way without the prior consent of the Township
(except in the case of an emergency) and without completing
proper restoration.
(2) The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right-ofway
has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
right-of-way.
(3) The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
article.
(4) The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards.
(5) The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
Township in accordance with the provisions contained in this
article.
E. If the Township has reason to believe that a permit holder has failed to
comply with a permit or this article, it shall notify the permit holder in
writing. The permit holder shall have 30 days to cure the violation,
§ 145-19 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-20
1:330
§ 145-21. Permit fees.
§ 145-22. Right-of-way management.
unless the Township reasonably determines that there is a threat to
public safety as a result of noncompliance, in which case the Township
may impose a shorter time period to cure the violation.
F. If a permit holder fails to cure a violation within the specified time
period, the Township shall be permitted to immediately suspend the
right-of-way permit. The permit holder shall be provided an opportunity
to be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Each new applicant for a right-of-way permit shall include with its
application an application fee. This fee shall be directly related to the
Township's costs in reviewing the application (excluding expert costs)
and managing the rights-of-way with respect to each permit holder.
Such costs in managing the rights-of-way include, but are not limited to,
inspection costs, administrative costs, costs of maintaining the rightsof-
way and costs of degradation of streets and right-of-way property.
This fee will not be refunded in the event the application is denied. If
the application is granted, the application fee will apply to the full term
of the right-of-way permit of one year. If the applicant applies for a
construction permit concurrently with the application for a right-of-way
permit, then the application fee contained herein shall apply to both the
right-of-way permit and the construction permit.
B. Each existing permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-of-way
permit shall include with its application an annual fee. Such costs
include, but are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs,
costs of maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of
streets and right-of-way property.
C. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit holder shall pay, within
30 days of the presentation of a statement, any extraordinary or
unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the Township as a result of
the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way, provided that the Township
notifies the permit holder of the expected expenses prior to them being
incurred and provides the permit holder with an opportunity to mitigate
such expenses. Examples of extraordinary or unusual costs include, but
are not limited to, the cost of obtaining and operating a backhoe, dump
truck or other heavy equipment used to repair the right-of-way,
overtime or special pay for police officers or other emergency services.
The statement of such expenses presented to the permit holder shall be
directly related to the Township's actual costs.
D. No additional fee is required for a limited-duration right-of-way permit
when the application is filed in conjunction with an application for a
street opening permit and the applicable fees for the street opening
permit are paid.
§ 145-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-22
1:331
§ 145-23. Construction standards.
A. The Township shall have the right to limit activity and the placement of
new or additional equipment, materials, or facilities in a right-of-way if
there is insufficient space to reasonably accommodate all requests to
occupy and use the right-of-way.
B. The Township shall consider requests for occupying and using a rightof-
way in the order of receipt of fully completed applications for rightof-
way permits.
C. The Township shall strive, to the extent possible, to accommodate all
requests but shall be guided by the physical condition of the right-ofway
and whether such use would have a detrimental effect on public
safety as it relates to the right-of-way.
D. The Township shall have the right, but not the obligation, to monitor
any equipment or activity located in a right-of-way.
E. A permit holder shall allow the Township to make inspections of any
part of the permit holder's equipment, material, or facilities located in a
right-of-way at any time upon three days' notice or, in case of an
emergency, upon demand.
A. Before commencing any work in a public right-of-way, a permit holder
shall fully comply by registering with Pennsylvania's One Call System
pursuant to 73 P.S. § 176 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
B. Each permit holder shall use the public right-of-way in a manner
consistent and in compliance with the application it submitted to the
Township and all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
C. All occupation of or activity in a public right-of-way must be properly
marked by barricades and flashing amber lights so placed as to indicate
from the roadway in both directions the exact location and limits of said
occupation or activity and at all times must be properly guarded.
D. Whenever a permit holder damages a public right-of-way or Township
property in the right-of-way, the permit holder shall restore such rightof-
way or property within a period of 30 days.
E. A permit holder's use of the right-of-way shall not endanger or interfere
with the safety of persons or property within the Township.
F. All operating, maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be
thoroughly trained in the safe use of all equipment and materials and in
the safe operation of vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety
procedures required by applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
G. The permit holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all work areas
and those portions of a right-of-way that it may occupy or obstruct so
§ 145-22 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-23
1:332
§ 145-24. Mailbox obstructions.
§ 145-24.1. Sign obstructions.
§ 145-24.2. Utility poles.
that conditions that could develop into safety hazards are corrected
before they become a hazard.
H. Except in the case of an emergency, at least seven days prior to the
commencement of any use of a right-of-way, a permit holder shall notify
nearby residents of such use in a manner which is satisfactory to the
Township. The name of the permit holder shall be clearly disclosed to
such residents.
I. All facilities shall be installed, where possible, parallel with existing
sewer, water, gas, electric, telephone, cable and other utility lines.
J. Whenever a permit holder shall cause damage to the right-of-way or to
the Township's property in the right-of-way, the permit holder shall
restore such right-of-way or property within 30 days, weather
permitting.
A. The Township shall not be responsible for the repair or replacement of
any mailbox placed within any public highway, street, sidewalk or other
right-of-way. However, to alleviate the possibility of damage due to
snowplowing and vehicular traffic, the following guidelines must be
complied with:
(1) Mailboxes must be erected so that the front of curbside boxes is set
back 12 inches from the face of the concrete curb. The structure
supporting the box must not encroach on this setback distance.
(2) The bottom of a mailbox must be between 42 inches to 48 inches
above the finished road surface.
(3) Mailboxes and the standards or posts upon which they are erected
must be designed and installed to withstand the impact of snow
hurled from a passing snowplow.
B. Mailboxes shall not overhang a public sidewalk.
A. No sign, other than official Township street or directional signs or
street banner signs, shall be erected or maintained within a public
right-of-way.
B. No sign shall project over any public sidewalk, nor shall any sign extend
beyond any property line.
A. All telegraph, telephone, trolley, electric, light, antenna or similar poles
erected within the boundaries of any public highway, street or other
right-of-way shall be lettered or stenciled with the initials of the owners
or with some other designation of ownership, together with a number
§ 145-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-24.2
1:333
§ 145-25. Liability and indemnification.
§ 145-26. Insurance.
§ 145-27. Reporting requirements.
for the same. A complete record showing the location and number of
each pole shall be filed by the owner or owners of said poles with the
Township annually on or before July 1.
B. The filing of an application and the issuance of a permit for the erection
of a telegraph, telephone, trolley, electric, light, antenna or similar pole
shall constitute an agreement on the part of the applicant that it will at
any time thereafter, upon notice from the Township, at its own expense,
make such change in location or construction of such pole as may be
required.
A. A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Township and its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising out of the
permit holder's use or occupancy of a right-of-way.
B. A permit holder shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Township in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the permit holder's use or occupancy
of a right-of-way.
C. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but
not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all
other costs of indemnification.
D. A permit holder shall not be required to indemnify and hold the
Township harmless for claims caused by the Township's negligence,
gross negligence or willful misconduct.
A. A permit holder shall, at all times during the life of a right-of-way
permit, carry and require its subcontractors to carry liability, property
damage, workers' disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and
amount as shall be determined by the Township as set forth in the
permit. A permit holder shall name the Township as an additional
insured on its liability insurance policies.
B. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days' notice to the
Township in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such
coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or
cancellation.
A. A permit holder shall annually provide the Township, upon application
for renewal of the permit, or upon request, the current maps of the
horizontal and vertical locations of its existing facilities and a summary
§ 145-24.2 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-27
1:334
§ 145-28. Permit transfer.
§ 145-29. Performance bond.
A permit holder may be required to obtain a performance bond in a
reasonable amount set by the Township based on the cost of the use or
occupancy of a right-of-way and the extent of the disturbance of such rightof-
way. The performance bond shall ensure the permit holder's faithful
performance of its construction, maintenance, and safety obligations. The
Township may reduce or cancel the bond requirement when construction is
completed.
§ 145-30. Permit termination.
In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Township, the
Township reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
of all additions and deletions of equipment in a right-of-way, unless
no changes have occurred in the previous year. If no changes have
occurred in the previous year, the permit holder shall so inform the
Township.
B. A permit holder shall submit to the Township such reasonable
information directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation
of the rights-of-way as the Township may request.
A. A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days'
prior written notice to the Township, provided that the transferee/
assignee agrees, in writing, to comply with all the obligations and
requirements contained in this article.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this article shall create or be
construed as granting any applicant or permit holder any interest in
real property, nor shall the issuance of any permit be so construed.
A. A permit holder fails, after 30 days' prior written notice, to comply with
any of the material provisions of the permit or this article.
B. A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts,
or is adjudged bankrupt.
C. All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an instrument to
secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit holder within 90 days
from such sale.
D. A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its
conduct or relations with the Township under the permit.
E. The Township condemns all of the property of a permit holder within
the Township by the lawful exercise of eminent domain.
F. The permit holder abandons its facilities.
§ 145-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-31
1:335
§ 145-31. Removal of facilities.
§ 145-32. Violations and penalties.
A. Upon expiration or termination of a permit, if the permit is not renewed,
the permit holder shall, upon 30 days' prior written notice to the permit
holder, remove its facilities from all occupied rights-of-way and shall
restore said areas.
B. If required removal is not completed within six months of notice to do
so, the Township may deem any property not removed as abandoned,
and the Township may remove it at the former permit holder's expense.
C. In the event a permit holder installed and/or operated any underground
conduit or pipe which is six inches or more in diameter, the permit
holder shall fill said conduit or pipe with material in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
D. During the term of the permit, if a permit holder decides to abandon or
no longer use all or part of its facilities, it shall provide the Township
with written notice of its decision at least 30 days prior to such
decision, which notice shall describe the equipment and its location.
E. The Township shall have the right to require a permit holder to remove
the facilities upon 60 days' prior written notice to the permit holder. If
such removal is not completed within six months of such notice, the
Township may remove it at the permit holder's expense.
A. Any person, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to comply with the
conditions or requirements of any permit granted in accordance with
the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
pay a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000 for each and every offense.
B. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
for each day that a violation exists.
C. All fines and penalties imposed by this article are recoverable by
summary proceedings before any District Justice in the Township, and
all suits or actions at law instituted for the recovery thereof are to be in
the name and for the use of the Township.
§ 145-31 NEWTOWN CODE § 145-32
1:336
Chapter 148
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 33.
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Slope conservation — See Ch. 134.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
138.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 172.
Fees — See Ch. A176.
§ 145-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-32
1:337

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 148-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Newtown Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance" and may be cited as the "Township
Subdivision Ordinance."
§ 148-2. Purpose.
This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., Act 247 of 1968,
as amended) and the Newtown Township Comprehensive Plan for the
following purposes:
§ 148-3. Interpretation; conflicts with other provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
A. To assure that development occurs only on sites suitable for building
purposes and human occupancy.
B. To assure that development of the Township is orderly, efficient,
integrated and harmonious with the environment.
C. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other proposed
streets, parks or other features of the Township.
D. To assure that adequate open spaces are retained for recreation and for
the proper distribution of population.
E. To ensure coordination of subdivision and land development plans with
Township, intermunicipal, county and commonwealth improvement
plans.
F. To eliminate or minimize adverse effects or damage to the environment
and biosphere and to encourage productive and enjoyable harmony
between man and his environment, consistent with the mandates of the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and Article 1, Section 27
(the Environmental Amendment), of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
G. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and standards.
H. To protect the social and economic stability of the Township and
conserve the value of land and buildings in the Township.
I. To create conditions favorable to the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of Newtown Township.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:339
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provision of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 148-4. Authority.
From and after the effective date hereof, the Board of Supervisors shall
have the authority to regulate subdivision and land development within the
Township.
§ 148-5. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the jurisdiction of subdivision and
land development within the Township limits. In order to aid the Board
of Supervisors in its consideration of subdivisions and land developments,
the Board of Supervisors hereby decrees that the Planning Commission of
Newtown Township shall serve the following functions:
§ 148-6. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent that such ordinances or parts of ordinances are
inconsistent herewith, except to the extent that they are made applicable to
projects by state statute because of the dates of the projects. However, no
such ordinance or parts of such ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed
by virtue of a more stringent interpretation as provided for in § 148-3.
§ 148-7. Compliance required; scope.
A. All plans upon submission to the duly authorized representative of the
Township shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review,
except minor changes to conditional use applications.
B. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors concerning approval, disapproval, modification and/or
conditions for approval of such plans.
C. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors concerning the interpretation of the granting of
modifications to provisions and standards of this chapter and related
ordinances.
A. No lot, tract or parcel of land shall be subdivided and no land may be
developed and no street or concomitant facility may be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the use
of occupants of buildings abutting or to abut on them, except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
Township ordinances and regulations.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to build, alter or repair
any building on land in a subdivision or land development may be issued
and no building may be erected in a subdivision or land development
§ 148-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-7
1:340
until a final subdivision or land development plan has been approved
and recorded in accordance with this chapter and, where improvements
are required, such improvements have been completed or their
completion has been assured by a performance guaranty consistent
with the terms of Article V of Act 247, as amended,73 and with §§ 148-15
and 148-50 of this chapter.
C. The scope of this chapter shall include all matters over which, by law,
the Township is authorized to exercise control by enactment and
enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to:
(1) All improvements within any tract undergoing subdivision or land
development.
(2) The improvement of public facilities, adjacent to any tract
undergoing subdivision or land development, including streets and
drainage facilities which border upon any such tract.
(3) The installation or enhancement of off-site improvements needed to
adequately serve the subdivision or land development.
D. The scope of this chapter shall not include dedications of rights-of-way
to the Newtown Township Sewer Authority or power and
communication lines where such dedications are made independently
and not related to any matter itself a subject of this chapter. The
dedication of rights-of-way, however, which provide for maintenance of
vehicle accessways for utilities, such as for the Philadelphia Suburban
Water Company, shall be included within the scope of this chapter.
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 148-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-7
1:341

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 148-8. Word usage.
As used in this chapter, words in the singular include the plural, and those
in the plural include the singular. Words in the present tense include the
future tense, words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter. The word "person" includes corporation, unincorporated association
and partnership, as well as an individual. The word "structure" includes the
meaning of "building," and each shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof."
§ 148-9. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
indicated below:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur from natural processes alone.
ACCELERATION OR DECELERATION LANE — A lane of a cartway intended
for use by vehicles entering, leaving or crossing a lane of forward travel
without interrupting the flow of traffic.
ACT 247 — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of July 31, 1968,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil, the raising and harvesting
of the products of the soil and the keeping, breeding and management of
livestock for use on the property or raised for sale and profit.
ALLEY — See "service street."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, including his heirs, successors
and assigns, who has filed an application for subdivision or land
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan, for the approval of
a land development plan and for the approval of a residential development.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded entirely by streets; by streets and
a watercourse; by streets and a railroad; by streets and the corporate
boundaries of the Township; by streets and public land or other park or
recreation area; or any combination of the above.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township.
BUFFER STRIP OR SCREEN — A strip of required yard space adjacent
to a use or facility within a property or to the boundary of a property or
district, on which is located a visual barrier of sufficient height and density
§ 148-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:343
to appropriately buffer or screen the property or use. Such barrier shall be
comprised of vegetative material unless specific authorization is given by
the Board for alternatives (e.g., berming, fences, walls, etc.).
BUILDING — Any structure for which a building permit is required by
the Newtown Township Building Code,74 i.e., any combination of materials
forming any structure which is erected on the ground and permanently
affixed thereto, designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering,
enclosure or structural support of persons, animals or property of any kind.
Any mobile home or similar structure constructed off-site prior to placement
on the ground is also a "building."
BUILDING ENVELOPE — An area formed by lines connecting all setback
lines on a lot, but excluding floodplains, rights-of-way and other areas where
building is prohibited.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (Figures 2, 3 and 4) — 75 An established line
within a property defining the minimum required distance between any
building which may be erected and the adjacent right-of-way line of the
street on which it fronts, to provide the front yard specified by Chapter 172,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel over the street.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE (Figure 5) — 76 An area of unobstructed vision at
street intersections defined by lines of sight for vehicles exiting onto a road,
measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the pavement edge to the center
of the approaching traffic lanes.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of occupants and residents of the
development, excluding streets, off-street parking areas, areas set aside for
public facilities and private yards.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership of real property, as defined in
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended,77 which
includes an undivided interest in a portion of a parcel, together with a
separate interest in a space within the parcel.
DETENTION BASIN (STORMWATER) — A reservoir designed and
constructed to retard the flow of surface water so as to reduce the rate of
stormwater runoff to predetermined amounts.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made the
improvements associated with a subdivision or land development. The
"developer" may also be the subdivider, as defined herein.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code.
75.Editor's Note: Figures 2, 3 and 4 are located at the end of this chapter.
76.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is located at the end of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 148-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-9
1:344
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes,
streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
excavation or drilling operation and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — A written contract between a subdivider
or developer and the landowner, on one hand, and the Township on the
other, specifying the agreed-upon conditions of development.
DRIVEWAY (LANE) — A private means of vehicle access from a public or
private street to a single lot; provided, however, that two contiguous lots
may share a common driveway where the applicable requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown
are complied with on each lot.
DWELLING — Any building or part thereof designated for or occupied for
residence purposes.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Activity resulting in the movement of earth or
stripping of vegetative cover from the earth, not including the clearing of
land for agricultural purposes.
EASEMENT — A permanent right for limited use of land. The owner of the
property shall have the right to make any other use of the land which is
not inconsistent with the rights of the easement beneficiary (e.g., utility,
drainage and public access easements).
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — A legal agreement between a property
owner and an appropriate conservation organization or governmental
entity, through which the property owner establishes certain use
restrictions over all or portion(s) of the property for conservation purposes.
ENGINEER (TOWNSHIP) — A professional engineer licensed in
Pennsylvania and duly designated by the Township to perform the duties of
engineer as herein specified.
FLOODPLAIN — The low areas adjoining and including a watercourse or
other body of water (such as a pond, marsh or lake) within the Township,
which are subject to inundation by a flood having a frequency of recurrence
of once in 100 years. The basis for delineation shall be as prescribed in
Chapter 91, Flood Damage Prevention.78
GUARANTY, MAINTENANCE — Any security which may be required of
a developer by the Township after final acceptance by the Township of
improvements installed by the developer. Such security may include, but
is not limited to, federal or commonwealth lending institution irrevocable
letter of credit or restrictive or escrow account.
GUARANTY, PERFORMANCE — Any security which may be required of
a developer by the Township in lieu of a requirement that certain
improvements be made before the Township approves the developer's
78.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-12, as amended, was repealed 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5. See now Ch. 172,
Zoning, Art. XXB, Flood Hazard District.
§ 148-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:345
subdivision plan or land development plan. Such security may include, but is
not limited to, those instruments cited above as acceptable for maintenance
guaranties.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material which is impenetrable and unable to
absorb water, including but not limited to buildings, structures and paved
areas (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
IMPROVEMENTS — Buildings for public or quasi-public use, streets, curbs,
gutters, streetlights and signs, water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewer mains
including laterals to the street right-of-way line, power and communication
lines, storm drainage lines, stormwater management structures, walkways,
recreational facilities, open space changes, shade trees, buffer or screen
plantings and all other additions to the tract that are required by ordinance
or necessary to result in a complete subdivision or land development in the
fullest sense of the term.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-5]
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion, including clearing, grading, filling, plowing or any
other earthmoving, as defined.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including,
for purposes of this chapter, the holder of an option or contract to purchase
(whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee
if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner,
or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4) — 80 A parcel of land, undivided by any street
or dedicated future street right-of-way. Such parcel shall be separately
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenants; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.79
C.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
80.Editor's Note: Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4 are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-9
1:346
described by metes and bounds, the description of which is recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County by deed description or
is described by an approved subdivision plan recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County.
LOT AREA — The area of land included within the title lines of a
lot.[Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a "corner lot" if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT, INTERIOR (FLAG) (Figure 4) — 81 A lot which does not adjoin a street
but is connected thereto by an access strip of required minimum width.
Minimum lot area and other dimensional requirements shall be those of
the applicable zoning district and shall be met on that portion of the lot
exclusive of the minimum access strip.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street right-ofway.
For interior lots, it is the line generally parallel to the street rightof-
way at the nearest point to the right-of-way where the lot attains the
minimum required lot width. Where a lot abuts more than one street, there
shall be a front lot line on each street.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial or collector street and a local street, with vehicular access
solely from the local street.
The following shall not be calculated in determining the minimum lot
area:
Seventy-five percent of any land lying within the Flood
Conservation District or located in wetlands.
(1)
Area within the title lines set aside as right-of-way for a street,
public or private utilities and all areas of easements, including, but
not limited to, storm drainage easements, sewage easements and
easements of access.
(2)
Fifty percent of the land containing very steep slopes and 25% of
the land containing steep slopes.
(3)
If the lot area (non-residential) as determined in accordance with. Subsection A(1)
and (2) above is three acres or more, then the area of steep slope
and very steep slope lands is not required to be deleted from the
lot area.
(4)
A.
In case of an interior (flag) lot, any portion connecting such interior
(flag) lot to a road or street shall not be included in the calculation of
minimum lot area.
B.
81.Editor's Note: Figure 4 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:347
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the street line or building setback line as specified. When the street
line is curved, the measurement shall be made along the arc which is on or
parallel to the curve of the street line.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-582]
MONUMENT — A permanent reference marker set by a registered land
surveyor at a property corner. It may be either a steel rod at least 5% inches
in diameter and 30 inches long or a steel reinforced concrete section having
a top dimension of at least four inches and tapering to six inches at the
bottom and a minimum length of 24 inches with a steel rod embedment.
PLAN —
AS-BUILT PLAN — A corrected final plan, showing dimensions and
locations of all streets and other improvements as actually constructed.
A.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan to accompany preliminary and final
plan submissions, including a natural resources inventory, impact
assessment and mitigation and maintenance proposals.
B.
FINAL PLAN — An exact and complete site design and layout plan and
improvements construction plan prepared by and signed and sealed by
a registered engineer to be recorded upon approval.
C.
IMPROVEMENTS CONSTRUCTION PLAN — A component of the
preliminary and final plan, prepared by a registered engineer, showing
the construction details of streets, drains, sewers, water supply
systems, bridges, culverts and other improvements as required,
including a horizontal plan, profiles and cross sections.
D.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — A plan showing the addition of lawns, trees,
plants and other natural and decorative features to a parcel as may be
required, including buffer areas, green areas and other plantings.
E.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A site design and layout plan and
improvements construction plan prepared by a registered engineer,
in less detail than a final plan and prepared for consideration prior
to submission of a final plan, but in sufficient detail to determine
feasibility of the use proposed in light of physical conditions and all
other matters made applicable by Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code
of the Township of Newtown, this chapter and any other applicable
Township ordinance.
F.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of the definition of "mobile
home park," which immediately followed this definition.
§ 148-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-9
1:348
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Newtown
Township.
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plan, if such change affects any street layout on such map
or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, including the
elimination of property lines to meet zoning requirements; or if it affects
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.
RETENTION BASIN (SILT) — A reservoir used to collect stormwater to
allow removal of sediment and debris from water by settlement.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, driveway, crosswalk, utility corridor or for any other public or
private purpose.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by water.
SEWAGE FACILITIES (SANITARY) —
RECORDED PLAN — A final plan, with accompanying documents as
required by this chapter, which has been recorded by the applicant in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County.
G.
SITE DESIGN AND LAYOUT PLAN — A component of the preliminary
and final plan, prepared by a registered engineer, showing property
lines, existing and proposed streets, lots, buildings, public areas,
drainage facilities, easements and other details pertinent to the
proposal.
H.
SKETCH PLAN — A plan submitted, at the applicant's option, for review
and discussion prior to application for preliminary plan approval,
including whatever information the applicant deems useful; for
example, a graphic plan, not necessarily to scale, showing approximate
tract boundaries and a general layout of lots, buildings and streets.
I.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE FACILITIES SYSTEM — The disposal of sewage
by use of septic tanks or other safe and healthful means, and generally
within the confines of the lot on which the use is located.
A.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE FACILITIES SYSTEM — A sanitary sewage
system in which sewage is carried from individual dischargers by a
system of pipes to one or more common treatment and disposal
facilities. Treatment and disposal may occur either on-site or off-site
and shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township.
B.
PUBLIC SEWAGE FACILITIES SYSTEM — A system for the collection,
treatment and disposal of sewage in which sewage is conveyed by
a system of pipes to a treatment facility operated by a political
C.
§ 148-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:349
SIGHT DISTANCE (Figure 5) — 83 The required length of roadway visible to
the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway to any
other point where the view is not obstructed by traffic or other obstruction.
STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STREET — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended for general
public use to provide means of movement for vehicles and pedestrians.
The word "street" includes the words "road," "highway," "thoroughfare" and
"way."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a landowner
unit (or agent authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision or
development of land. The "subdivider" may also act as the developer, as
defined herein.
subdivision or public authority and disposed of through means
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street serving a large volume of comparatively
high-speed and long-distance traffic, including all facilities classified
as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street designed and located to provide
means to drain traffic off local streets and to provide access for through
traffic between residential neighborhoods and districts within the
Township to major streets and/or a street used for access to
nonresidential properties, i.e., commercial, industrial, professional, etc.
B.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A local street intersecting another street at
one end and terminating at the other end by a permanent vehicular
turnaround.
C.
LOCAL STREET — A street primarily intended to serve and provide
access to the properties abutting thereon.
D.
PRIVATE STREET — A local street, serving only abutting lots, that is
not offered or required to be offered for dedication.
E.
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
F.
SINGLE-ACCESS STREET — A local street, including but not limited
to a cul-de-sac or loop design, which has only one point of intersection
with an existing road.
G.
83.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-9
1:350
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, for lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
Any subdivision of land for finance purposes shall comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Newtown. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street
or easement of access or residential dwellings, shall be exempted from this
definition. The term "parcel of land" includes air space and condominium
ownership.
SURVEYOR — A registered land surveyor licensed in Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER SUPPLY —
ZONING ORDINANCE — Chapter 172, as amended, of this Code.
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A safe, healthful and
adequate supply of water to a single user from a private well or spring
located on the land of the user.
A.
CENTRAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system for supplying water
from a common source or sources to all dwellings and other buildings
within a development. The water supply source may be located on-site
and/or off-site. A "central system" can be further described as either of
the following:
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which is owned by
a municipality, a public utility or a private company or political
subdivision and may be interconnected with other water supply
systems.
(1)
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which is
owned by a municipality, a public utility company or a private
company and which serves a single community or subdivision and
is not interconnected with any other water supply system.
(2)
B.
§ 148-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-9
1:351

ARTICLE III
Plan Procedure
§ 148-10. Review; decision.
§ 148-11. Sketch plan.
A. Final authority for approval or denial of approval for all preliminary and
final subdivision and land development plans shall be vested in the
Board of Supervisors. However, prior to action by the Board, all such
plans shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for review
and recommendation; provided, however, that the failure to make such
referral and/or the failure of the Commission to review and/or make a
recommendation with respect to any such plan shall not affect the
validity of any action taken by the Board with respect to any such plan.
B. Plans submitted for review shall be received by the Township no fewer
than 21 calendar days preceding the date of the review meeting in
which the review is to take place. The reviewing body may defer the
review of plans which have not been so received. The twenty-one-day
time limit may be waived at the discretion of the reviewing body.
[Amended 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-11]
C. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision on all applications and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following the
date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following
the date the application is filed, provided that should said next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application,
said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following
the day the application was filed or in accordance with any extensions
granted. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-5]
D. The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall be communicated
to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address
not later than 15 days following the decision or by the end of the period
specified in Subsection C hereof, whichever shall first occur, or in
accordance with any extension(s) granted. The form and content of the
decision shall comply with applicable requirements of Act 247, Section
508.84
A. Submission.
(1) All applicants for subdivision or land development may submit a
sketch plan to the Planning Commission for review prior to
submission of a formal application, except under the procedure for
conditional use amendments; however, submission of a sketch plan
is not mandatory. Submission of a sketch plan does not constitute a
formal subdivision or land development application.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 148-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-11
1:353
§ 148-12. Preliminary plans.
(2) Sufficient copies of the sketch plan may be submitted to the
Township for distribution to the Planning Commission and
Township Engineer prior to the Commission meeting at which the
sketch plan is to be discussed. The requisite number of copies shall
be as determined by the Board.
(3) The applicant is strongly urged to consult Chapter 134, Slope
Conservation, and Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,
prior to submission of the sketch plan in order to ensure that the
proposed subdivision or land development will be compatible with
the conservation and stormwater management plans to be
submitted.
B. Review.
(1) The Planning Commission shall, at a meeting with the applicant,
consider the suitability of the sketch plan for the development of
the land and its relationship to the harmonious extension of streets
and utilities, arrangement and density of housing and compatibility
of the plan with the Comprehensive Plan for the Township. Based
on this meeting, the Commission may give its comments to the
applicant; provided, however, that the failure of the Commission to
submit comments, in writing, shall not be deemed to be an approval
of any application or to vest any rights in the applicant.
(2) The applicant may, but need not, request further review of the
sketch plan by the Board. If further review is requested, the Board
may consider the sketch plan, may consider the written or other
comments of the Planning Commission, may meet with the
applicant and may advise the applicant as to the Board's comments
with respect to the sketch plan; provided, however, that the Board
is not required to review the sketch plan nor to submit comments to
the applicant if the Board does review the sketch plan.
(3) Nothing herein contained nor the failure of the Planning
Commission or the Board, or both, to proceed or act in accordance
with this section shall be deemed to be a decision with respect to
any subdivision or land development plan or to vest any rights in
the applicant.
A. Submission.
(1) All preliminary plans submitted pursuant to this chapter shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter and shall, in addition,
conform to such administrative regulations of the Board as may
have been adopted by the Board at any time or from time to time
and as shall be in effect and applicable to the submission at the
time such submission is initiated. All submissions shall be on the
§ 148-11 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-12
1:354
form promulgated by the Township for the submission of
subdivision or land development plans.
(2) Official submission of a preliminary plan to the Township shall
consist of:
(a) One copy of the application for review of preliminary
subdivision or land development plan on the form promulgated
by the Township for this purpose.
(b) Four copies of the preliminary plan and all supporting plans
and information or as required to enable proper distribution
and review, as required by the Board.
(c) Payment of application fees and deposit of escrow for plan
review cost.
(d) Completion of filing requirements of the Delaware County
Planning Commission.
(3) Copies of the preliminary plan and all required supplemental data
initially shall be submitted to the Township, together with the
required fees and escrow deposit established in accordance with
the terms of this chapter. The Township shall note the date of
receipt of the application, fees and escrow deposit. The application
shall not be deemed to be submitted until a complete application
and the required fees and the required escrow deposit all have
been submitted. The Township shall make a preliminary review of
the application. If the Township determines that the application is
defective on its face, it shall notify the applicant, who may request
the return of all submissions for the purpose of correction and
resubmission. A request for the return of all submissions shall be in
writing and shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application.
(4) Upon submission of a complete application, together with all
required fees and escrow deposits, the Township shall accept the
application, plans and other required materials as filed and shall
transmit the requisite number of copies of the plans and other
required materials to the Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer.
(5) Notice of the filing of the application by mail shall be given by the
Township at the expense of the applicant to all property owners
within 500 feet of the affected tract. The notice shall provide
instructions on how to view the Planning Commission and Board of
Supervisors meeting agendas and on how to register for email
notifications of future Planning Commission or Board of Supervisor
meetings to review the application. The failure to give mail or email
notices under this section shall not invalidate any action taken by
the Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors. [Amended
8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 148-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-12
1:355
B. Review.
(1) Township Planning Commission.
(a) The Planning Commission shall review all plans referred to it
and shall consider any recommendations made by any county
agency, the Township Engineer and any other persons or entity
who shall have submitted comments with respect to any such
application.
(b) After such review, the Commission shall send written notice of
the action of the Commission and the reasons therefor, citing
specific sections of statutes or ordinances relied upon, to the
Board of Supervisors.
(c) Unless extended by the Board of Supervisors or otherwise
specified by the Board, a preliminary plan approval shall expire
if the applicant fails to obtain final plan approval within 12
months from the date of the granting thereof. [Added
6-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-5]
(d) At its own discretion, before acting on any preliminary plan,
the Planning Commission may hold a hearing thereon after
public notice. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(2) Board of Supervisors.
(a) When a preliminary plan has been officially submitted to the
Board of Supervisors by the Planning Commission or 30 days
prior to the expiration of the review period, such plan shall be
placed on the Board's agenda for review and action.
[Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(b) In acting on the preliminary subdivision or land development
plan, the Board shall review the plan and the written
comments of the Township Planning Commission, Township
Engineer, County Planning Commission and all other reviewing
agencies, and comments from public hearings, if any, to
determine conformity of the application to the standards of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinance. The Board may
specify conditions, changes, modifications or additions to the
application which the Board deems necessary or appropriate
and may make a decision to grant preliminary approval subject
to such conditions, changes, modifications or additions, citing
appropriate ordinance provisions as prescribed in Subsection
B(2)(d) hereof.
(c) For the purposes of Section 508 of Act 247,85 the Township
Planning Commission is the body which first reviews any
application. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-586]
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 148-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-12
1:356
§ 148-13. Final plan.
(d) Whenever the approval of a preliminary plan is subject to
conditions, the written action of the Board as prescribed herein
shall:
[1] Specify each condition of approval, citing relevant
ordinance provisions in each case.
[2] Require the applicant's written agreement to the
conditions. Where the applicant's written concurrence is
not received within the time allotted, the Board shall be
deemed to have denied approval.
(e) At any time, the applicant with the concurrence of the
Township, may waive time limitation by doing so in writing.
The applicant may waive preliminary approval by the Board of
Supervisors and request that final approval be granted.
(f) At its own discretion, before acting on any preliminary plan,
the Board of Supervisors may hold a hearing thereon after
public notice. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
A. Submission.
(1) The final plan shall conform to the terms of approval of the
preliminary plan and to the most recent administrative regulations
adopted by the Board.
(2) The Board may permit submission of the final plan in sections,
pursuant to the terms of Section 508(4) of Act 247.87
(3) Official submission of a final plan to the Subdivision Officer shall
consist of:
(a) Four copies of the application for review of final subdivision or
land development plan on the form promulgated by the
Township for this purpose.
(b) A sufficient number of copies as specified on the application
form of the final plan and all supporting plans and information
to enable proper distribution and review, as required by the
Board.
(c) Payment of application fees and deposit of escrow for plan
review cost.
(4) Copies of the final plan and all required supplemental data initially
shall be submitted to the Township, together with the required fees
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of original Subsection (4),
dealing with written notice of the Board's decision, which immediately followed this
subsection.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 148-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-13
1:357
and escrow deposit established in accordance with the terms of
this chapter. The Township shall note the date of receipt of the
application, fees and escrow deposit. The application shall not
be deemed to be submitted until a complete application and the
required fees and the required escrow deposit all have been
submitted. The Township shall make a preliminary review of the
application. If the Township determines that the application is
defective on its face, it shall notify the applicant who may request
the return of all submissions for the purpose of correction and
resubmission. A request for the return of all submissions shall be in
writing and shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application.
(5) Upon submission of a complete application, together with all
required fees and escrow deposits, the Township shall accept the
application, plans and other required materials and shall transmit
the requisite number of copies of the plans and other required
materials to the Township Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer. In addition, copies shall be transmitted to such additional
persons or agencies as the Township shall determine.
(6) Notice of the filing of the application shall also be given to all
abutting property owners within 500 feet of the affected tract. The
notice shall provide instructions on how to view the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors meeting agendas and on how
to register for email notifications of future Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisor meetings to review the application. The failure
to give mail or email notices under this section shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Planning Commission or the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(7) Where the final plan is for a minor subdivision, the requisite
number of copies shall be submitted to the County Planning
Commission and other applicable agencies for their review.
B. Review.
(1) Township Planning Commission.
(a) The Planning Commission shall review the final plan submitted
and shall consider any recommendations made by any county
agency, the Township Engineer and any other persons or entity
who shall have submitted comments with respect to any such
application.
(b) After such review, the Commission shall send written notice of
the action of the Commission and the reasons therefor, citing
specific sections of statutes or ordinances relied upon to the
Board of Supervisors.
(c) At its own discretion, before acting on any final plan, the
Planning Commission may hold a hearing thereon after public
notice. [Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 148-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-13
1:358
(2) Board of Supervisors.
(a) When a written report on a final plan has been officially
returned to the Board of Supervisors by the Planning
Commission, such plan shall be placed on the agenda of the
Board of Supervisors for review and action. [Amended
8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(b) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation
and other supporting information, the Board shall, at one or
more regular or special public meetings, review the final plan
and shall, within the time limitations set forth herein below,
either approve or disapprove the plan.
(c) At its own discretion, before acting on any final plan, the Board
of Supervisors may hold a hearing thereon after public notice.
[Added 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
(3) Every final plan approval shall be subject to these further
conditions, and any others required by the Township:
(a) The applicant shall execute a subdivision and land
development agreement in accordance with § 148-14.
(b) The applicant shall provide a performance guaranty in
accordance with § 148-15.
(c) The applicant shall agree, if requested, to tender a deed of
dedication to the Township for such streets, any and all
easements for sanitary sewers, waterlines or storm sewers,
and improvements thereto, including street paving, sidewalks,
shade trees, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary and storm
sewers, manholes, inlets, pumping stations and other
appurtenances as shall be constructed as public improvements
and as are required for the promotion of public welfare, after
all streets, sidewalks, sewers and the like are completed and
such completion is certified as satisfactory by the Township
Engineer. The Board shall require that the applicant supply a
title insurance certificate from a reputable company before any
property is accepted for dedication by the Township.
(d) Whenever the applicant is providing open space as part of the
development, an easement in perpetuity restricting such open
space against further subdivision or development except
recreation facilities approved by the Township shall be
executed between the applicant and the Township or an
organization acceptable to the Township and shall run to the
benefit of the Township and lot purchasers in the subdivision or
land development.
(e) The applicant shall have applied for all required permits from
agencies having jurisdiction over ancillary matters necessary
§ 148-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-13
1:359
§ 148-14. Subdivision and land development agreement.
The applicant shall execute an agreement, to be approved by the Township,
before the final plan is released by the Board of Supervisors and filed on
record. Such agreement shall specify the following, where applicable:
to effect the subdivision or land development, such as
Pennsylvania Departments of Transportation and
Environmental Protection and the Public Utility Commission,
and no construction shall commence until final approvals of
permits shall be granted.
A. The applicant agrees that he will lay out and construct all streets and
other improvements, including grading, paving, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade
trees, storm and sanitary sewers, landscaping, traffic control devices,
open space areas and erosion and sediment control measures in
accordance with the final plan as approved, where any or all of these
improvements are required as conditions of approval.
B. The applicant guarantees completion and maintenance of all
improvements by means of a type of financial security acceptable to the
Township, as specified in § 148-15B.
C. The applicant agrees to tender a deed or deeds of dedication to the
Township in compliance with § 148-13B(3)(c), provided that the
Township shall not accept dedication of such improvements until their
completion is certified as satisfactory by the Township Engineer.
D. Whenever an applicant proposes to establish or continue a street which
is not offered for dedication to public use, the Board of Supervisors
shall require the applicant to submit, and also to record with the plan, a
copy of an agreement made with the Board on behalf of himself and his
heirs and assigns, and signed by him, and which shall establish the
conditions under which the street may later be offered for dedication
and shall stipulate, among other things:
(1) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the street
as a whole.
(2) That the Township shall not be responsible for repairing or
maintaining any undedicated streets.
(3) That the method of assessing repair and maintenance costs of
undedicated streets be stipulated and be set forth in recorded deed
restrictions so as to be binding on all successors or assigns.
(4) That, if dedication be sought, the street shall conform to Township
specifications or that the owners of the abutting lots shall, at their
own expense, restore the street to conformance with Township
specifications.
§ 148-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-15
1:360
§ 148-15. Performance guaranties.
A. The applicant shall deposit with the Township financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements (including both
public and private improvements) and common amenities, including but
not limited to streets, walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, shade
trees, stormwater detention and/or retention facilities, pipes and other
related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
improvements, buffer or screen plantings and, except as provided for in
Subsection F hereof, water mains and other water supply facilities, fire
hydrants and sanitary sewage facilities.
B. Financial security required herein shall be in the form of a federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letter of
credit, a restrictive or escrow account in such institution or with a
financially responsible bonding company or such other type of financial
security which the Township may approve. The bonding company may
be chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided that the
bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct
business within the commonwealth and stipulates that it will submit to
Pennsylvania jurisdiction and Delaware County venue in the event of
legal action, and that Pennsylvania law shall control the decision on the
issues.
C. The financial security shall provide for and secure to the public the
completion of all subdivision improvements for which such security is
being posted within one year of the date fixed in the subdivision plan
and subdivision agreement for completion of such improvements.
D. The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
the required improvements for which financial security is to be posted.
The cost of the improvements shall be established by submission to the
Board of Supervisors of bona fide bid or bids from the contractor or
contractors chosen by the party posting the financial security to
complete the improvements, or in the absence of such bona fide bids,
the costs shall be established by estimate prepared by the Township
Engineer. If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security shall be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedures.
E. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by section
or stage of development, subject to such requirements or guaranties as
to improvements in the future sections or stages of development as it
finds appropriate for the protection of any finally approved section of
the development and consistent with the terms of Act 247.
§ 148-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-15
1:361
§ 148-16. Recording of final plan.
Within 90 days of the applicant's execution of the subdivision and land
development agreement and performance guaranty, the final plan and
agreement shall be recorded by the applicant in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County or the approval may be voided by the Township
prior to recording.
§ 148-17. Construction prerequisites.
F. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
G. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Township to release
or authorize to be released, from time to time, such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Upon certification of the Township
Engineer, the Township shall authorize release by the bonding company
or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Township
Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed.
The Township Engineer, in certifying the completion of work for a
partial release, shall not be bound to the amount requested by the
applicant, but shall certify to the Township his independent evaluation
of the proper amount of partial releases. The Township may, prior to
final release at the time of completion and certification by the Township
Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the
aforesaid improvements as per Article VI.
A. No construction or land disturbance activities (not including soil or
percolation testing, well drilling or similar engineering or surveying
activities) shall be commenced until the applicant submits to the
Township Secretary a copy of the Recorder of Deeds' receipt for
recording of the final plan and copies of all required permits of other
governmental authorities.
B. No application for a building permit under Chapter 172, Zoning, of the
Code of the Township of Newtown shall be submitted and no building
permit under Chapter 172, Zoning, shall be issued for any building in
any subdivision or land development and no work shall be done on any
building in any subdivision or land development until the final plans for
the subdivision or land development have been approved and recorded
as provided for and until the terms of § 148-12A(1) hereof have been
satisfied. Further, where final subdivision or land development approval
§ 148-15 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-17
1:362
§ 148-18. Continuing validity of plans.
The continuing validity of any approval of plans in accordance with this
article shall be subject to those limitations established by Section 508(4) of
Act 247, as amended.88
§ 148-19. Plan amendments.
Major modifications of the approved plan, as determined by the Township,
shall be resubmitted and reprocessed in the same manner as the original
plan. All site disturbance activities shall cease pending approval of modified
plans.
has been conditioned upon the submission and approval of individual
lot grading plans for some or all of the lots, no building permit shall
be issued for construction on any such lot until this condition has been
complied with.
C. No water system or sewer system, including extensions to existing or
proposed Township systems or new systems employing sewage
treatment plants, shall be constructed prior to the issuance of
appropriate permits from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or from federal or local agencies, as
required.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 148-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-19
1:363

ARTICLE IV
Plan Content Requirements
§ 148-20. Sketch plan.
§ 148-21. Preliminary plan.
A preliminary plan shall be labeled "preliminary" and shall consist of and be
prepared in accordance with the following:
A. The applicant may submit whatever information he deems useful;
however, to facilitate the fullest possible response from the Planning
Commission, the applicant is encouraged to submit the following items:
(1) Name and address of the owner/applicant.
(2) Name and address of the applicant's engineer, surveyor, planner,
architect or landscape architect, if applicable.
(3) Approximate tract and lot boundaries and area expressed in square
feet or acres.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Location map.
(6) Streets on or adjacent to the tract.
(7) Topographical and physical features and existing structures.
(8) Proposed general lot, building and street layout.
(9) In the case of land development plans, proposed general layout,
including building locations, parking lots and open spaces.
B. The plan need not be exact scale, nor are precise dimensions required,
but it should be clearly titled "sketch plan."
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn to a scale that is adequate for proper
review, but in no case larger than one inch equals 10 feet and no
smaller than one inch equals 50 feet and shall not exceed 36 inches
by 24 inches in overall size.
(2) Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof, bearing
in degrees, minutes and seconds [errors of closure shall not be
more than one part per 10,000].
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered, dated and shall show its
relationship to the total number of sheets.
(4) The plan shall bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which
features are existing and which are proposed.
§ 148-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-21
1:365
(5) Revisions shall be recorded in the title block, numbered, generally
identified and dated.
B. Site design and layout plan.
(1) A key map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 800 feet,
showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all
streets and municipal boundaries existing within 500 feet of any
part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
(2) A series of maps, prepared according to Subsection A hereof, with
accompanying narrative as needed, showing the following:
(a) Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying
title.
(b) Name and address of the landowner of the tract or of his
authorized agent, if any.
(c) Name, address and seal of the registered engineer responsible
for the plan. If an architect or landscape architect collaborated
in the preparation of the plan, his or her name and address also
shall appear. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-5]
(d) Zoning information, including applicable district, lot size and
yard requirements, applicability of floodplain and slope limits
and any other limits, proof of any variance or special exception
which may have been granted and any zoning boundaries that
traverse or are within 200 feet of the tract.
(e) Tract boundaries showing bearings and distances.
(f) Total acreage of the tract.
(g) Original date of preparation, revision dates, North point and
graphic scale.
(h) The names of all owners of all adjacent lands, the names of all
proposed and existing subdivisions adjacent and the locations
and dimensions of any streets and/or right-of-way easements
shown thereon.
(i) The locations and dimensions of all existing streets, railroads,
sewers and sewage systems, aqueducts, water mains and
feeder lines, fire hydrants, gas, electric and oil transmission
lines, watercourses, buildings, sources of water supply,
easements and other significant features within the property or
within 300 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
developed or subdivided.
§ 148-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-21
1:366
(j) The locations and widths of any streets or other public ways or
places as shown upon an adopted local or county plan, if such
plan exists for the area to be subdivided or developed.
(k) Locations of all historically significant sites or structures on
the tract or on any abutting property.
(l) Locations of walkways and paths (pedestrian, equestrian,
bicycle, etc.) that have been in public use, with proposals for
their continued protection through easement or otherwise.
(m) A full plan of the land development or subdivision, showing
proposed lot layout with lots numbered in consecutive order
and individual lot dimensions sufficiently detailed to
demonstrate to the Township how the proposed layout
compares to zoning requirements and that it is mathematically
attainable within the parcel being subdivided, building
envelopes and location of areas to be subject to easements of
any kind. In addition, the plan for a land development or
subdivision shall show:
[1] Topographical and physical features including existing
structures and existing and proposed contours at two-foot
intervals.
[2] Where applicable, proposed building locations, location
and size of parking lots, proposed uses and details
required by Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Newtown, if any, provisions for access and
traffic control, locations of loading docks and provisions
for landscaping and lighting of the site.
[3] Floodplains, steep slopes, proposed grading and tree
removal.
(n) Where the plan submitted covers only a part of the applicant's
entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future street system
and lot layout of the unsubmitted part; the street system of the
submitted part will be considered in light of adjustments and
connections with future streets in the part not submitted.
(o) In addition to all other requirements, plans for cluster,
condominiums or multifamily developments also must include
the following information:
[1] Areas that are proposed to remain open or wooded.
[2] Recreational areas.
[3] Areas to be used for agriculture.
[4] Total dwelling units, number of buildings, proposed
density, total parking spaces and bedroom ratio.
§ 148-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-21
1:367
[5] Pedestrian walks.
(3) Where subdivision of land is proposed as a part of land
development because of the creation of mortgages encumbering
less than the entire tract, a plan shall be submitted showing the
proposed division of property, including easements for access to all
parcels not fronting on public roads. Such easements shall be a
minimum of 33 feet wide.
(4) All plans shall be accompanied by Planning Modules for Land
Development provided by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, including information with regard to the
means of sewage disposal and provision of water supply and, if onsite
sewage facilities are contemplated, certain test pit and
percolation test information as called for in § 148-38C in order that
the Township may have sufficient information to make a
determination if the proposed subdivision or land development
adequately meets the Township and commonwealth sewage
disposal requirements.
(5) A statement or certificate by the applicant indicating that the plans
are or are not in conformity with engineering, zoning, subdivision,
buildings, sanitation and other applicable Township ordinances and
regulations and, if they are not so conforming, the reasons for
requesting an exception. Proposed zoning changes shall note the
suggested locations of buildings in connection therewith.
C. Improvements construction plan.
(1) A statement describing proposed public improvements, including
streets and gutters, typical cross-section diagrams of proposed
street construction and the means of water supply and sewage
disposal to be provided.
(2) A plan or plans showing location, width and names of all proposed
streets and street rights-of-way, and including:
(a) All street extensions or spurs as are reasonably necessary to
provide adequate street connections and facilities to adjoining
developed or undeveloped areas.
(b) Profiles for proposed streets.
(c) Proposed and existing grade lines.
(d) All driveways or street connections to existing roads.
(e) Proposed minimum setback line for each street.
(f) Location and dimensions of playgrounds, public buildings,
public areas and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for public use.
§ 148-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-21
1:368
§ 148-22. Final plan.
Final plans shall be labeled "final" and shall conform in all important details
to preliminary plans, including any conditions specified by the Board. A final
plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance with the following:
(3) Where off-site or community sewer service is anticipated, the
preliminary design of sewage systems, including but not limited to
the location and grade of sewers, pumping stations, sewer mains
and, where applicable, sewage treatment plants, showing the type
and degree of treatment intended, treatment process units and the
size, capacity and location of treatment facilities. Also, if required
by the Board of Supervisors, the location of a proposed right-of-way
not less than 30 feet in width along natural watercourses and
where otherwise necessary in order to permit the Township to
construct and maintain sanitary and storm sewers as and when
required.
(4) Where off-site or central water service is anticipated, the
preliminary design of water distribution facilities, including the
size and location of water mains, fire hydrants, storage tanks and,
where appropriate, wells or other water sources.
(5) If land to be subdivided lies partly in another municipality, the
applicant shall submit information concerning the location and
design of streets, layout and size of lots and provision of public
utilities on land subject to his control within the adjoining
municipalities. The design of public improvements shall provide for
a smooth, practical transition where specifications vary between
municipalities. Evidence of approval of this information by
appropriate officials of the adjoining municipalities also shall be
submitted.
(6) Where the applicant proposes to install the improvements in
sections, he shall submit with the preliminary plan, pursuant to
Section 508(4) of Act 247,89 a delineation of the proposed sections
and a schedule of deadlines within which applications for final
approval of each section are intended to be filed.
(7) Location of easements for future improvements.
D. Conservation plan. A steep slope conservation plan, as required by
Chapter 134, Slope Conservation, shall be submitted concurrent with
the preliminary plan application.
E. Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan, as
required by Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be
submitted concurrent with the preliminary plan application.
A. Drafting standards.
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 148-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-22
1:369
(1) Subdivision or land development plans submitted for review for
final approval shall be clear, clean and legible black or blue on
white prints of the drawings. Upon completion of review, and for
signature by the Board, clean reproducible prints of all plans shall
be submitted. Space shall be provided for signatures by the
appropriate Township and county officials on the face of the plans.
(2) Final plans shall be on sheets not larger than 24 inches by 36
inches overall. Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the
maximum size prescribed above, final plans shall be drawn in two
or more sections, accompanied by a key diagram showing relative
location of the sections. The scale shall not be less than 50 feet to
the inch or more than 10 feet to the inch. All dimensions shall be
shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
B. Site design and layout plan. This plan shall include the following:
(1) All information required in § 148-21B(2).
(2) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every lot and boundary line and to produce such lines
upon the ground, including all dimensions, angles or bearings of
the lines and areas of each lot and of each area proposed to be
dedicated to public use. The gross and net area of the tract shall be
included.
(3) For residential subdivisions, the proposed building envelopes and
names of all streets. The Township shall assign house numbers
throughout the Township.
(4) Location of permanent reference monuments.
(5) A certificate of title showing the ownership of the land to be vested
in the developer or other applicant for plan approval.
(6) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgments of deeds and signed by the owner or owners of
the property, to the effect that the subdivision or land development
shown on the final plan is made with his/her or their free consent
and in accordance with his/her or their desires.
(7) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(8) A copy of such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as condition to sale,
together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed
which may affect the title to the land being subdivided. Such
restrictions shall be satisfactory to the Board.
§ 148-22 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-22
1:370
(9) Such certificates of approval or of preliminary approval by proper
authorities of the state as may have been required by the Board or
by this chapter.
(10) A certification by the registered engineer who prepared the plans
that such plans are in conformity with zoning, building, sanitation,
subdivision and other applicable Township ordinances and
regulations. In all instances where such plans do not conform,
evidence shall be presented that an exception or waiver has been
granted or authorized. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-5]
(11) The allocation of permissible disturbed area under § 134-8 of
Chapter 134, Slope Conservation, shall be plotted for each lot.
C. Improvements construction plan. Where public improvements other
than monuments and street traffic signs are to be required for any
subdivision or land development, an improvements construction plan
and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer shall
be filed, setting forth the nature and location of the work and all
engineering data necessary for completion of the work. The
improvements construction plan and specifications shall be subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors as a prerequisite to approval of
the final plan. The improvements construction plan shall conform to the
following standards and shall contain the following information:
(1) The improvements construction plan shall be at one of the
following scales:
Horizontal Vertical
1 inch = 40 feet 1 inch = 4 feet
1 inch = 50 feet 1 inch = 5 feet
(2) A plan is required of street profiles and cross sections,
incorporating the following information:
(a) The profile plan shall show the vertical section of the existing
grade and proposed grade along with the center line of the
proposed street. Right side and left side grading may be
required also when deemed necessary by the Township
Engineer. Where storm drainage, waterlines and/or sanitary
sewer lines are to be installed, they also shall be indicated on
the profile plan.
(b) Typical cross sections of street construction shall be shown on
the profile plan and shall indicate the following (See Figure 6
also.):
[1] Right-of-way width and the location and width of paving
within a right-of-way.
[2] Type, thickness and crown of paving.
§ 148-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-22
1:371
[3] The location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks to be
installed, if any.
[4] Typical location, size and depth of any other underground
utilities that are to be installed in the right-of-way.
(3) If required, a plan for location and type of streetlights to be
installed.
(4) Where off-site or community sewer service is to be provided, the
final design of all facilities, including but not limited to sewer
mains, manholes, pumping stations and sewage treatment
facilities. Plans and profiles shall be corrected to show as-built
dimensions of installations including location and elevations at
each manhole and sewer lateral to lots in respect to the lot lines
and street center line.
(5) Where off-site or central water service of water supply is to be
provided, the final design, including location and size of all water
service facilities within the subdivision, shall be shown, including
wells, storage tanks, pumps, mains, valves and hydrants. The plan
shall contain a statement that the placement of fire hydrants and
the components of the system have been reviewed by the Fire
Marshal and that both are compatible with the fire-fighting
methods and equipment utilized by local fire companies.
D. A conservation plan as stipulated in § 148-21D consistent with the
terms of preliminary plan approval and modified as necessary to reflect
the proposal for final approval.
E. A stormwater management plan as stipulated in § 148-21E, consistent
with the terms of preliminary plan approval and modified as necessary
to reflect the proposal for final approval.
(1) Drawings shall indicate capacity of basins for water storage or
sediment collection and shall indicate bottom elevations, top of
bank elevations, elevations of sediment within the basins before
cleaning is required, top elevations of water within the basins
during one-hundred-year storms and normal low-water elevations
within the basins.
(2) Drawings shall also indicate the property owner or organization
responsible for cleaning and maintaining each basin.
§ 148-22 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-22
1:372
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 148-23. General regulations.
§ 148-24. Land requirements.
§ 148-25. Blocks.
A. The following principles, standards and requirements shall be applied
by the Board in evaluating plans for proposed subdivision and land
development. In addition, the standards set forth in Chapter 172,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown for the particular
district in which the subdivision or land development is taking place
shall govern the layout of lots and/or design of buildings, parking lots
and other facilities.
B. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered
minimum standards and the requirements for the promotion of public
health, safety and general welfare. Where required to meet applicable
statutes, ordinances or regulations, higher standards may be required.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards specified in this article is
clearly impractical, the Board may modify or adjust the standards to
permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial
compliance with the objectives of this chapter.
A. Land shall be reasonably suited to the purposes for which it is proposed
to be subdivided or developed without substantial detriment to
neighboring properties. Proposed land developments shall be
coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community
as a whole may develop harmoniously.
B. No land shall be developed for residential purposes unless all hazards
to life, health or property from flood, fire and disease shall have been
eliminated, or if the development might cause such hazards, the plans
for the development shall provide adequate safeguard against such
hazards.
C. No plan of subdivision or land development shall be approved which
would result in lots or land use inconsistent with Chapter 172, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown in effect for the zoning district
in which the land to be developed or subdivided is located or which
would in any other way be inconsistent with Chapter 172, Zoning.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Topography.
§ 148-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-25
1:373
§ 148-26. Lots and lot sizes.
(3) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(4) Thoughtful and innovative design to create an attractive
community.
B. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,000 feet and, as far as
practicable, a minimum length of 500 feet. In design of blocks longer
than 700 feet, special consideration should be given to access for fire
protection, whether by an easement for emergency access or sidewalk
installation.
C. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are used.
A. Lot dimensions and areas and minimum front yard setbacks shall not be
less than as required by Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Newtown, as it may be amended from time to time.
B. Where both water and sanitary sewage disposal are provided by on-lot
facilities, lots for any purpose shall have a minimum area of 30,000
square feet and a minimum width, measured at the building line, of 150
feet.
C. Except as provided in Subsection G hereof, all lots shall have frontage
on and direct access to a street. Each lot shall have, in addition to the
required minimum width at the front lot line, sufficient free and
complete access to an existing street cartway or right-of-way to avoid
the need to cross any portion of another lot to reach such street.
D. In general, side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial
to street lines. The Township shall encourage flexibility in lot layout to
take advantage of the features of the site.
E. Any proposed lots abutting an existing or proposed arterial or major
collector street in the Township shall be designed as reverse frontage
lots having direct access only to a minor collector or local street, as
specified in Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of
Newtown. This requirement may be waived by the Board of Supervisors
if, in its judgment:
(1) The advantages to the Township of compliance with this standard
are outweighed by the applicant's resulting inability to meet other
requirements of this chapter or Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of
the Township of Newtown (minimum dimensions, layout of lots,
disturbance of slopes, etc.); or
(2) Compliance would be unreasonable or impractical due to the size of
the proposed development, configuration of the site, etc.
§ 148-25 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-26
1:374
§ 148-27. Streets.
F. House numbers and street names shall be assigned to each lot by the
Township in accordance with established Township methods.
G. Interior lots (flag lots).
(1) No more than one contiguous interior lot shall be formed. The
creation of such lots shall be minimized and limited to those
circumstances dictated by the configuration of the site; however,
the applicant shall not be permitted to use interior lot design to
avoid constructing or extending streets.
(2) No more than two lots in depth (i.e., one tier of interior lots) shall
be created along a new or existing street; access to any other lots
shall be taken directly from a new street.
(3) An interior lot shall have an access strip with a minimum width of
50 feet. The area of the access strip shall not be included in the net
lot area. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
(4) Minimum dimensional requirements shall be those of the
applicable zoning district and shall be measured on that portion of
the lot exclusive of the access strip.
(5) Front setback distance shall be measured from a line parallel with
the street located at the interior end of the access strip.
H. The building setback line from a street shall be increased for lots that
front on a cul-de-sac circle, if required, to a location where the
minimum lot width can be met by a straight line parallel with a tangent
line at the center of the arc at the street right-of-way of the property
line and in accordance with the provisions of § 172-110 of Chapter 172,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown. [Amended
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
I. All lots shall have a minimum lot width at the street line of 50 feet.
[Added 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
A. General requirements.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or
parts thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the
Township, including recorded subdivision plans, and shall be
classified according to their function.
(2) Proposed streets shall further conform to such Township and state
road and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and filed
as prescribed by law.
(3) Thoughtful and imaginative design of streets and their relationship
to the arrangement and shape of lots is required. Streets shall be
logically related to the topography so as to produce usable lots,
§ 148-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-27
1:375
curvilinear design, permitted grades, proper alignment and
drainage and to provide for adequate vision.
(4) Collector and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage
through traffic, but provisions for street connections into and from
adjacent areas may be required by the Board.
(5) If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to
permit resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be
provided as necessary, to be no less than the rights-of-way then
required for minor collector or local streets.
(6) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except when designed as culde-
sac streets.
(7) Continuations of existing streets shall be known by the same name,
but names for other streets shall not duplicate or closely resemble
names for existing streets in the region. Where streets continue
into adjoining municipalities, evidence of compatibility of design,
particularly with regard to street widths, shall be submitted. The
applicant shall coordinate such designs with both municipalities to
avoid abrupt changes in cartway width or in improvements
provided.
(8) New streets shall be laid out to continue existing streets at equal or
greater width, as regards both cartway and right-of-way, where
such continuations are reasonable and practical. Minimum widths
shall be as established in Article VI.
B. Major streets.
(1) Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed major collector or arterial street, the Board
shall require dedication of additional right-of-way to provide the
minimum right-of-way specified hereinafter, as well as marginal
access streets, rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots or such
other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with the major street and
separation of local and through traffic.
(2) Where warranted because of additional traffic, drainage or
comparable problems or conditions, both sides of the major street
are to be improved as a responsibility of the applicant himself or by
means of sufficient funds escrowed for use by the Township to
execute such improvement.
C. Cul-de-sac streets; single-access streets.
(1) Single-access (including cul-de-sac) streets permanently designed
as such may serve a maximum of 24 residential lots or 50
multifamily dwelling units. Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at
§ 148-27 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-27
1:376
the closed end with a paved turnaround having a minimum
diameter to the outer pavement edge of 80 feet and a minimum
diameter of 100 feet to the right-of-way line. When approved by
the Board of Supervisors, the maximum number of lots served
by a single-access road may be increased. At the discretion of
the Board, the minimum diameter of the cartway and the rightof-
way shall be increased on nonresidential streets where truck
traffic is anticipated. In such cases, the cartway diameter shall be
a minimum of 100 feet and the right-of-way diameter a minimum of
120 feet.
(2) The turnaround right-of-way of a cul-de-sac street shall be placed
adjacent to the tract boundary with a fifty-foot right-of-way width
provided along the boundary line to permit extension of a street at
full width, unless future expansion of a cul-de-sac street is clearly
impractical or undesirable. The small triangles of land beyond the
cul-de-sac to the boundary shall be so deeded that maintenance of
these corners of land shall be the responsibilities of the adjoining
owners until the roadway is continued.
(3) The turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac street shall have a maximum
slope of 5% across the diameter in any direction.
(4) Cul-de-sac streets with center-line slopes less than 2%, which are
level or nearly so across the diameter perpendicular to the center
line, shall be graded so that there is a minimum 2% fall in all
gutters around the cul-de-sac.
(5) Cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum length of 250 feet and a
maximum of 700 feet. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
D. Street width.
(1) The minimum right-of-way and cartway widths for all new streets in
the Township shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Principal arterial 80 PennDOT Standard
Minor arterial 60 PennDOT Standard
Major collector 60 36
Minor collector 50 27
Local 50 27
Private 50 24
(2) Minimum cartway widths, as established herein for most
residential streets, are not designed to accommodate on-street
parking. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be
required by the Board for the following purposes:
§ 148-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-27
1:377
(a) To promote public safety and convenience.
(b) To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas
of high-density residential development.
(c) To accommodate special topographic circumstances which
may result in cut/fill slopes extending beyond the standard
right-of-way width. These should be included within the rightof-
way in all circumstances to assure accessibility for
maintenance operations.
(3) Rights-of-way of lesser width than prescribed in this section shall
not be permitted.
(4) Subdivisions abutting existing streets shall provide, for dedication,
the minimum right-of-way widths for those streets in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
E. Street alignment. The design for all streets shall be consistent with
Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets, Publication 70, and to
Highway Design Manual, Part 2, of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, as amended, as these standards pertain to road
classification and design speed.
(1) All deflection of street lines shall be connected by use of horizontal
curves.
(2) To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum center line radii for
horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(a) Local streets: 250 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 750 feet.
(c) Arterial streets: 850 feet.
(3) A tangent section at least 50 feet long shall be required between
curves; however, a long radius curve shall be preferred in all cases
to a series of curves and tangents. Tangents of 100 feet shall be
required between reverse curves.
(4) Superelevation, commonly known as "banking a curve," shall be
required when curve radii are less than 600 feet on arterial or
collector streets.
F. Street grades.
(1) Center-line grades shall be not less than 1%.
(2) Center-line grades shall not exceed 7%, except that a maximum
grade of 10% on local streets may be permitted for short lengths
where natural contours provide conditions for minimal grading at
the steeper grade.
§ 148-27 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-27
1:378
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change, at a
rate no more abrupt than 1% change in grade per 25 feet along the
center line, provided that the following minimum sight distances
are maintained:
(a) Local street: 200 feet.
(b) Collector street: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial street: 400 feet.
(4) Vertical curves shall not produce excessive flatness in grade. There
shall be no dips, cross gutter bumps or humps in the paving.
(5) Under no conditions will maximum grades be permitted with
minimum vertical curve radii.
(6) The grade within 50 feet of any side of an intersection or the
perimeter of a turnaround shall not exceed 4%. The grade shall be
measured along the curb or flow lines of the streets.
G. Street intersections (Figure 5).90
(1) Right angle intersections shall be used in all cases whenever
practicable, especially when local residential streets empty into
collector or arterial streets. There shall be no intersection angle of
less than 60°, measured at the center line.
(2) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point.
(3) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with arterial streets
shall be located not less than 1,000 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line. Exceptions may be granted for those
cases deemed by the Board to require closer spacing.
(4) Streets entering from opposite sides of another street shall either
be directly across from each other or offset by at least 200 feet on
local and collector and 400 feet on arterial streets, measured from
center line to center line, except intersections with streets with
medial strips having cut throughs at prescribed separation
distances.
(5) Corner curb radii shall be according to the following schedule of
minimum lengths: local and collector streets, 25 feet; arterial
streets, 35 feet. Where streets of different functional classifications
intersect, the requirements for the higher classification shall hold.
(6) All necessary street name signs and traffic control signs shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to provide. Street name signs and
all other such signs shall be erected by the Township and shall be
90.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-27
1:379
paid for by the developer before the Township accepts dedication
of the street.
(7) Intersections shall be controlled by stop signs, except that one
through street may be designated for each intersection, or by
traffic signals as may be required under Subsection G(4) hereof.
(8) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections in
accordance with Figure 5.91 Within such triangles, no visionobstructing
object shall be permitted which obscures vision above
the height of 30 inches and below 10 feet, measured from a vehicle
10 feet back from the edge of the pavement of the street being
entered to the center line of the approaching traffic lane. In the
case of a four-lane street being intersected, it shall be measured on
the left from the intersecting street to the outside lane and on the
right to the median lane.
(9) In designing street intersections, the following sight distance
dimensions shall be used:
Clear Sight Triangle Length Along
Street Being Entered
(feet)
Two-Lane Street Four-Lane Street
Posted Speed of
Street Being
Entered Left Right Left Right
Stop street 75 75 75 75
25 mph 250 195 175 195
35 mph 440 350 300 350
45 mph 635 570 500 570
55 mph 845 875 785 875
(10) Greater sight triangle dimensions imposed by Pennsylvania
Department of Highways for intersections with the State Highway
System shall supersede the above.
H. Acceleration, deceleration and turning lanes (Figure 5).92
(1) Deceleration or turning lanes may be required by the Township
along existing and proposed streets whenever the Board feels such
lanes are required to meet reasonable safety needs, as determined
by a traffic impact study or otherwise by the Board.
(2) Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards:
91.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is located at the end of this chapter.
92.Editor's Note: Figure 5 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-27 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-27
1:380
§ 148-28. Traffic impact study.
The applicant for any residential subdivision or land development proposed
to contain 25 or more dwelling units or for any nonresidential land
development with a proposed occupancy of 50 or more persons shall, if
required by the Township, submit a traffic impact study by a qualified traffic
engineer. The study shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, an
analysis of expected traffic generation to, from and upon surrounding roads,
particularly showing a.m. and p.m. peak hours to existing traffic flow during
a normal business day, in comparison with that which is anticipated after
the proposed development is fully completed and, if applicable, upon the
completion of each stage. Existing traffic flows shall be based on actual
counts; if these are not available, then an alternative source shall be fully
cited and deemed acceptable by the Township. The study shall include
recommendations for lane changes, signalization, impact on other
intersections within the Township and other matters as applicable.
§ 148-29. Street construction (Figure 6).93
(a) The lane shall have a minimum width of 12 feet or, in the case
of intersections with state-owned highways, such width as is
required by the applicable regulations and standards of
PennDOT.
(b) The lane shall provide the full required lane width for the
entire length which shall be measured from the center line of
the intersecting road. In addition, there shall be a seventy-fivefoot
taper provided at the beginning of the lane so that traffic
can leave the main traveled lane smoothly.
(c) The minimum lane length shall be as follows:
Speed
(mph)
Minimum Deceleration Lane Length
(feet)
30 100
40 175
50 225
(3) Acceleration lanes are required only when the need is indicated by
a traffic impact study. The design shall be as per the
recommendation of the Township Engineer. As necessary, a paved
taper shall be provided for right-hand turns.
A. All materials entering into the construction of streets and the methods
of construction and drainage shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of the latest revision of PennDOT Specifications, Form
408.
93.Editor's Note: Figure 6 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-29
1:381
B. Subgrade.
(1) The area within the limits of the proposed road surface shall be
shaped to conform to the line, grade and cross section of the
proposed road.
(2) All unsuitable subgrade materials shall be removed or stabilized.
(3) Encroachment into wet or swampy areas shall be minimized; where
unavoidable, such areas shall be permanently drained and
stabilized.
(4) Fill material shall be suitable and thoroughly compacted for its full
width in uniform layers of not more than eight-inch thickness.
(5) The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling with a
minimum ten-ton roller and/or a sheepsfoot roller for each six-inch
layer over the entire width of the embankment being placed.
(6) Backfill for trenches within the cartway and curb area shall be
thoroughly compacted prior to application of the base course.
C. Base course.
(1) In residence zoning districts, the following base course shall be
used:
(a) Base course shall consist of six inches of PA 4A crushed stone
placed on a two-inch initial layer of screening and rolled
uniformly and thoroughly with the ten-ton roller. Rolling shall
continue until the material does not creep or wave ahead of the
roller wheels.
(b) After compaction of the base stone, dry screenings shall be
applied in sufficient quantity to fill all of the voids in the rolled
stone base. A vibratory roller, of PennDOT approved design,
shall be used in this step of construction, and rolling shall
continue until all voids are filled. Small areas around inlets and
manholes that cannot be reached by the vibratory roller shall
be compacted with a mechanical tamper or whacker.
(c) When the stone surface is tight and will accept no more
screenings, all loose screenings shall be broomed from the
surface to expose the top 1/2 inch of the aggregate over at
least 75% of the road.
(2) In Industrial, Commercial and Special Use Zoning Districts and in
the construction of all collector roads, a bituminous concrete base
course shall be used and shall consist of six inches of compacted
2-A modified stone subbase material on an approved subgrade with
four inches of bituminous concrete base course.
(3) No base material shall be placed on a wet or frozen subgrade.
§ 148-29 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-29
1:382
§ 148-30. Private streets.
Private streets may be permitted by the Board only under unusual
conditions or circumstances and shall conform to the following:
D. Bituminous surface. Bituminous material shall be ID-2 hot mix applied
at a minimum temperature of 300° F. with two inches of binder course
and 1 1/2 inches of surface course after compaction, except streets in
Subsection C(2) hereof shall have two inches wearing course. Where
streets with a base course conforming to Subsection C(2) hereof are
constructed, no binder course shall be required.
E. Bituminous concrete general standards. Bituminous concrete shall not
be applied in wet, cold or rainy weather and not before March 15 or
after November 15 of any year. Bituminous concrete shall be applied at
a rate and manner to prevent cold joints. The previous course shall be
approved by the Township before subsequent courses are applied.
Forty-eight hours prior notice shall be given to the Township Manager
and Township Engineer before any pavement operation shall begin. The
Township shall have the right to refuse to allow construction to proceed
because of weather conditions.
F. Pavement cross slope. The completed road surface shall have a uniform
slope of 1/4 inch per foot from edge to center line, except that on
superelevated curves, this slope shall not be less than 1/4 inch per foot
and shall extend up from the inside edge to the outside edge of the
paving.
G. Grading and shoulders. Roadways shall be graded for not less than
eight feet beyond the edge of the proposed paving on each side. This
grading width shall be increased as necessary where sidewalks and/or
planting strips, guardrails or shoulder swales are to be provided.
Shoulders shall be graded with a slope of one inch per foot. Beyond the
limits of this grading, banks shall be sloped to prevent erosion, but this
slope shall not exceed two horizontal to one vertical, with tops of slope
in cuts rounded. However, the Board of Supervisors, at its discretion,
may preserve valuable trees within rights-of-way.
H. A typical roadway cross section for residential street is contained in
Figure 6.94
A. There shall be a recorded agreement between the applicant and the
Township specifying that such streets shall not be offered for dedication
and shall not be accepted by the Township unless constructed to
Township standards then existing at the time of offer of dedication.
B. Lots fronting on private streets shall meet the requirements of the
Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown, as
amended, with regard to lot width and setbacks.
94.Editor's Note: Figure 6 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-31
1:383
§ 148-31. Driveways.
A. Private driveways shall be provided for all residences and the
construction shall be in accordance with the regulations of this section
in order to provide safe access to Township and state roads, to eliminate
problems of stormwater runoff and to assure sufficient area for and
access to off-street parking.
B. All driveways shall contain a straight length of at least 40 feet,
measured from the cartway edge of the intersecting street and
extending inside the lot. The segment between the cartway and the
edge of the right-of-way shall be paved.
C. Within the legal right-of-way of the intersected street or for a distance
of at least 14 feet from the edge of the shoulder, whichever is greater,
the driveway shall have a grade of 5% or less. The remainder of the first
40 feet of the driveway shall have a grade of 12% or less.
D. Driveways to single-family residences shall intersect streets at angles of
no less than 60°. All other driveways shall intersect streets at right
angles, where practicable, and in no case less than 75°. The angle of
intersection is the acute angle made by the intersection of the center
line of the driveway with the center line of the road.
E. Driveway entrances into all nonresidential, single-use properties shall
be no less than 20 feet in width, shall not exceed 36 feet in width at the
street line, unless provided with a median divider, and shall be clearly
defined by use of curbing. The curbs of these driveway entrances shall
be rounded with a minimum radius of 15 feet where they intersect a
street.
F. The intersection of any driveway with a street shall be at least 40 feet
from the nearest end of the paving radius of that street's intersection
with other streets.
G. Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all driveway entrances and
shall be shown on plans. Within such triangles, no object greater than
2 1/2 feet in height and no other object that would obscure the vision of
the motorist shall be permitted. The legs of such triangles shall be at
least 100 feet in either direction for residential driveways, and at least
300 feet for nonresidential driveways, measured from a point 12 feet
back from the edge of the cartway of the intersecting street. Greater
distances may be required if warranted by specific circumstances.
Whenever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs within any
proposed building setback line, such a portion shall be shown on the
final plan of the subdivision or land development and shall be
considered a building setback line.
H. The street gutter line, wherever possible, shall be maintained as a
paved swale. It shall have a maximum depth of four inches and a
minimum width of 24 inches. A pipe may only be placed under the
driveway entrances when approved by the Township Engineer. The
§ 148-31 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-31
1:384
§ 148-32. Alleys and service streets.
§ 148-33. Parking areas (Figure 7).95
Parking areas shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 172, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown and the Building Codes,96 including
handicapped parking, and shall conform conceptually with standards
contained in Figure 7.
§ 148-34. Sidewalks and paths.
acceptability of such a pipe shall be governed by the gutter depth on
each side of the driveway. The minimum pipe size under a driveway
shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
I. Driveways shall be graded so that, wherever possible, surface drainage
will be discharged to the owner's property; otherwise, adequately sized
pipes, inlets and/or headwalls shall be installed and gutter
improvements shall be made to direct surface drainage into the road
drainage system and not onto the paving of the intersecting road.
J. A common driveway shall serve no more than two lots.
A. Alleys and service streets are not permitted in residential
developments.
B. Alleys and service streets serving commercial and industrial
establishments and multifamily developments shall be permitted only if
the Township deems it necessary. Such alleys shall have a paved
cartway of at least 20 feet and right-of-way width of 30 feet. Where
necessary, corners shall have a radius of 20 feet or a triangle using the
chord of a fifteen-foot radius, cut back to permit safe use by large
vehicles. If it is impossible for an alley to go through a block, the alley
shall be provided with a turnaround at its closed end of a design
approved by the Township Engineer.
C. Emergency access routes, for use by ambulances, fire trucks or similar
vehicles, shall be provided when the Board determines that the size,
configuration, density and/or circulation pattern of a given tract
warrants special access routes of this kind. The applicant shall design
these routes in consultation with the Township Engineer and shall use
semipervious surfaces wherever possible.
A. Sidewalks generally shall be required for nonresidential and
commercial areas, but the Board may waive the sidewalk requirement
for low-density residential areas.
B. When provided, sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete, air-entrained, with a minimum twenty-eight-day strength of
95.Editor's Note: Figure 7 is located at the end of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 148-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-34
1:385
§ 148-35. Curbs.
3,000 pounds per square inch, with a minimum width of four feet and a
thickness of four inches on a four-inch base course except at driveway
crossings when the sidewalk thickness shall be increased to six inches
with reinforcement. The Board may require wider pavements in highdensity
areas and in commercial areas. The location of sidewalks
relative to planting strips shall be at the discretion of the Board.
C. All sidewalks shall be wood-float finished and cured according to A.C.I.
Curing Procedures (Ref. Standard 301-66, Chapter 11). Concrete shall
be placed on a minimum of two inches of clean, crushed stone. Welded
wire mesh (WWF#6) shall be placed in all sidewalks at driveway
crossings and the thickness of the concrete increased to six inches.
D. Ramps for handicapped persons shall be provided at all intersections
and other locations involving grade changes. Ramps shall be
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation design standards.
E. At the discretion of the Board, with recommendations from the Planning
Commission, a system of bicycle, equestrian and/or pedestrian paths for
public use generally unrelated to and separate from streets shall be
established and secured by dedication or easement. Such paths shall be
consistent with any existing plans specified by the Township, so as to
encourage the formation of an interconnecting trail network both
within and beyond the Township. Such paths normally shall not exceed
10 feet in width and, at the option of the applicant, shall be located
adjacent to existing or proposed lot lines or in such manner as to
minimize any obstruction to the development. Existing paths may be
relocated if a connection with a path on an adjoining property is thereby
established.
F. To facilitate circulation, pedestrian walkways may be required to serve
the interior of developments. Such walkways shall be a minimum of four
feet in width and shall be of a durable surface satisfactory to the Board
of Supervisors. Where the walks are not within a street right-of-way, a
separate right-of-way at least 10 feet wide shall be designated on the
subdivision plan. As appropriate, the walks shall be maintained by the
homeowners' association, when the walks traverse common areas, or
by the abutting property owners, when the walks traverse existing lots.
A. Curbs shall be provided along all streets and at the intersections
thereof except when waived by the Board upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission in order to preserve existing trees or other
similar reasons. Where curbs are not provided, stabilized shoulders
shall be provided and the ground shall be graded to a slope of 1/2 inch
to one inch per foot to the right-of-way line and either seeded or sodded
to such standards as shall be prescribed by the Board. In cut areas, this
slope shall be toward the curb; in fill areas, it shall be away from the
curb.
§ 148-34 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-35
1:386
§ 148-36. Streetlights.
§ 148-37. Monuments.
Permanent survey monuments shall be set in all subdivisions by a registered
surveyor and shall be indicated on all land development and subdivision
plans. Monuments shall be set at all property corners and at the intersection
of property lines with floodplain boundaries. Concrete monuments with iron
B. Unless constructed as per Subsection C hereof, all curbs shall be
constructed of concrete in accordance with applicable standards, as
amended, of the PennDOT specifications, Form 408, Section 630, for
unreinforced concrete curbs. Curbs shall be 18 inches deep, battered
type, and shall have an eight-inch face above the finished grade.
Concrete must develop a minimum strength of 3,500 pounds per square
inch in 28 days. Expansion joints shall be used every 40 feet, at each
point of radius and at each end of a curb depression. Contraction joints
shall be provided at ten-foot intervals. All curbs shall be spray cured,
according to the American Concrete Institute (A.C.I.) Curing
Procedures (Ref. A.C.I. Standard 301-66) upon stripping, which shall
not occur within 24 hours after concrete is placed. Any uncontrolled
cracks or spalling shall require replacement of that entire curb section.
All curbs shall be doweled into precast storm drainage inlets in two
places on each side of the inlet. Brick inlets shall contain a shelf for
curbs to bear on. No part of a sanitary sewer manhole shall be located
within three feet of a curb face.
C. The applicant may install granite curbs, provided that their
construction conforms with standards set forth in the above-referenced
specifications, Form 408, Section 634, for granite curbs types A or C.
A. Streetlights may be required, if deemed necessary by the Board, for
areas including but not limited to the following:
(1) At street intersections and where sidewalks are provided; and
(2) At all other spots considered hazardous by the Township, including
frontages on West Chester Pike and in nonresidential areas.
B. The style, type and manufacturer of streetlights shall be subject to
Township approval and shall be operated and maintained by a public
utility on streets which may be dedicated to the Township.
C. Lighting shall be in conformance with IES Lighting Handbook on
Roadway Lighting and generally accepted engineering practices. An
average maintained illuminance of 0.4 footcandles on the cartway and
0.2 footcandles on sidewalks shall be a minimum design criterion.
Streetlighting plans may be reviewed by a Township-appointed
electrical engineer for adequacy of design, the cost of which shall be
paid by the developer.
§ 148-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-37
1:387
rod embedments shall be used at points where property lines intersect
street right-of-way lines.
§ 148-38. Sewage treatment and disposal.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each property shall be connected to a public sewer system if
accessible by gravity flow.
(2) Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
(3) Where on-site sanitary sewage facilities are to be utilized, each lot
so served shall have proper soils and shall be of a size and shape to
accommodate the necessary length of tile fields at a safe distance
from and at a lower elevation than the proposed building(s) to
facilitate gravity flow in accordance with Township and state
regulations and shall be so plotted.
(4) The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal shall be in
accordance with the Township's officially adopted Act 537 Sewage
Facilities Plan.97
(5) The rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be complied with and procedures
set forth therein followed. In addition, the administrative rules of
the Township adopted pursuant to the Sewage Facilities Act, as
amended,98 shall also be adhered to and are adopted herein by
reference.
(6) Where electric power is required for the operation of a sewage
disposal system, an emergency power system or storage facility
shall be provided.
B. Sanitary sewage disposal system(s).
(1) All lots which cannot be connected to a public or community
sanitary sewage disposal system in operation at the time of
construction of a principal building either shall be provided with an
on-site sanitary sewage disposal system meeting the design
standards of Title 25, Chapter 73, Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and
Township standards or the applicant shall guarantee (by deed
restriction or otherwise), as a condition of the sale of each lot or
parcel within the subdivision, that such facilities can be installed by
the purchaser of such lot or parcel.
(2) In all other cases, the applicant shall provide a complete
community or public sanitary sewage disposal system. The design
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 148-37 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-38
1:388
§ 148-39. Water supply.
and installation of any public system shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer and Board of Supervisors. The
design and installation of any community system shall be subject
to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township, and such systems shall be further
subject to satisfactory provisions for the maintenance thereof. A
copy of the approval of such system, where applicable, shall be
submitted with the final plan.
(3) Where studies by the Township indicate that construction or
extension of sanitary trunk sewers to serve the property being
subdivided appears probably within 10 years, the Township shall
require the installation and capping of sanitary sewer mains and
house lateral connections, in addition to the installation of
temporary, individual, on-site sanitary sewage disposal systems.
Individual house lateral connections on capped sewer systems shall
extend to the right-of-way line. It shall be filed with the Township
with regard to the sewer line locations prior to finalizing sewer
design. Design of capped sewer systems shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township.
C. Soil percolation test requirements.
(1) Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all subdivisions
wherein building(s) at the time of construction will not be
connected to a functioning public or community sanitary sewage
disposal system. Deep hole test pits are recommended as a further
means of guaranteeing suitability of a site.
(2) Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Delaware County Health
Department, by either a registered professional engineer or
registered sanitarian and/or the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act99 sewage enforcement officer, at a rate of one per lot.
(3) The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed in relation
to the physical characteristics of the tract being subdivided and of
the general area surrounding the tract. The lot layout in the final
plan shall be based on this analysis.
(4) The backfilling of all percolation test holes and related test pits on
the tract shall be accomplished within the time period specified in
Section 750.7(b)(8) of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
537, as amended).100
99.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
100. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.7(b)(8).
§ 148-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-39
1:389
A. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure that:
(1) Each dwelling unit and each commercial or industrial building in all
subdivisions and land developments hereafter granted approval
shall have an adequate supply of potable water for domestic use.
(2) Each unit or building shall have an adequate supply of water for
purposes of fire protection.
(3) In each case where water is to be supplied to a subdivision or land
development by means of a central water supply system, such
system shall meet Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Township of Newtown's or other governmental
agency's minimum standards controlling water storage and
production capabilities for domestic and fire use for the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of all Township residents affected.
(4) The provisions of this section do not apply to those portions of the
production and supply system which are under the control of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
B. Where the applicant proposes that individual on-site water supply
systems shall be utilized within the subdivision, he shall be responsible
either to install such facilities or to guarantee (by deed restriction or
otherwise), as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within the
subdivision, that the facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such
lot or parcel. Individual water supply systems shall be designed and
installed in accordance with all applicable standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Wherever feasible, the subdivision shall be provided with a central
(public or community) water supply system. The design and installation
of a public system shall be subject to the approval of the Township; the
design and installation of a community system shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory provision for
the maintenance thereof. Standards and materials for the construction
of any central water supply system shall meet or exceed those
requirements described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. Where a permit is
required by such Department, it shall be presented as evidence of such
review and approval before construction commences.
D. Each central water supply system shall be either municipally owned or
under the regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission
(PUC).
E. Wherever a public or community water system is provided, fire
hydrants suitable for the coupling of equipment serving the Township
shall be installed as specified by the Insurance Services Office of
§ 148-39 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-39
1:390
§ 148-40. Utilities.
All other utility lines, including but not limited to electric, gas, streetlight
supply, cable television and telephone, shall be placed underground.
Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance with the engineering
standards and specifications of the Township, municipal authority or other
public utility concerned. All such underground utilities shall be put in place,
connected and approved before the streets are constructed, where such
utilities lie under the proposed cartway and before any person is permitted
to occupy any building to be served by such utilities.
§ 148-41. Recreational land requirements. [Amended 4-13-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-4; 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-10]
Pennsylvania. Location of hydrants shall be approved by the Township
and shall conform to the following:
(1) Generally, all fire hydrants shall be located on an eight-inch line or
a looped six-inch line. Where a dead-end line is required to contain
a fire hydrant, the portion of the line between the main loop and the
hydrant shall be an eight-inch minimum diameter.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be spaced in a development so that all proposed
building(s) will be no more than 600 feet from the hydrant
measured along traveled ways.
(3) To provide for fire fighting, all community water systems shall
provide a minimum of 500 gallons per minute at a residual pressure
of 20 pounds per square inch for a two-hour period.
F. If the applicant proposes that the subdivision or land development be
served by a central water supply system, the applicant shall submit a
technical report entitled "Proposed Public Water Supply Study" as
evidence of sufficient water supply quality and quantity. The contents of
this study shall include those specific items as described in the Public
Water Supply Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Where the water supply system occurs under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission, the water
supply study also shall include those items of information required by
the Public Utility Commission.
G. If the applicant proposes that the subdivision or land development shall
be supplied by a utility regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, the applicant shall submit evidence that line extension and
connection to such utility is feasible and that the applicant shall bear
the necessary costs for such line extension and connection.
A. Intent.
(1) The intent of this section is to provide for adequate recreational
lands and facilities to serve residents and persons employed in the
Township. This section recognizes that residential, commercial,
§ 148-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-41
1:391
and industrial uses create demand for local recreational lands and
facilities and enables the creation and maintenance of recreational
lands and facilities to meet this demand.
(2) In reviewing a plan for subdivision or land development, the
Township Planning Commission shall consider the open space and
recreational needs of the additional residents and/or employees
proposed by the development and shall discuss its findings and the
further requirements of this section with the applicant as it deems
necessary in the public interest.
B. Recreational use areas; applicability and scope. This section regulates
the amount, location, and type of land to be provided in conjunction
with residential, commercial, and industrial uses for recreational uses
and facilities. Active recreational use areas shall be provided in
conjunction with all residential, commercial and industrial development
in the Township and shall be in the form of designated lands on the
same tract as the development, except as provided for in Subsection F,
Fee in lieu of recreational use areas.
C. Amount of land required for recreational use areas.
(1) Recreational use areas shall be provided on a pro rata basis as
follows:
Use
Amount of Recreational Use Area
Required
(square feet)
Residential 1,000 per dwelling unit
Retail and general
commercial
150 per 275 square feet of gross floor
area
Office 150 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Industrial 150 per 520 square feet of gross floor
area
(2) The above-referenced recreational use areas are in addition to any
other recreational or open space area requirements of Newtown
Township's ordinances.
D. Characteristics of recreational use areas. Recreational use areas
required in accordance with this section shall meet the following
standards:
(1) Recreational use areas shall be so designated on any submitted
plans, and the plans shall contain a notation stating, "recreational
use areas shall not be separately sold and shall not be further
developed or subdivided." A restriction shall be placed in the deed
of the property indicating the above-referenced requirement.
§ 148-41 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-41
1:392
(2) Recreational use areas shall be contiguous to the development, not
separated by existing streets, and shall not be a part of any lot
within the development.
(3) Recreational areas shall be consistent with Newtown Township's
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Recreational use areas shall not consist of:
(a) Floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes or very steep slopes;
(b) Lands designed for retention/detention basins in connection
with required stormwater management, or land which contains
fuel, power, or other transmission lines, whether underground
or overhead.
(c) Lands that are located within any required setback.
(5) At least 50% of the open space shall have a natural slope of 5% or
less that existed at predevelopment and not contain wetlands or
contain areas located in the Flood Conservation District.
(6) Recreational use areas shall contain not less than 20,000 square
feet, have a minimum width of 75 feet and shall be configured so as
to be able to accommodate active recreation facilities.
(7) Recreational use areas shall be interconnected with similar uses
and open space areas on abutting parcels, including pedestrian
trails and pathways, whenever possible.
(8) Recreational use areas shall be free of structures, except those
related to active recreation.
(9) Recreational use areas shall be provided with safe and convenient
access to the developed area of the tract by adjoining frontage on
streets or easements capable of accommodating pedestrian,
bicycle, and maintenance vehicle traffic. Recreational use areas
shall contain appropriate access improvements and shall be
provided with perimeter parking areas where appropriate.
E. Ownership and maintenance of recreational use areas. Property owners
shall maintain recreational use areas. Alternative provisions for
ownership and maintenance of recreational use areas may be pursued
and shall be made in one of the following manners:
(1) The Township may accept dedication of the recreational use area or
any interest therein for public use and maintenance, but the
Township need not accept a dedication of the recreational use area.
(2) With permission of the Township, and with appropriate deed
restrictions in favor of the Township and in language acceptable to
the Township Solicitor, the developer may transfer the fee simple
title in the recreational use area or a portion thereof to a private,
§ 148-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-41
1:393
not-for-profit organization among whose purposes is the operation
of recreational facilities, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona
fide recreational organization with a perpetual existence;
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
retransfer or reverter of title to the Township in the event that
the organization becomes unable or unwilling to continue to
carry out its functions; and
(c) A maintenance agreement accept able to the Township is
entered into by the developer, the organization, and the
Township.
(3) The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for
the ownership and maintenance of the recreational use area
consistent with the requirements for unit owner's association found
in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101
et seq. If such an organization is created, the deeds for the
recreational use areas and for all individual lots within the
development shall contain the following requirements in language
acceptable to the Township Solicitor:
(a) Such organization shalt not dispose of recreational use areas
by sale or otherwise except to the Township unless the
Township has given prior approval. Such transfer shall be
made only to another organization which shall maintain the
recreational use areas in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter;
(b) The organization and all lot owners within the development
shall agree to maintain the recreational use areas. If private
ownership fails to do so, the Township may proceed to maintain
the recreational use areas and may assess and lien the
properties within the development accordingly;
(c) All lot owners shall be required to become members of the
organization and shall pay assessments for the maintenance of
the recreational use areas, which may be adjusted as required
and may provide for professional management.
F. Fee in lieu of recreational use areas.
(1) If provision for lands as designated recreational land areas on the
same tract as the development conforming to the above-referenced
criteria is not feasible, a fee shall be paid to the Township for the
purpose of providing recreational uses elsewhere in the
municipality. The fee shall be based on the number of dwelling
units for residential use and on gross floor area for nonresidential
use. The fee may be adjusted by the Township from time to time.
§ 148-41 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-41
1:394
§ 148-42. Easements.
§ 148-43. Stormwater management.
(2) The fee in lieu of providing the recreational land areas on the same
tract as the proposed subdivision or development shall be based
upon the proportionate area of the following schedule of open
space impact cost factors per acre.
Zoning District
Impact Cost
(per acre)
R-1, R1-A $160,000
R-2 $80,000
R-3, R-4 $40,000
O, C-1, C-2 $160,000
I $120,000
SU-1, SU-2 $160,000
A. Where sewer facilities are intended for dedication, the requirements for
easement shall be in accordance with the Township and/or Township
Sewer Authority standards. Easements shall be similarly established as
necessary for other utilities. Easements shall be 40 feet wide for
construction and 25 feet wide for maintenance.
B. Storm drainage easements shall be adequate to maintain all structures
and shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
C. The Board may require easements as prerequisites to its approval of
common driveways or other access arrangements.
A. The management of stormwater on the site, both during and upon
completion of the disturbances associated with the proposed
subdivision or land development, shall be accomplished in accordance
with the standards and criteria of Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control. The design of any temporary or permanent facilities
and structures and the utilization of any natural drainage systems shall
be in full compliance with the terms of Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control, and the interpretations of the Township Engineer.
B. Inlets.
(1) All brick inlets shall be set on a six-inch concrete footing with at
least four inches of footing extending beyond the outside brick
face. Walls shall be parged on the outside with one-half-inch-thick
type "s" cement mortar, and all joints shall be full and struck flush
on the inside. Weep holes shall be provided after every third brick
at the bottom of the pavement's crushed stone base course. All
brick inlets shall have a concrete cap at least eight inches wide and
six inches thick.
§ 148-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-43
1:395
§ 148-44. Mobile home developments.
Any application for approval of a mobile home development shall comply
with the requirements of Article VIII, Mobile Home Developments, of this
chapter.
§ 148-45. (Reserved)101
(2) Precast inlets shall have weep holes at least 3/4 inches in diameter
in the area of the pavement's crushed stone base course.
Underdrains shall be installed at all low areas in roadways. A
system of underdrains shall also be installed in all steep cut areas
and wet areas in order to provide a dry road foundation. Should
springs or other unforeseen wet conditions be encountered during
construction, an underdrain system shall be required according to
field conditions. All underdrains shall discharge into road inlets or
at a convenient point in the drainage system. Openings for drain
pipes in inlets shall be mortared closed around the pipe on both
inside and outside faces of the inlet walls.
(3) The tops of all inlets shall be adjusted to conform to the finished
grade of the pavement and curbs by use of a grade adjustment ring.
(4) All culverts and storm drainage pipes shall be reinforced concrete
with a minimum size of 15 inches. Where required, underdrain pipe
shall be installed with a minimum size of four inches.
C. At the time of application for a building permit for any approved lot
created by a subdivision under the terms of this chapter, issuance of the
permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the terms of Chapter
143, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
Newtown.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 148-45, Exterior lighting, added 7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-3,
was repealed 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6. For current provisions, see Ch. 172, Zoning,
Art. XXIII, Outdoor Lighting.
§ 148-43 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-45
1:396
ARTICLE VI
Ownership and Maintenance of Common Lands
§ 148-46. Development plans.
§ 148-47. General provisions.
A. Subdivision and land development plans shall describe a plan for
ownership and maintenance of any common open space and other land
or facilities held in common. The plan may provide for:
(1) Dedication to and maintenance by the Township if acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors; and/or
(2) Private ownership and maintenance.
B. The plan shall provide for private ownership and maintenance of soil
erosion detention or retention basins and other similar permanent
stormwater and soil erosion structures.
A. Land development plans and documents shall describe the plan for
ownership, maintenance or operation of common lands or other
facilities not dedicated to a governmental agency.
B. The cost of maintenance of common lands and facilities and all costs of
operating and using all facilities within the tract shall be paid only by
the residents and/or owners of the tract.
C. The Board of Supervisors may require easements and/or deed
restrictions covering all or portions of the common lands or facilities.
D. The Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to provide for and
establish an organization similar to that required by the Uniform
Condominium Act (68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101) or statutes of a similar nature
or import, including supplements and amendments thereto, and require
that such organization and/or dwelling owners shall hold undivided
interests in the common lands and shall not convey, transfer, dispose of
or otherwise alienate the common lands from the tract. In determining
whether the organization described in the plan is adequate, the Board
shall consider the type and structure of the organization from the
standpoint of its capacity to raise revenue, meet obligations and
properly maintain facilities. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-5]
E. In the event the common lands, in the judgment of the Board of
Supervisors, are permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in
reasonable condition in accordance with the approved plan, the
ordinances of the Township and/or applicable statutes of the
commonwealth, whether the same are now in force or by law to require
compliance therewith and/or enter upon the common lands and
properly maintain the same, and, in the latter event, prior to entering
upon the property, the Board shall give notice of the condition
§ 148-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-47
1:397
complained of to the tract owner(s) and afford the latter a period of not
less than 30 days to remedy and correct the same.
F. The cost of such proceedings and/or maintenance by the Township shall
be assessed ratably against the properties within the development tract
which have a right of enjoyment of the common lands and shall become
a lien upon such properties upon filing thereof as required by law.
§ 148-47 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-47
1:398
ARTICLE VII
Improvements
§ 148-48. Construction requirements.
The applicant shall construct all streets, together with all other
improvements, including grading, paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade trees, storm
drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, landscaping, traffic control devices,
open space and restricted areas and erosion and sediment control measures
in conformance with the final plan as approved, the applicable provisions
of the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, dated 1976 or the latest revision
thereto, and other applicable regulations.
§ 148-49. Inspections; cease and desist order.
A. The construction or installation of all improvements shall at all times be
subject to inspection by representatives of the Township. If such
inspection reveals that work is not in accordance with approved plans
and specifications, that construction is not being done in a workmanlike
manner or that erosion or sediment controls are failing to prevent
accelerated erosion or waterborne sediment from leaving the site of
construction, the representative is empowered to require corrections to
be made and/or the suspension of subdivision approval and to issue a
cease and desist order which may include any or all of the following
sanctions:
(1) That no lot in the subdivision shall be conveyed or placed under
agreement of sale.
(2) That all construction on any lots for which a building permit has
been issued shall cease.
(3) That no further building permits for any lots shall be issued.
B. The cease and desist order shall be terminated upon determination by
the Township that the defects or deviations from plan requirements
have been corrected.
C. No underground pipes, structures, subgrades or base course shall be
covered until inspected and approved by the Township. A minimum of
eight inspections by the designated representative shall be required.
These inspections shall be effected in accordance with Subsection A
hereof and shall occur at the following intervals:
(1) Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
installing permanent drainage or other site improvements or
establishing covers.
(2) Upon excavation and completion of subgrade.
§ 148-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-49
1:399
§ 148-50. Completion; notification; performance guaranty.
(3) Upon excavation, installation and completion of drainage
structures, community sewage systems or water supply systems.
(4) Before placing stone base course or before initial layer of
screenings.
(5) Prior to pouring concrete.
(6) Before binder course.
(7) Before wearing course.
(8) Final inspection.
D. The developer shall notify the designated representative of the
Township (usually the Township Engineer) at least 24 hours in advance
of completion of any construction operations requiring an inspection.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, he shall notify the Board, in writing, of the completion of
the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The
Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the Board and
shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by mail. The
report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board; such report
shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of such
improvements, either in whole or in part. If such improvements, or any
portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer, such report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Board shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified mail of the
action of the Board with regard to approval, nonapproval or rejection of
improvements.
C. If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Board, the developer shall proceed to complete those
improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
D. The developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all subdivision or
land development improvements until such improvements are offered
for dedication and are accepted by the Township. In addition, 10% of
the performance guaranty shall be held back by the Township until the
developer has posted a maintenance guaranty as provided for in
§ 148-53 and as-built plans are verified and accepted by the Township.
E. Partial releases of the performance guaranty during the period of
construction shall be authorized as per § 148-15G.
§ 148-49 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-51
1:400
§ 148-51. As-built plans.
Within 30 days after completion and Township approval of subdivision
or land development improvements as shown on final plans and before
Township acceptance of such improvements, the developer shall submit to
the Board a corrected copy of such plans showing actual dimensions and
conditions of streets and all other improvements, certified by a professional
engineer to be in accordance with actual construction.
§ 148-52. Dedication and acceptance.
A. Public improvements. Upon completion of any public improvements
shown on an approved subdivision plan and within 90 days after
approval of such public improvements as herein provided, the
developer shall submit written offer of such public improvements for
dedication to the Township. Such offer shall include a deed of
dedication covering such public improvements, together with
satisfactory proof establishing the developer's clear title to such
property. Such documents are to be filed with the Township Secretary
for review by the Township Solicitor. Deeds of dedication for public
improvements may be accepted by resolution of the Board at a regular
meeting thereof. The Supervisors may require that at least 50% of the
lots in any approved subdivision or land development (or phase thereof,
if final plan approval has been in phases) have certificates of occupancy
issued for buildings thereon prior to acceptance of dedication.
(1) Should the streets, even though constructed according to the
specifications of this chapter, deteriorate before 50% of the lots
have certificates of occupancy issued, such streets shall be
repaired, as described immediately below, before being accepted
by the Township.
(2) Where it appears that the fifty-percent occupancy rate will be
extended more than a twelve-month period, the developer may
delay placing the final wearing course until the fifty-percent rate is
attained. The developer shall be responsible for all maintenance
and repair of the roadway which shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, pothole repair, cleaning, snowplowing, cindering,
mowing, drainage, maintenance and removal of debris in a manner
acceptable to the Board. For certain maintenance functions such as
snowplowing and cindering, the Board shall require an escrow fund
and maintenance agreement in order to assure the occupants of the
undedicated street that it shall be opened on a timely basis for
emergency vehicles and general usage after a snowfall, during
icing conditions or any other form of blockage or emergency.
B. The Board may require that some or all subdivision and land
development improvements remain undedicated, with maintenance the
responsibility of individual lot owners, a homeowners' association or
similar entity or an organization capable of carrying out maintenance
responsibilities.
§ 148-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-52
1:401
§ 148-53. Maintenance guaranty.
C. Where stormwater basins have been used for retention of silt and will
be used to detain stormwater, the basins shall be cleaned after the soil
covering has been established and prior to acceptance by the Township.
A. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion (whether such dedication
is of the fee or of an easement), the Board shall require the posting of
financial security to secure the structural integrity of the improvements
and the functioning of the improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the final plan. The security shall be in
the form as is authorized for the deposit of the performance guaranty,
as described in the definition in § 148-9 hereof, shall be for a term of 18
months from the date of the acceptance of dedication and shall be in an
amount equal to 15% of the actual costs of installation of the
improvements so dedicated.
B. Where maintenance of stormwater retention facilities or private streets
is to be the responsibility of individual lot owners, a homeowners'
association or similar entity or an organization capable of carrying out
maintenance responsibilities, the Board shall require that maintenance
responsibilities be set forth in perpetual covenants or deed restrictions
binding on the landowner's successors in interest permitting a lien for
assessment of such costs, and may further require that an initial
maintenance fund be established in a reasonable amount.
§ 148-52 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-53
1:402
ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Home Developments
§ 148-54. Applicability.
The following article shall apply to subdivisions and land developments
related to mobile home developments, as herein defined. The definitions
shall relate to this article only.
§ 148-55. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
ANCHORING — The fastening of the mobile home to its mobile home stand
in order to prevent upset or damage due to wind, erosion, flooding or other
natural forces.
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements and
uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them. Unless
otherwise specified, "buffers" may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas. "Buffers" are divided into three types:
HITCH — A device which is part of the frame or attaches to the frame
of a mobile home and connects it to a power source for the purpose of
transporting the unit.
MOBILE HOME — See § 148-9 of this chapter.[Amended 11-14-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-5]
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land under single ownership
which has been planned and improved in compliance with the requirements
of Chapter 172, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown for the
placement of mobile homes, conventionally built or modular single-family
SCREEN BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density to
effectively block the view from one side to another during all seasons of
the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sites.
A.
SOFTENING BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density
to ease and soften, but not essentially block, the view from one side to
another; and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
B.
OPEN BUFFER — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground cover
and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified depth,
but not necessarily having significant vertical components to achieve a
certain height or density, the purpose of which is to achieve adequate
spacing and attractive landscaping between two or more actively used
areas.
C.
§ 148-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-55
1:403
detached homes, or combination thereof, for nontransient use; consisting of
two or more mobile home lots.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home development,
provided with the necessary utility connections, patio and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home,
though it may be designed, developed and used for a modular or
conventionally built single-family detached home as well.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.
SEWER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser
pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
SKIRTS — Panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the
underside of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical exterior
walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance between the
bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation below.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the lot lines, excluding that area
continuously covered by water and rights-of-way of existing public roads.
WATER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.
§ 148-56. Individual mobile homes.
Individual mobile homes may be erected on any lot where the use is
permitted, provided that compliance is made with zoning requirements,
§§ 148-57, 148-58A and N(6) through (10) and 148-59 and all other
applicable regulations. Tracts of land may be developed and improved for
the purpose of erecting two or more mobile homes provided that zoning
requirements, all requirements of this article, including those sections
referenced above, and other applicable regulations are met. The following
regulations of this article apply to mobile home developments, as defined
herein.
§ 148-57. Mobile home developments.
The provisions of this article shall be followed in the construction or
alteration of all mobile home developments in accordance with Chapter 172,
§ 148-55 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-57
1:404
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Newtown. These regulations are
in addition to those set forth in Chapter 172, Zoning, and other applicable
regulations of the Township Subdivision and Land Development regulations.
All applications for mobile home developments shall follow the procedures
established in Article III of this chapter.
§ 148-58. Requirements.
A. Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures, and all tract
improvements shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape of
the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common
appurtenances that are available.
B. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or structure shall be fitted to
the terrain with a minimum disturbance of the land and a minimum
elevation difference between the floor level of the unit and the ground
elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs, rock formations, streams,
floodplains, steep slopes and other natural features of the tract shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practical. Favorable views shall be
emphasized by the plan.
C. Courtyards. Groups or clusters of units, so placed as to create interior
spaces and courtyards, shall be incorporated whenever feasible.
D. Layout. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety of
orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with their
long sides facing the street rather than their ends, in order to provide
variety and interest. Site layout shall be designed to ensure that mobile
home units are offset to block long uninterrupted vistas between the
units.
E. Streets. Streets shall be laid out and improved in accordance with
Article VII when public and in accordance with the latest adopted road
construction standards of the Township. The following shall apply to all
streets, public or private:
(1) Access to streets.
(a) Where the mobile home development abuts or contains a
present or proposed arterial or collector street, reverse
frontage with screened planting contained in a foot nonaccess
easement along the right-of-way shall be required unless
supervisor approval is obtained to alternative treatment as
may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties or other abutting properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
(b) Mobile home lots may have direct access only onto minor
internal streets. Direct access from a mobile home lot shall not
be permitted onto the street from which the mobile home
development gains primary access.
§ 148-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:405
F. Fire lanes and hydrants.
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 150
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, as defined
herein, nor more than 600 feet from a private or public street or a
fire hydrant. All fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the
approval of the Township.
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of
40 feet; and there shall be constructed within this right-of-way an
all-weather and well-drained, surface cartway with a minimum
width of 24 feet. The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or
more private or public streets.
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 50 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced radius of 40
feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length of 400 feet.
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this and other
articles and shall provide adequate access to buildings by firemen
and other emergency services.
(5) Fire hydrants shall be provided by the developer. The number, type
and location of fire hydrants and the size and rate of flow of feeder
lines shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the Township.
G. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home developments shall provide
safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width
for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
individual mobile homes, mobile home development streets, all
community facilities provided for the residents and off-street
pedestrian traffic generators, such as schools, bus stops,
commercial centers, etc. These pedestrian walkways may parallel
vehicular roadways, where they shall only be required on one side,
or they may form a separate but coordinated system away from
streets. Walkways shall be provided whenever pedestrian traffic is
concentrated and where school children congregate, but may be
waived elsewhere if the applicant successfully demonstrates a lack
of need to the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel
§ 148-58 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-58
1:406
roadways, they shall be separated from the road pavement by a
distance of at least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a
paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
three feet.
H. Parking. Provisions for parking shall conform to Article XXIV of Chapter
172, Zoning. In addition, the following shall apply:
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to
meet the needs of the occupants of the development and their
guests. Each unit shall be provided with a minimum of two offstreet
parking spaces, plus an additional car space for every four
mobile home lots to provide for guest parking.
(2) Required car parking spaces shall be located for convenient access
to the mobile home stands. At least one car space shall be located
on each mobile home lot and the other space may be located in
adjacent parking bays.
I. Buffers.
(1) General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines
except those which abut another mobile home development, there
shall be a permanent buffer at least 15 feet in depth, unless this is
waived pursuant to Subsection I(4) or (5) hereof. Where zoning
requirements are more stringent, they shall apply. A screen buffer,
as defined herein, shall be provided whenever the mobile home
development abuts existing residential zones and/or residential
uses or any existing street, as modified by Subsection I(3) hereof,
drive or parking areas and where abutting other types of uses when
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors to provide sufficient
buffering and transition. No less than a softening buffer shall be
provided wherever the mobile home development abuts existing
commercial, office and industrial uses. No less than an open buffer
shall be provided where more extensive buffers are deemed
unnecessary by the Board.
(2) Components. The minimum components of each type of buffer shall
be as follows:
(a) Screen buffer.
[1] The primary component of a screen buffer shall be a row of
suitable evergreen trees, at a height of not less than six
feet when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart oncenter,
and these trees shall be of such species to attain a
height at maturity of not less than 20 feet. Also required as
a secondary component of the buffer is one of the
following:
§ 148-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:407
[a] Mounding, the use of which is encouraged, provided
that the slopes shall be a minimum of three to one.
[b] Visually opaque fencing not greater than six feet in
height.
[c] Coniferous shrubbery.
[2] Any combination of evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs,
mounding, fencing or other natural vegetation or manmade
material is allowable, provided that an effective
visual screen at least 15 feet in height above the adjacent
ground elevation in the mobile home development is
achieved within a reasonable time. But whenever only
vegetation is used, there shall be at least a double row of
evergreen trees, with the trees in one row offset five feet
from the trees in the other row, and the rows at least five
feet apart.
(b) Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees, spaced not more than 25 feet apart oncenter,
at least 25% of which shall be evergreens. The
evergreens shall be at least six feet in height when planted and
shall attain at least 20 feet in height at maturity. Any deciduous
trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and eight feet in
height when planted and shall attain a height of not less than
20 feet at maturity. These trees shall be interspersed with
other allowable components, including any other type of trees,
shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or similar natural or man-made
elements having a visible vertical dimension or any
combination thereof.
(c) Open buffer. The open buffer shall, as a minimum, consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and
may include trees, shrubs or other natural or man-made
landscaping materials, but it shall be mostly vegetative rather
than paved.
(3) Street boundaries. Wherever necessary for adequate sight distance
or where the Board of Supervisors so determines that a sufficient
buffer exists to protect the welfare and safety of the community, a
single row of deciduous trees at least eight feet in height when
planted and at least 20 feet in height at maturity, with a spacing of
not more than 40 feet on-center, may be provided along all property
boundaries which abut a street.
(4) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge of a mobile home
development occurs along natural features which function as
buffers, including but not limited to mature vegetation, significant
grade changes or stream valleys, which are likely to be
permanently preserved, buffering may be waived along that edge
upon approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 148-58 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-58
1:408
(5) Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and,
in the event of death or other destruction, shall be replaced within
one year by the persons responsible for maintenance when death or
destruction occurred.
(6) Buffer landscape plan. A buffer landscape plan acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors shall be submitted with the final plans,
showing all pertinent information including the location, size and
species of all individual trees and shrubs to be preserved or planted
or, alternately, the general characteristics of existing vegetation
masses which are to be preserved.
J. Compliance with erosion control provisions. Provision for compliance
with Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be included
as part of subdivision and land development application requirements.
K. Ground cover requirement. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of
every mobile home development shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of
dust during dry weather. Impervious pavement shall be kept to a
minimum. All ground surfaces shall be appropriately maintained.
L. Landscaping. The following site landscaping requirements shall apply
to all mobile home developments:
(1) Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
mobile home development. In addition to the preservation of
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall
be given to landscaping of parking areas and provisions of street
trees as required by this article.
(2) In order to determine the suitability of specific areas of the total
mobile home development site for specific land uses and land use
intensities, a thorough analysis of the natural features of the site
shall be required. The following subject categories shall be
included in such an analysis:
(a) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns in site area,
including denoting surface water, marsh, floodplain,
permanent high-water table and seasonal high-water table
areas throughout the site.
(b) Geological. Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including defining aquifers, particularly
those subject to pollution, shallow bedrock areas and areas in
which rock formations are unstable.
(c) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area
including defining of prime agricultural soils, aquifer recharge
soils areas, unstable soils and soils susceptible to erosion.
§ 148-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:409
(d) Topography. Analysis of terrain of site, including designation of
slope areas over 15%, between 8% and 15% and under 8%.
(e) Vegetation. Analysis of land cover of site including designation
of forest and woodland areas, meadowland areas and areas
with little or no land cover.
(3) Landscaping shall be planned and effectuated in the mobile home
development so as to integrate buildings with their surrounding
lands and to present a total pattern throughout the site. The use of
berms is encouraged. In the planning and effectuation of such
landscaping as well as in the effectuation of Subsections L(4) and
(5) hereof, the developer shall be guided by the following criteria.
Plant material, including both deciduous and evergreen trees and
shrubs, shall be chosen on the basis of:
(a) Aesthetic values, such as autumn coloration, flowers, fruit,
bark and crown characteristics and susceptibility to dieback.
(b) Susceptibility to insect and disease infestation and air
pollution.
(c) Species longevity.
(d) Wind firmness and suitability of plant material to soil types.
(e) Wildlife values, including the ability of plant material such as
oak, hickory, dogwood and walnut to provide food for bird and
animal life.
(f) Trees and shrubs which are prone to cause pavement heaving
or whose roots have a tendency to invade water and sewer
lines, i.e., poplar, willow, silver and Norway maple and beech,
shall not be planted where their presence shall result in
pavement heaving or the clogging of mains and drains.
(g) Where land is open or barren, the planting of trees is
encouraged.
(4) The protection of trees of two-inch caliper or over measured 4 1/2
feet off the ground shall be a factor in determining the location of
open space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels.
(5) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction
of natural amenities. Natural features, such as lakes, streams and
wooded slopes, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final
landscaping of the development, wherever possible and desirable.
The applicant shall demonstrate the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction.
Wherever possible, scenic points, historic spots and other
community assets and landmarks shall be preserved.
§ 148-58 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-58
1:410
(6) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
space. Excessive cuts and fills shall be avoided. Topsoil shall not be
stripped, covered or removed from the development site.
(7) The interior of each parking lot shall have one two-inch caliper
shade tree for every four cars.
(8) Whenever the site is not naturally wooded, shade trees shall be
provided along all streets. No fewer than two two-inch caliper trees
measured 4 1/2 feet off the ground shall be planted for each
twenty-five-foot section of collector streets. For the purpose of
these regulations, street trees are limited to the following: Moraine
locust, red oak, columnar-type maples and sugar maples or such
other variety as approved by the Township Planning Commission.
(9) Subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, the planting
strip or utility strip between the curb and sidewalks may be moved
and placed into an acceptable public park area on an equal basis,
resulting in an integral curb, gutter and sidewalk treatment where
this is accomplished. Where integral curb, gutter and sidewalk is
permitted, a planting and utility easement shall be required. The
combined dimension of such sidewalk and planting and utility
easement together shall not exceed the residual dimension of road
right-of-way measured from the back of the curb to the right-of-way
line for each side, respectively. Such integral treatment shall,
however, not be permitted on arterial or collector thoroughfares.
Areas within planting strips cannot be used to enable larger lot
sizes or used for park purposes.
M. Common elements. Each mobile home development shall conform to
Article VI.
(1) Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be
conveniently located for the use intended.
(2) Consolidation of recreation, management and other common
facilities in a single building and location is encouraged, if the
single location shall adequately serve all mobile home lots.
N. Utilities.
(1) Adequate lighting. All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of
high pedestrian use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting
shall be designed and located so as to direct light away from
adjacent residences. Adequate lighting shall be provided after
dark. Appropriate lighting fixtures shall be provided for walkways
and to identify steps, ramps and signs. Such lighting shall be
designed and located so as to direct light away from adjacent
residences.
§ 148-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:411
(2) Lighting requirements waiver. The requirements for lighting may
be waived by the Board of Supervisors where density of
development may not justify its use.
(3) Utilities installed underground. Electric, telephone, cable
television and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the developer unless, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, special conditions require otherwise. In such event,
such installations shall be as directed by the Board.
(4) Service lines in easements. Where telephone and electric service
lines are placed underground, conduits or cable shall be placed
within an easement or dedicated public ways, in a manner which
shall not conflict with other underground services. Further, all
transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
(5) Design at utility structures. Easements shall be provided to account
for the distribution of unit substations to service the area. The
design of the utility structures should be architecturally compatible
with the surrounding structures.
(6) Individual water riser pipes and connections.
(a) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection shall approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the Township Plumbing Inspector and
terminate at least four inches above the ground surface. The
water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home
does not occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves, riser pipe and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(7) Individual sewer connections.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the Township Sewer
Authority and the Township Plumbing Code.102 The sewer riser
pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 121, Plumbing.
§ 148-58 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-58
1:412
connection to the mobile home drain outlet shall approximate
a vertical position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the Township Plumbing Inspector. All joints
shall be watertight.
(c) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
(8) Gas distribution systems.
(a) General. Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home
development shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the applicable codes adopted by the enforcing agency.
Where the state or other political subdivision does not assume
jurisdiction, such installations shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
ANSI Z21.30 and Z106.1.
(b) Required gas supply. The minimum hourly volume of gas
required at each mobile home lot outlet or any section of the
mobile home development gas piping system shall be
calculated as follows:
Distance Natural L.P.G.
For the most remote
mobile home lot outlet on
any branch or main
125 CFH 50 CFH
For the secondmost
remote outlet on any
branch or main
100 CFH 40 CFH
For the thirdmost remote
outlet on any branch or
main
75 CFH 30 CFH
(c) Installation. All gas piping installed below ground shall have a
minimum earth cover of 18 inches. Gas piping shall not be
installed under any mobile home.
(d) System shutoff valve. A readily accessible and identified
shutoff valve controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas piping
system shall be installed near to point of connection to the
service piping or supply connection of the liquefied petroleum
gas tank.
(e) Mobile home lot shutoff valve. Each mobile home lot shall have
an approved gas shutoff valve installed upstream of the mobile
home lot gas outlet and located on the outlet riser at a height of
§ 148-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:413
not less than four inches above grade. Such valve shall not be
located under any mobile home. Whenever the mobile home
lot outlet is not in use, the outlet shall be equipped with an
approved cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas.
(f) Mobile home connector. Each mobile home shall be connected
to the mobile home lot outlet by an approved three-quarterinch
mobile home connector not more than six feet in length.
Approved pipe and fittings may be used between the flexible
connector and the mobile home lot gas outlet when the
distance between the mobile home lot gas outlet and the
mobile home gas service connection exceeds that required to
make a safe installation with only a mobile home connector.
(g) Mechanical protection. All gas outlet risers, regulators,
meters, valves or other exposed equipment shall be protected
from mechanical damage by vehicles or other causes.
(h) Gas connection installation. The mobile home gas connection
shall be installed at the edge of the mobile home stand,
approximately 30 feet from the front of such stand and located
as not to terminate beneath the mobile home.
(9) Fuel oil distribution system.
(a) General. Distribution systems shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing
such systems. Piping installed below ground shall have a
minimum earth cover of 18 inches.
(b) Permanently installed piping. All piping from outside fuel
storage tanks or cylinders towards mobile homes shall be
permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
(c) Underground storage tanks. All fuel oil storage tanks or
cylinders should be installed underground and shall not be
located inside or beneath any mobile home or accessory
structure or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(d) Venting. Every tank shall be vented by a vent not less than 1 1/
4 inches iron pipe size so designed and installed to prevent the
entrance of rain or debris.
(e) Shutoff valve. A shutoff valve located immediately adjacent to
the gravity fee connection of a tank shall be installed in the
supply line to the mobile home.
(f) Fuel oil connectors. Fuel oil connectors from the tank to the
mobile home shall be brass or copper tubing or approved
flexible metal hose, not smaller than three-eighths-inch iron
pipe or tubing, and shall be protected from physical damage.
Aluminum tubing shall not be used.
§ 148-58 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-58
1:414
§ 148-59. Mobile home stands.
A concrete pad, properly graded, placed and compacted so as to be durable
and adequate for the support of the maximum anticipated loads during all
seasons, shall be used for all mobile homes.
(g) Liquidtight fittings. Valves and connectors shall be listed
standard fittings maintained liquidtight to prevent spillage of
fuel oil on the ground.
(10) Fuel supply and storage.
(a) Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home
lot shall be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent
accidental overturning. Such containers shall be not less than
25 or more than 100 pounds liquefied petroleum gas capacity.
(b) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or
any other structure.
(c) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened
in place and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile
home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(d) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be screened from
adjacent structures, access roads and traffic arteries by
hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in grades or
walls.
A. Anchoring. Every mobile home placed within a mobile home
development shall be anchored to the mobile home stand where it is
located prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way or the
expiration of seven days, whichever occurs first. The anchoring system
shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of 80 miles per
hour.
B. Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home
stands in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit.
C. Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed which are
designed to complement the appearance of the mobile home and are
coordinated throughout the park.
D. Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
E. Garbage and trash collection. Individual collection of garbage and trash
and the indoor storage thereof before collection shall be provided.
§ 148-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-59
1:415

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 148-60. Modifications; relief from hardship.
§ 148-61. Records.
§ 148-62. Fees; deposits; costs.
A. In any case in which an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Board that strict application of any provisions of this chapter would be
unreasonable and would cause unnecessary hardship as applied to the
proposed subdivision or land development, the Board may grant a
modification of such provision so as to grant relief from the unnecessary
hardship. Any such modification granted shall be the least modification
necessary to grant relief from the unnecessary hardship and shall be
applied so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, however, that such modification shall not be granted
if it would have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter or adversely affecting any other property.
B. In granting modifications, the Board may impose such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements so modified.
A. The Township shall assign a subdivision application number to all
subdivision and land development applications, and all matters
referring to an application should be filed in accordance with the
subdivision case number. The Township shall keep a record of its
findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all plans filed with
it for review.
B. All such records shall be public records.
A. No application for preliminary or final approval shall be deemed to have
been submitted until the fee and escrow deposit, as set forth below,
shall have been paid.
B. A subdivision or land development application fee (nonrefundable) and
an escrow deposit shall be submitted with any application for
preliminary or final plan approval to cover the costs of plan review and
processing. Amounts of the application fee and escrow deposit shall be
fixed by the Board of Supervisors by resolution. The escrowed funds
shall be used to reimburse the Township for actual expenditures
incident to these processes up to the limit provided by law, including
but not limited to fees of the Township Engineer, other professionals
deemed necessary by the Township and legal fees in excess of the fee
for review of the Township's standard forms. Any costs incurred by the
Township in excess of the amount held in escrow shall be fully
reimbursed by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permits.
§ 148-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-62
1:417
§ 148-63. Appeals.
Appeals from the actions of the Board with respect to any application
for subdivision or land development approval shall be governed by the
provisions of Act 247 as they may be amended from time to time, or any
successor legislation thereto.
§ 148-64. Preventive remedies.
C. Following final plan approval and recording and the establishment of
any required performance guaranty, a second escrow deposit shall be
established to cover the cost of inspections of improvements,
construction, materials or site testing or maintenance costs (e.g., snow
removal, cindering, street sweeping, etc.) prior to the acceptance of
improvements by the Township. Any costs incurred by the Township in
excess of the amount held in escrow shall be fully reimbursed by the
applicant. Any unexpended balance in the escrow deposit following
acceptance of dedication of improvements by the Township shall be
returned to the applicant. The amount of the escrow deposit shall be
fixed by the Board of Supervisors by resolution.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. Permit issuance.
(1) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
§ 148-62 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-64
1:418
§ 148-65. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-5]
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(2) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge,
determining that there has been a violation, further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. The Magisterial District Judge shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 148-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-65
1:419
Chapter 152
TAXATION
§ 148-65 NEWTOWN CODE § 148-65
1:420
ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 4-14-1975 by Ord. No. 1975-1; amended in its entirety
11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-06]
§ 152-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Newtown.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 152-2 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:421
§ 152-2. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Township of
Newtown during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes, as the same may be allocated by the Township from time to
time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or maintenance;
reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through implementation
of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to the homestead property exclusion).
The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a person
may be employed.
§ 152-2.1. Exemptions; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 152-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-2.1
1:422
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 152-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2.1
1:423
§ 152-2.2. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not
all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
§ 152-2.1 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-2.2
1:424
§ 152-3. Filing of returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 152-4. Dates for determining liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 152-5. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 152-5.1. Individuals engaged in concurrent employment or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 152-2.1 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 152-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5.1
1:425
§ 152-5.2. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 152-6. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the
priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following
order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 152-5.1 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-6
1:426
§ 152-6.1. Suits for collection.
§ 152-7. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 152-8. Interpretation.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998.103 (Municipalities may detail their appeals processes.)
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
103. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 152-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-8
1:427
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 152-8 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-8
1:428
ARTICLE II
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-8]
§ 152-9. Discount.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes assessed and imposed by the
Township shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax
upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after
the date of the tax notice.
§ 152-10. Penalty.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such Township taxes
charged against them for four months after the date of the tax notice shall
be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by
the tax collector and be collected by him.
§ 152-11. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall take effect for the tax year 1977 and
remain in effect for all subsequent tax years until amended.
§ 152-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-11
1:429

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-1]
§ 152-12. Authority; title.
§ 152-13. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACQUIRED COMPANY — A real estate company is an acquired company
upon a change in the ownership interest in the company, however effected,
if the change does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself
or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or
indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company
within a period of three years.
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons,
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the United States or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. A "document" shall also include a
A. Pursuant to the authority contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257104, a tax for the purpose of providing
revenue for general Township purposes is hereby levied, assessed and
imposed upon the transfer of real property or an interest in real
property within the limits of Newtown Township, regardless of where
the instruments making the transfers are made, executed or delivered
or where the actual settlements on the transfer take place, at the rate of
1% of the amount of the value of said real property or interest therein,
as herein defined.
B. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Newtown Township
Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance."
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 152-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-13
1:431
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording pursuant
to § 152-16B hereof.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION —
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal decedents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the
business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of stock of the
corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The
business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
(2)
(3) Fur farming;
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
A.
With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary
or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
B.
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within limitation, buildings,
structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with
or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements,
immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a
conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
§ 152-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-13
1:432
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
and which derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or holds real estate, the value of
which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible asset
holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and
actively traded on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
D. Real property.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in
real estate in which the lessee has equity; provided, however, that in
determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
B.
§ 152-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-13
1:433
§ 152-14. Imposition of tax; exemptions.
§ 152-15. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon the following
transactions:
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsections A or B above, the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof
or for and in respect of the vellum parchment or paper upon which such
document is written or printed a tax payable to the Township of
Newtown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, at the rate of 1% of the value
of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be
payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for
recording or within 30 days of acceptance of such document or within
30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt
from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
A. A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the property
condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation, which
§ 152-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-15
1:434
reconveyance may include property line adjustments, provided that
said reconveyance is made within one year from the date of
condemnation.
B. A document which the commonwealth is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or Tax Claim Bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
that the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was
acquired by the husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree
in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child,
between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and brother or
sister or the spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent
and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to
tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
recorder of deeds is represented with a copy of the trust instrument
that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer:
§ 152-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-15
1:435
(1) For no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or
(2) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of his principal,
there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property
of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the Department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock or the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee or property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture.
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
§ 152-15 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-15
1:436
§ 152-16. Documents; declaration of acquisition.
§ 152-17. Tax credits.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A Stat. 3,
26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. Except as excluded in § 152-15 hereof, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders
or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
B. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present for recording a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County for the purpose of noting thereon or the
affixation thereto of such documentary stamps or other evidence of the
payment of this tax as required by law. Such declaration shall set forth
the value of the real estate holdings of the acquired company in
Delaware County.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax upon
the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
§ 152-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-17
1:437
§ 152-18. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or cost of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff or other officer conducting such sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
herewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 152-19. Real estate located partially in Township.
Where real estate or an interest in real estate lying partly within the
boundaries of Newtown Township and partly without said boundaries is
transferred, the tax herein imposed shall be calculated upon such portion
of the real estate or interest therein lying within the boundaries of the
Township as determined by the Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value filed
with the Recorder of Deeds or, if no such filing is required, by affidavit of
the transferor or as separately stated in the document of transfer; provided,
however, that such value shall in no event be less than the highest assessed
valuation for local tax purposes placed upon the real estate or the interest
in the real estate in the assessment of the property within the Township.
§ 152-20. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of
Delaware County for recording shall set forth therein and as a part of
such document the true, full and complete value thereof. When the full,
complete and actual consideration for the transfer which is subject to
the tax is not set forth in the document, the person liable for the tax
shall, contemporaneously with the filing of the document, file with the
Recorder of Deeds a Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value identical to
that promulgated by the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or, in the instance of an acquired company, a Realty Transfer
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is demised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the demise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 152-17 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-20
1:438
Tax Declaration of Acquisition identical to that promulgated by the
Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable real estate
transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship.
§ 152-21. Collector; documentary stamp.
§ 152-22. Additional tax due.
§ 152-23. Enforcement.
The Secretary of Newtown Township is hereby charged with enforcement
of the provisions of this article and is hereby authorized and empowered
to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
registration and notation of transactions, the collection of transfer taxes,
interest and penalties due hereunder, the prosecution of violations
hereunder, and any other matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., as the same are from time to time
amended, are incorporated into and made a part of this article and shall be
deemed to have been adopted by the Township Secretary.
A. The tax imposed hereby, including any amount payable to the Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to § 152-22 hereof, shall be
collected by the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County who shall act as
agent for the Township in the collection of the transfer tax as provided
in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended. The tax thus collected shall be
payable by the Recorder to the Treasurer of Newtown Township at least
monthly or at such other intervals as the Township and the Recorder of
Deeds shall mutually determine.
B. The payment of the tax imposed by this article when received by the
Recorder of Deeds shall be evidenced by the affixing of a documentary
stamp or stamps or other evidence of payment as approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.
A. In the event that a determination or redetermination of transfer tax due
is made by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue pursuant to
Section 1111-C of Act 1986-77, 72 P.S. § 8111-C, such determination or
redetermination shall be deemed to have been also made by the
Secretary of Newtown Township, and there shall be due and owing to
the Township, as additional transfer tax, the amount determined or
redetermined by the Department to be due the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall re-record the
document only when the transfer tax imposed by this article has been
paid.
§ 152-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-24
1:439
§ 152-24. Delinquent taxes.
§ 152-25. Violations and penalties.
A. If, for any reason the transfer tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional
penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. The transfer tax when due and unpaid, together with all interest and
penalties thereon, shall be a lien in favor of the Township on the real
estate or interest in the real estate which is described in the document
on which the tax is imposed and upon any other property, both real and
personal, of the person failing to pay the tax due, after said lien has
been entered and docketed of record by the Prothonotary of Delaware
County in accordance with the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Law.105
C. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
D. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected and enforced in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.106 The Township Solicitor
is authorized to pursue any and all remedies available by law for
collection of the tax, and all such remedies shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accept or present for recording or cause to be accepted or
presented for recording any document without the full amount of
the tax thereon being duly paid; or
(2) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the provisions of
this article or the rules and regulations prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Secretary under the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be liable, upon conviction thereof,
to a fine not exceeding $600, together with the cost of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and cost, shall be liable to a term of
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
[Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 152-24 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-25
1:440
ARTICLE IV
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 6-9-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-3]
§ 152-26. Definitions; word usage.
§ 152-27. Imposition; exceptions.
A tax is imposed for general revenue purposes, at the rate of 10% of the
admission price to each amusement within the Township of Newtown for
which the individual admission price is $0.10 or more. The tax shall not be
charged and collected on:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the content:
ADMISSION — Monetary charge of any character, including
contributions, donations, dues or membership fees, periodic or
otherwise, charged for the privilege of attending or engaging in
amusements as hereinafter defined, provided admission shall not
include tax added or charged expressly subject to the Tax Reform Code
of 1971, P.L. 6, No. 2, March 4, 1971, 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq. (1982),
as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
AMUSEMENT — All manner or form of entertainment, diversion, sport,
pastime, or recreation within Newtown Township for which admission
is charged or paid, except motion-picture theaters.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing or imposing a fine or penalty, "person," as applied to
associations, shall mean the partners thereof; and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. Monetary charge paid by any bona fide student in a public or private
school for the privilege of attending amusements conducted or
participated in by such school.
B. Admission accompanying or incidental to the serving of food or drink or
the sale of merchandise, where the charge for admission is wholly
included in the price paid for food, refreshment or merchandise, and
the price for food, refreshment or merchandise is not increased during
the time when such entertainment is offered. In the event that the price
of such food, refreshment or merchandise is increased during times the
entertainment is offered, then such increase in the price as is paid by
one purchasing such food, refreshment or merchandise shall be
deemed to be an admission.
§ 152-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-27
1:441
§ 152-28. Rate of tax.
§ 152-29. Permit required.
After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct or
to continue to conduct any amusement within the Township of Newtown
shall file with the Township Manager or his designee an application for a
permanent amusement permit or temporary amusement permit, as the case
may be. A permanent permit shall be issued to an amusement that is to
continue for longer than 30 days. A temporary permit shall be issued to an
amusement that is to continue for less than 30 days.
§ 152-30. Permit expiration.
Permanent permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
issued. Temporary permits shall be valid until the last day the amusement is
conducted, but not exceeding 30 days from the date of issue.
§ 152-31. Permit application.
C. Admission where the proceeds thereof, after payment of reasonable
expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of any charitable, religious,
civic or nonprofit educational organization whose status is evidenced by
proof of Internal Revenue Service tax exemption.
A. Where the admission is fixed, the tax shall be collected according to the
following table: $0.01 for every $0.10 for admission price.
B. If the price is $1 or more, the tax shall be 10% of each dollar plus
additional charges according to the table in Subsection A above, upon
any fractional part of a dollar in excess of dollar amounts.
C. Where the admission is not fixed, the tax shall be based upon the gross
admissions collected.
D. On admissions to golf courses, the tax shall be 10% with the tax base
upon which the tax shall be levied not to exceed 40% of the greens fees,
which fees shall include all cost of admissions to the golf course.
A. On forms supplied by the Township Manager, the following information
shall be printed in ink or typewritten:
(1) Name of the Township of Newtown;
(2) Whether a temporary or a permanent permit;
(3) Name and address of the person receiving the permit;
(4) Location of the amusement covered by the permit;
(5) Type of amusement;
(6) Period for which the permit is issued;
§ 152-27 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-31
1:442
§ 152-32. Payment of tax due; report to be submitted by permit
holders.
§ 152-33. Duties of Township Manager.
(7) Number of the permit; and
(8) Date the permit is issued.
B. The original shall be given to the permittee, and the duplicate shall be
kept in the file by the Township of Newtown.
C. In case of loss, defacement, or destruction of any permit, the permittee
shall apply to the Tax Collector for reissuance.
A. Every holder of a permanent permit shall, on or before the last day of
every calendar month, transmit to the Township Manager under oath or
affirmation, a report of the total admissions charged or collected by him
during the preceding calendar month and of the total tax due thereon
under this article. When he submits this report, he shall pay the
Township Manager or his designee the entire amount of tax due.
B. Every holder of a temporary permit shall, at the close of each day the
amusement was held, transmit to the Township Manager or his
designee, under oath or affirmation, a report of the total admission
charged or collected by him on such day and of the total tax due thereon
under this article. When he submits this report, he shall pay the Tax
Collector the entire amount of tax due. On the day of expiration of the
temporary permit, the permittee shall, in addition, submit to the
Township of Newtown, under oath or affirmation, a report of all
admissions charged or collected during the period in which such
temporary permit was in effect and of all taxes due and paid. When he
submits this report, he shall pay the entire amount of taxes remaining
unpaid, provided:
(1) Any holder of a temporary permit who is a resident of the Township
of Newtown, or who has a permanent place of business therein,
may submit the reports hereinabove required of himself on the day
following the days hereinabove specified.
(2) In every case, the Township Manager shall furnish to the person
paying any tax levied under this article a receipt for the payment of
such tax.
A. The Township Manager or his designee is charged with the duties of
collecting and receiving taxes, fines, and penalties imposed by this
article. It shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount
received by him, from whom received, and the date of such receipt.
B. The Township Manager and/or his duly appointed agents are hereby
empowered, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Newtown, to prescribe, adopt or promulgate rules and
§ 152-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-33
1:443
§ 152-34. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Township Manager or any other official,
agent or employee of the Township of Newtown, as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 152-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
judgment thereof, pay a fine of not more than $600.
§ 152-36. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed. The following ordinances or parts thereof are specifically
repealed.
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, and are charged with enforcing the
provisions of this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated
pursuant hereto.
C. If any person required to secure a permit under this article shall fail to
file a report at the time specified herein or shall file a report which on
its face appears incorrect or insufficient, the Township Manager or his
duly appointed agents shall assess said person or persons an amount of
tax which said Tax Collector or his agents deems reasonable or
appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Township Manager or his
duly appointed agents shall give the parties assessed a notice in which
shall be stated the amount of the tax imposed or levied.
D. Every holder of an amusement permit shall keep and maintain complete
records showing the daily admissions charged or collected, the amount
of tax due and any other information necessary to determine the
amount of tax due.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the
right appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in all other cases.
A. The Township Manager or his duly appointed agents shall have the
power in the name of the Township of Newtown to institute proceedings
against any and all persons who violate the provisions of this article.
B. If for any reason, the amusement tax is not paid when due, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional
penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 152-33 NEWTOWN CODE § 152-37
1:444
§ 152-37. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 152-38. When effective.
This article shall become effective on the date of enactment and shall
continue on a calendar year basis, thereafter, without annual reenactment.
§ 152-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-38
1:445
Chapter 155
TELEVISION
§ 155-1. Findings; purpose. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that the public convenience
of the Township of Newtown would be served by a cable television and
communications system. The purpose of this chapter is:
§ 155-2. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Newtown Cable Television and
Communications Ordinance."
§ 155-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Newtown.
CCB — The Newtown Township Cable Communications Board provided for
in § 155-12.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
LICENSE — A license to erect, maintain and operate a cable television
system in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
LICENSEE — The person to whom a license under this chapter is granted.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Newtown.
§ 155-4. Licensing regulations.
A. To provide for the development of cable television as a community
communications system and for other public purposes.
B. To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, operation,
maintenance and use of a cable television and communications system
in, upon, along, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected
with the streets, public ways or public places within the corporate limits
of the Township, as they now or in the future may exist.
C. To provide for the payment of fees to the Township for the construction
and operation of cable communications systems.
D. To provide remedies for violations of this chapter.
A. Upon application duly made, the Board may grant the nonexclusive
right for the use of the public streets within the Township for the
construction, operation and maintenance of cable television and
§ 152-38 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-4
1:446
§ 155-5. Territory.
communications systems subject to the terms and conditions contained
in this chapter.
B. Any person proposing to commence or engage in the business of
construction or operating a cable television and communications
system in the Township shall first have applied for and have received a
license pursuant to this chapter. If requested by the applicant, such
license shall contain mutually acceptable provisions relating to the
location of a tower within the Township.
C. Any person submitting an application for a license under this chapter
shall provide all information required by this chapter and such other
information as may be required by the Board. The form of application
shall be approved by the Board by resolution. Each applicant shall be
responsive to the questions soliciting such information and shall supply
all the information solicited. The failure to provide such information
may render an application invalid.
D. Each license shall be granted for a term of 15 years; thereafter, such
license may be renewed for terms of 20 years in accordance with the
provisions of § 155-16. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require such renewal. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1;
2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-01]
E. Licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive; by
submitting an application for a license, the licensee acknowledges the
right of the Township to grant additional licenses pursuant to this
chapter.
F. Licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be voluntarily
transferred without the express approval of the Board except for
transfers for financing purposes only. For the purpose of this
subsection, the transfer of control of the licensee shall be deemed to be
a transfer of the license.
G. The licensee shall not engage in the business of selling, repairing or
installing television receivers or radio receivers within the Township
during the terms of its license and the licensee shall not allow any of its
affiliates to engage in any such business.
H. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications affecting the
license submitted by the licensee to the FCC or any other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to
any matters affecting cable television and communications operations
authorized pursuant to this chapter shall also be submitted
simultaneously to the Township.
A. Licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for the present
territorial limits of the Township and for any area henceforth added
§ 155-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-5
1:447
§ 155-6. Applications for pole attachment permit.
§ 155-7. Construction and installation requirements.
thereto during the term of a license granted hereunder or any renewal
thereof.
B. Cable television and communications service shall be made available in
accordance with § 155-6 to all residences within the Township situated
along existing roads in areas indicated on the map included in the
license application.
A. Not later than 30 days after the date of a license granted pursuant to
this chapter, the licensee shall begin to file necessary pole attachment
permit applications. The licensee shall file all necessary pole
attachment permit applications not later than 180 days after the date of
its license.
B. The licensee shall commence construction of phase one not later than
120 days after the approval of all pole permits necessary for phase one.
C. The licensee shall install and make operational a cable television and
communications system throughout the streets of the Township in
accordance with the schedule submitted in the license application.
D. To the extent that any licensee intends to impose installation charges to
any specific building or property, in addition to those normally charged
to the appropriate classification of that building or property as
permitted pursuant to the terms of § 155-11D, the licensee shall clearly
indicate in its application the technical or economic reason for such
additional charges in the enumerated locations.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, wires, lines and
equipment erected by the licensee within the Township shall be so
located as not to interfere with the legal rights of any individual
property owner.
B. In case of disturbance by the licensee of any street, right-of-way or
paved area, the licensee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the Township, restore such street or paved area to
the condition it was prior to the disturbance caused by the licensee.
C. If at any time during the period of any license granted hereunder the
Township shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street
or repair, modify or relocate any sanitary or storm sewers or other
public facility, a licensee, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall
remove or abandon, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cable,
underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
D. The licensee shall not erect or place or cause to be erected or placed
any poles or other equipment in the right-of-way boundary except with
the written approval of the Board. In the event that such approval is
§ 155-5 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-7
1:448
granted, such poles or other equipment shall be so erected or placed as
not to interfere with the legal rights of adjoining property owners.
E. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the Township
where utilities' facilities are or are required to be underground at the
time of the installation of the licensee's cable television system. In areas
where either telephone or electric utilities' facilities are above ground
at the time of the installation of the cable television and communication
system, a licensee may install its service above ground. In the event
that both telephone and electric utilities' facilities are placed
underground by the telephone and electric utility companies or are
required to be placed underground by the Township, the licensee shall
likewise place its facilities underground at its sole cost and expense.
F. Where the licensee's wires and cable are to be placed above ground,
they shall be placed upon the poles erected by the electric or telephone
companies, provided that such companies have filed tariffs with the
appropriate regulatory authority governing such use. If no such tariffs
are applicable, the poles of the electric and telephone companies shall
be used for the licensee's distribution system, provided that mutually
satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into with such
companies. If arrangements cannot be made for the use of the poles of
such companies, the licensee shall place his wires and cable
underground or seek permission to erect poles from the Board as
provided for in Subsection D hereof; permission to erect poles shall not
be unreasonably withheld.
G. A licensee shall, at the request of any person holding a permit issued by
the Township to move a building, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings or equipment. The expense of such
temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires to provide clearance
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the licensee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The licensee
shall be given no less than 10 business days' advance notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes.
H. A licensee shall have the authority to reasonably trim and shape trees
upon and overhanging streets of the Township so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the licensee, except that at the option of the Township such
trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the
expense of the licensee.
I. All installations of equipment shall be durable, of a permanent nature
and installed in accordance with good engineering practice and shall
comply with all existing Township regulations, ordinances and state
laws so as not to interfere with the right of the public or individual
property owner and as not to unduly interfere with the travel and use of
public places by the public during the construction, repair or removal
thereof.
§ 155-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-7
1:449
§ 155-8. Channel capacity; devices.
J. In the construction, conduct, maintenance and operation of its
business, the licensee shall comply with all requirements of the
Township ordinances, resolutions, local laws, requirements and
specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including
but not limited to those concerning street work, street excavation, use
and removal and relocation of property within a street; provided,
however, that such ordinances, resolutions, local laws, requirements
and specifications are not inconsistent with this chapter and any license
granted hereunder and, further provided that as to matters other than
the operation of a cable television system, apply generally in the
Township.
K. Each licensee shall maintain all wires, conduits, cable and other real
and personal property and facilities in good condition, order and repair.
L. Each licensee shall keep accurate and complete maps and records of its
system and facilities and shall furnish to the Township as soon as they
are available complete copies of such maps and records. Such maps and
records shall be available for inspection by the public during normal
business hours.
M. Each licensee shall comply with all FCC rules and regulations
governing the construction and installation of this cable television
system. In addition:
(1) All cable and wires shall be installed parallel with existing
telephone and electric utility wires whenever possible; and
(2) Multiple configurations shall be in parallel arrangements and
bundled in accordance with engineering and safety considerations.
A. Each licensee shall construct a cable television and communications
system with sufficient bandwidth that, when used in conjunction with
an appropriate device at the subscriber's receiver, shall be capable of
the reception of a minimum of 52 downstream video channels.
B. Each licensee shall construct a cable television system with sufficient
bandwidth that, in addition to the downstream capability noted in
Subsection A hereof, there shall be a minimum of four upstream
channels.
C. The system constructed by the licensee shall have the future capacity of
providing two-way, voice and nonvoice, return communications.
D. In addition to the capabilities of the cable television system mandated
above:
(1) Each licensee shall construct a cable television system which, when
used with an appropriate device at the subscriber's receiver, shall
enable only the reception of those broadcast channels whose
§ 155-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-8
1:450
§ 155-9. Services standards.
carriage is permitted by the FCC and such community
communications channels as shall be specifically provided for in its
license;
(2) Each licensee shall construct a cable television system which, when
used with an appropriate device at the subscriber's receiver, which
device shall be available at the subscriber's option and cost, shall
enable the subscriber to lock out, temporarily, reception of the
premium pay television channels; and
(3) Each licensee shall make available the devices referred to in this
Subsection D for either sale to or lease by subscribers.
A. Each licensee shall transmit over its system within the Township the
signals of all television signals whose carriage is or may be required by
the FCC or this chapter or the license to the extent permitted by law.
Each licensee shall also transmit the signals of no fewer than two
distant independent commercial stations. Applicants for a license shall
designate in their applications the additional channels they will carry
when and if permitted to do so by FCC rules and regulations.
B. Each licensee shall initially and continually provide:
(1) Education access channel: a specially designated channel for use
by local educational authorities.
(2) Local governmental access channel: a specially designated channel
for local government uses.
(3) Leased access channel: a local origination channel which can be
used for specially designated leased access uses.
C. To the extent that the educational access and local government access
channels are not used for their designated purposes specified in this
section, they may be used for any other purpose specified in this
section. If at any time the channels then so designated are used for 80%
of the time on 80% of the weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. for six consecutive weeks, the licensee shall designate an
additional channel for such uses until the total channels so designated
for such purposes reaches five.
D. Each licensee shall also transmit as many FM radio signals in the
eighty-eight-to-one-hundred-eight-megacycle band as possible, the
number of which shall be determined by practical engineering
considerations.
E. Each licensee shall also provide communication facilities for the use of
the Township for civil defense, police and fire purposes, which
requirement shall be met by furnishing emergency alert capability
§ 155-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-9
1:451
§ 155-10. Performance and technical standards.
which shall enable persons authorized by the Township to override the
audio and/or video of all channels simultaneously.
F. Satellite and microwave reception. Each licensee shall have the
capability to receive at its head end and retransmit over the cable
television and communications system signals available by means of
satellite and television signals transmitted by microwave.
G. System network. A licensee shall not be required to provide and
maintain a separate head end within the Township; however, the
distribution network must feed from a single distribution point within
the Township and all subscribers in the Township must be fed from this
distribution point.
H. Remote live telecasting. Each licensee shall provide upstream channel
capability for live telecasts from:
(1) The Newtown Township Library.
(2) Marple-Newtown Schools in the Township.
(3) The Newtown Township Municipal Building.
(4) Newtown Square Fire Station(s).
I. Service to public buildings. Except as specified in the license, each
licensee shall provide each public school, all public libraries, fire
companies and Township buildings within the Township with a single
service drop and service without charge. It shall, if requested, provide
existing private and parochial schools within the Township, for
educational purposes only, with a single service drop (any such drop
exceeding 150 feet to be charged for time and material) and service
without charge. Additional drops and service shall be charged to the
facility by the licensee at cost to the licensee of time and material only.
J. Interconnection. Subject to applicable third party agreements, each
licensee shall be required to allow interconnection of its education and
government access channels with those of any other cable television
and communications facility operating in contiguous municipalities or
such larger territory as may be feasible. The licensee shall agree to
such interconnection within 60 days of a request by the Township. For
good cause shown, a licensee may request and the Township may grant
reasonable extension of time to comply with this requirement. To
facilitate interconnection, the franchisee for Marple Township may
provide dual service to the Marple-Newtown School District properties
on Media Line Road at no cost.
A. All performance and technical standards governing construction,
reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance and
dismantling of the cable television system provided for herein shall be
§ 155-9 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-10
1:452
§ 155-11. Rates and charges.
in accordance with all applicable FCC and other applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations; provided, however, that the
Township may require higher or different standards unless specifically
prevented from doing so by law.
B. Each licensee shall deliver to subscribers on typical standard
production television sets in good repair a television picture, whether in
black and white or in color, that is undistorted, free from ghost images
and accompanied with proper sound and as good as the state of the art
allows.
C. Each licensee shall transmit signals of adequate strength to produce
good pictures and good sound at all outlets without interfering with
other electrical or electronic systems or equipment or with television
reception already in existence in the area.
D. Except in the case of major outages due to storms, civil unrest, acts of
God or other conditions beyond the control of the licensee, each
licensee must provide service response for all complaints within 24
hours Mondays through Fridays and within two hours for system
outages.
E. Whenever it is necessary to interrupt service for the purpose of making
repairs, adjustments or installations, the licensee shall do so at such
time as shall cause the least amount of inconvenience to subscribers
and, unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary,
it shall give reasonable notice to subscribers.
A. Each licensee shall state in its application for a license its initial
monthly rates and installation and all other charges for service. Such
initial rates and charges shall remain in effect for at least six months
following the completion of phase one, as set forth in the licensee's
construction plan submitted with the license application.
B. Each licensee shall give at least 60 days notice of its intention to change
monthly rates and installation charges for residential service by mailing
notice thereof to each of its current subscribers to whom such charges
shall apply.
C. By its application for a license hereunder, the licensee agrees that its
rates and charges to its subscribers shall be fair and reasonable.
D. The licensee shall not, as to rates, charges, service or service facilities,
make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any party, nor
subject any party to undue prejudice or disadvantage, provided that the
licensee may establish reasonable classifications of customers. Nothing
in this chapter prohibits the reduction or waiving of charges in
connection with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting
subscribers or users.
§ 155-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-11
1:453
§ 155-12. Cable Communications Board.
§ 155-13. Complaints; service requests.
§ 155-14. Cancellations of service.
§ 155-15. Fees; financial information.
E. Each licensee shall charge rates that are comparable to rates charged
by cable companies offering similar service in the adjacent area.
A. At the option of the Board, the Newtown Township Cable
Communications Board (CCB) may be created. The CCB shall consist of
five members appointed by the Board for five-year terms. At the time of
the first appointments, one member shall be appointed for a five-year
term, one for a four-year term, one for a three-year term, one for a twoyear
term and one for a one-year term.
B. The CCB's duties shall include but not be limited to the assistance of the
development and advancement of local origination in the Township.
A. Each licensee shall maintain an office within close geographic proximity
of the Township which shall be open during usual business hours, have
a toll-free listed telephone number, and be so operated that complaints
and requests for repairs and adjustments and requests for use of
facilities may be received at any time. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-1]
B. Each licensee shall keep and maintain for public inspection a log of all
complaints and trouble calls received and the resolution of such
complaints and trouble calls. The log shall include the date and time of
all complaints and resolution of such complaints.
C. Each licensee shall give written notice to each subscriber of the
procedures for reporting and resolving complaints at the time of initial
subscription to the system.
A. Subscribers shall have the right to cancel their subscriptions to the
licensee's services at any time, without payment of a cancellation fee.
B. In the event of cancellation by a subscriber, the licensee shall promptly
remove from the subscriber's premises all equipment installed on such
premises by the licensee upon the request of the subscriber.
C. In the event that a subscriber fails to pay a properly due and owing fee
or charge, the licensee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet
upon giving the subscriber 10 days' written notice of its intention to do
so.
A. Each licensee shall pay to the Township semiannually 5% of its gross
revenue derived from services provided within the Township. If and
when permitted by FCC Rules and Regulations, each licensee shall pay
§ 155-11 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-15
1:454
§ 155-16. License renewal. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-1]
to the Township semiannually, instead of the fee specified above, such
fee as may be included in the license, but in no event less than the
amount described in this section. Each licensee shall state in its license
application the percentage fee it shall pay to the Township if and
when permitted by FCC Rules and Regulations. The licensee shall make
such semiannual payments on March 1 of each year for the period
from July 1 to December 31 of the immediately preceding year and on
September 1 of each year for the period January 1 to June 30 of that
year, each semiannual payment to be based on the gross revenue for
the applicable period. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1;
2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-01]
B. For the purpose of the preceding subsection, "gross revenue" means all
cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration
whatsoever in any form arising from or attributable to the sale or
exchange of cable communication services or in any way derived from
the operation of the cable communication system in Newtown
Township, including, but not limited to, any interconnection between its
system in the Township and any system whatsoever. This shall not
include any sales, service, occupation or other excised tax to the extent
that such taxes are charged separately for normal service charges and
are remitted by the franchisee directly to the taxing authority.
[Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
C. Each licensee shall file annually with the Township within 90 days after
the expiration of each fiscal year of the licensee a statement certified by
an independent certified public accountant that the amount paid is in
accordance with this chapter and the licensee's license.
D. Upon reasonable notice to the licensee, the Township's authorized
representative shall be permitted to examine or have examined the
books and records of the licensee to assure compliance with the terms
and conditions of this section. In the event of noncompliance with this
section, the cost of such examination shall be paid by the licensee.
E. Noncompliance with this section shall increase the amounts owing and
unpaid to the Township by 2% per month until paid, including any
material under payment of any semiannual payment.
F. Each licensee shall also supply to the Township such financial
information relating to the licensee's operations in the Township as the
Township may, from time to time, reasonably request in writing.
A. Not more than one year prior to the expiration of any license granted
pursuant to this chapter or any renewal thereof, the Board, after giving
public notice, shall proceed to determine whether the licensee has
satisfactorily performed its obligations under this chapter and its
license. The Board may consider the licensee's annual reports to the
§ 155-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-16
1:455
§ 155-17. License cancellation.
§ 155-18. Rights of Township.
§ 155-19. Liability; indemnity; insurance.
Township or to the FCC or the commonwealth in the event that any
reports are required. The Board may consider the licensee's
performance in light of the cable television industry's performance on
a national basis in respect to technical developments and performance,
programming, cost of service and the then state of the art. Not later
than eight months prior to the expiration of the license, the Board shall
hold a public hearing, duly advertised, at which interested persons shall
have the opportunity to be heard with respect to renewal of the license.
If the CCB shall then be in existence, it shall, not less than seven
months prior to the expiration of the license, make a recommendation
to the Board as to whether the license should be renewed for an
additional period of 15 years.
B. At least six months prior to the expiration of a license, the Board shall
determine whether such license shall be renewed for an additional
period of 15 years.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers accruing to the Township
under this chapter or otherwise, the Board reserves the right to
terminate and cancel a license and all rights and privileges of a licensee
hereunder in the event that a licensee:
(1) Violates any provision of this chapter, its license or any rule, order
or determination of the Township or Board made pursuant to this
chapter and fails to correct such violation within 30 days after it
receives written notice from the Township of such violation; or
(2) Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is
adjudged as bankrupt or bankruptcy or reorganization proceedings
are commenced against the licensee.
B. Such termination and cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted
after 30 days' written notice to the licensee and shall in no way affect
any of the Township's rights under this chapter or any provision of law.
A. At the expiration of the term for which a license is granted or upon its
termination and cancellation as provided for herein, the Township shall
have the right to require the licensee to remove at its own expense all
portions of the system from the Township.
B. Upon receipt of an application for approval of transfer of a license, the
Township reserves the right to acquire ownership of the licensee's cable
television and communications system in the Township, upon payment
to the licensee of a price equal to the highest bona fide offer for
purchase of the system.
§ 155-16 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-19
1:456
A. The Township and the Board shall not at any time be liable for any
injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause
arising from the use, operation or condition of the licensee's cable
television and communications system except if caused by the
negligence of the Township, its employees, servants or agents.
B. Each licensee shall indemnify, save and hold harmless and defend the
Township and the Board from all liens, charges and claims, including
but not limited to libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized
use of any trademark, trade name or service mark; demands; suits;
actions; fines; penalties; workmen's compensation claims; losses; and
costs, including but not limited to reasonable legal fees and court costs;
judgments; injuries; liabilities or damages, in law or equity, of any and
every kind and nature, arising out of or in any way connected with the
installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the licensee's cable
television and communications system except if caused by the
negligence of the Township, its employees, servants or agents.
C. Each licensee shall maintain and by its acceptance of a license
hereunder specifically agrees that it shall maintain, throughout the
terms of the license, liability insurance provided by a financially sound
and reputable carrier in the minimum amounts of:
(1) One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person,
within the limit, however, of $3,000,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident.
(2) Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident.
(3) Such amounts may be reasonably increased by the Board due to
inflation from time to time, but not more than once every five years.
D. Each licensee shall maintain and by its application for a license
hereunder specifically agrees that it shall maintain a letter of credit
running to the Township in the initial amount of $50,000 for the faithful
performance and completion of the construction and installation of a
cable television system within the Township. Such letter of credit shall
be in a form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and shall commence
upon issuance of a cable television license by the Township to the
licensee. The letter of credit shall be reduced to $25,000 after
completion of construction and installation of the main distribution line
in the Township and the beginning of construction of phase one. After
completion and installation of the entire cable television system, the
Township shall then release the remaining letter of credit to the
licensee.
E. Certifications of insurance and letter of credit obtained by a licensee in
compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the
Township Secretary.
§ 155-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-19
1:457
§ 155-20. Restrictions on release of information.
§ 155-21. Compliance with all applicable provisions required.
F. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond or letter of credit
shall be paid by the licensee.
G. The Township shall notify the licensee promptly, but in no case more
than 30 days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by
suit or otherwise, made against the Township on account of any activity
described in Subsection B hereof.
A. During the operation of the cable television and communications
system, a licensee shall strictly observe the privacy and property rights
of subscribers. The following restrictions shall apply to the public
release by a licensee of information and data:
(1) A licensee shall always indicate the number of its subscribers as a
whole number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers in
the Township.
(2) When indicating the number of its subscribers viewing a particular
channel at a particular time, the licensee shall indicate the total
number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the
percentage of all subscribers which they represent. In no event
shall a licensee release the viewing habits or preferences of a
particular subscriber.
(3) A licensee shall always release both the number and the
percentage of subscribers purchasing any service contemplated in
this chapter, but not the identity of any subscriber.
(4) A licensee may maintain such records as are necessary to bill
subscribers for the purchase of any cable television and
communications service.
B. No licensee shall maintain or tabulate or permit the maintenance or
tabulation of any data concerning the political, religious, moral or social
preferences or opinions of individual subscribers, members of their
families, their invitees, licensees or employees.
C. Each public dissemination of each piece of information made or
permitted to be made in violation of this section shall be considered a
separate violation of this chapter.
A. A license granted pursuant to this chapter authorizes a licensee only to
install and operate a cable television and communications system and
does not grant any other license, permit or franchise which may be
required by law, ordinance or regulation.
B. Each licensee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
Township laws.
§ 155-19 NEWTOWN CODE § 155-22
1:458
§ 155-22. Amendments.
The Board shall have power to adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the license granted to
a licensee.
§ 155-23. Restricted acts.
§ 155-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 162
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 107. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 165.
§ 162-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
ABANDONED — Includes any vehicle which is found unattended without
the current year's registration, state inspection or identification markers
as required by law and/either has been continuously parked in any public
street, public land or private property for a period of 10 or more consecutive
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or engage in the
business of constructing or operating a cable television and
communications system in the Township without having applied for and
having been duly granted a license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a licensee's cable television
and communications system within the Township for the purpose of
enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal,
picture, program or sound without payment to the operator of such
system in accordance with its then-current rate schedule.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to
willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment
used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs or sound.
§ 155-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-1
1:459
days or is so disabled as to be incapable of being operated under its own
power or is without one or more tires.[Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-02; 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-05]
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is wholly unfit to be
operated or which has been discarded from actual use or which is good only
for scrap.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle as defined by the Motor Vehicle Code of
Pennsylvania.107
§ 162-2. Restricted acts. [Amended 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 162-3. Removal of junked and abandoned vehicles; notification.
§ 162-4. Towing and storage regulations.
A. No person shall cause a vehicle to be abandoned upon any public or
private lands in the Township or upon any street or highway, except that
nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from parking,
storing or repairing a vehicle upon private or public property where
authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
laws of the Township, and nothing shall prohibit the placing, keeping or
storing of any vehicle in an enclosed garage or other building.
B. Except as permitted in Subsection A above, no person shall place, keep
or store or permit the placing, keeping or storing of any junked vehicle
on any public or private property within the Township or upon the
streets or highways in the Township.
A. All abandoned and junked vehicles shall be removed by the owner
thereof or by the owner or occupant of the private property on which
any such vehicle is located. Upon the failure of the owner of any
abandoned or junked vehicle or of the owner or occupant of the private
property on which the abandoned or junked vehicle is located to remove
the vehicle within seven days after receiving written notice to do so
from the Police Department, such notice being given either by personal
service or by certified mail to the owner of such abandoned vehicle or to
the owner or occupant of such private property, the Police Department
may remove the same or cause the same to be removed. [Amended
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
B. The Chief of Police or someone at his direction, within 24 hours after
any vehicle has been removed and impounded, shall notify the owner of
record of any such vehicle, either by personal service or by certified
mail, and also the owner or occupant of the property from which any
such vehicle has been removed, in like manner, of the fact that such
vehicle has been impounded, the place from which it was removed, the
reason for its removal and impounding and the place where the vehicle
has been impounded.
107. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 162-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 162-4
1:460
§ 162-5. Recovery of vehicle; payment of charges.
§ 162-6. Vehicles of unknown ownership. [Amended 4-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
In the event that the Police Department is unable to ascertain the ownership
of an abandoned or junked vehicle found upon private property, the Chief
of Police or someone at his direction may notify the owner or occupant
of the private property in writing, either by personal service or certified
mail, to remove such vehicle to an authorized junk or scrap yard within
seven days of receipt of the written notice. Upon failure of the property
owner or occupant to remove the vehicle as requested or in the event any
such vehicle is found upon the streets or highways of the Township and the
Police Department is unable to ascertain the ownership thereof, the Police
Department may remove the same or cause the same to be removed to an
authorized junk or scrap yard.
A. In removing any abandoned or junked vehicle, the Police Department
shall cause the same to be towed away and stored by such towing
services or garages as are approved by the Chief of Police. [Amended
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
B. Any approved towing service or garage, prior to engaging in any towing
away and/or storing of any vehicle hereunder, may be required to file a
surety bond with the Township, such bond to indemnify the Township
and the owner of any impounded vehicle against loss thereof or injury
or damage thereto while any vehicle is in the custody of such garage.
C. Specific towing and storage charges to be made under this chapter
shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The owner of any impounded vehicle shall be entitled to recover
possession of such vehicle upon the payment to the Township of the
towing and storage charges.
B. The payment of such charges, unless made under protest, shall be final
and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid. In the event that the towing and impounding charges
are paid under protest, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing before a
Magisterial District Judge or a court of record having jurisdiction, as in
the case of a prosecution as in other cases of summary offenses under
the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,108 and the Magisterial District
Judge or court of record shall proceed in accordance with Paragraph
1103 of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
108. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-7
1:461
§ 162-7. Arrangement for towing with police. [Amended 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
The owner of any abandoned or junked vehicle or the owner or occupant of
any private property on which any such vehicle is located may arrange with
the Chief of Police to have such vehicle towed away to a garage as a pound
for the storage of such vehicles or to an authorized junk or scrap yard upon
prepayment of a charge satisfactory to the Township Manager.
§ 162-8. Police report of abandonment. [Amended 4-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
Where an abandoned or junked vehicle is removed under the provisions of
this chapter and it remains unclaimed for a period of 15 consecutive days
without being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized
to remove the same, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to report or
cause to be reported the abandonment of such vehicle to the Department
of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided in the Motor
Vehicle Code.109
§ 162-9. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$50 per day for each day that the violation continues and, in default of
payment thereof, shall be imprisoned not more than 10 days.
Chapter 165
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 162.
109. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 162-7 NEWTOWN CODE § 162-9
1:462
ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
§ 165-1. Stop intersections designated. [Amended 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980-7; 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-9; 6-13-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983-7; 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-11; 2-11-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-1; 6-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-7; 8-12-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-10; 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-14; 6-22-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-6; 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-14; 5-23-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-2; 9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-4; 7-10-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-7; 9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-5; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-5; 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-5; 5-22-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-4; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-11; 5-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-2; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03; 9-11-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-06; 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04; 8-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 5-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-08]
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections,
the second-named highways or streets being hereby designated as through
highways or streets:
A. Florida Park.
(1) East and west on Florida Avenue at Pomona Avenue.
(2) East and west on Florida Avenue at Columbia Avenue.
(3) South on Tuxedo Lane at Florida Avenue.
(4) East and west on Fairview Avenue at Pomona Avenue.
(5) East and west on Fairview Avenue at Columbia Avenue.
B. Newtown Heights.
(1) East on Chestnut Street at Ellis Avenue.
(2) South on College Avenue at Chestnut Street.
(3) North and south on Farview Avenue at Main Street.
(4) East and west on Chestnut Street at Farview Avenue.
(5) East on Main Street at College Avenue.
(6) East on Pine Street at Ellis Avenue.
(7) North on Tennis Avenue at Chestnut Street.
C. Elgin Park — School Lane, Newtown Woods — Ellis Avenue, Poplar
Road, Newtown Woods Road.
(1) North on Elgin Avenue at School Lane.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:463
(2) West on Wisteria Road at Elgin Avenue.
(3) North and south on Newtown Woods Road at Poplar Road.
(4) East on Poplar Road at Ellis Avenue.
(5) South on Hempstead Circle at Hempstead Road.
(6) North on School Lane at Smedley Lane. [Added 5-12-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980-7; 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-9; 6-13-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-7; 11-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-11; 2-11-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-1; 6-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-7; 8-12-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-10; 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-14;
6-22-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-6; 10-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-14; 5-23-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-2; 9-12-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-4; 7-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-7; 9-24-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-5; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-5; 9-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-5; 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-4; 11-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-11; 5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2; 12-13-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-03; 9-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06;
6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04; 8-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 5-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-08]
(7) South on Smedley Lane at School Lane, except right turns. [Added
5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-7; 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-9;
6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-7; 11-12-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-11; 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-1; 6-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-7; 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-10; 11-11-1985 by
Ord. No. 1985-14; 6-22-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-6; 10-12-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-14; 5-23-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-2;
9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-4; 7-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-7;
9-24-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-5; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-5;
9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-5; 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-4;
11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-11; 5-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-2; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03; 9-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-06; 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04; 8-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-02; 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01; 5-23-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-08]
D. Larchmont Square — Dogwood.
(1) North and south on Berman Street at First Avenue.
(2) North and south on Gilbert Street at First Avenue.
(3) North and south on Gilbert Street at Second Avenue.
(4) North and south on Malley Avenue at First Avenue.
(5) North and south on Malley Avenue at Second Avenue.
(6) North and south on Malley Avenue at Third Avenue.
§ 165-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-1
1:464
(7) North and south on Gilbert Street at Third Avenue.
(8) North and south on Berman Street at Second Avenue.
(9) North on Springton Pointe Drive at Gradyville Road.
(10)West on Sleepy Hollow Lane at Springton Pointe Drive.
(11) Sleepy Hollow Drive at Springton Pointe Drive (both ends).
(12) North and south on Berman Street at Third Avenue.
(13) North on Morton Street at First Avenue. [Added 3-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-01]
E. Valley View.
(1) East and west on Mulberry Lane at Valley View Lane.
(2) East on Mulberry Lane at Pickwick Lane.
(3) North on Valley View Lane at Mulberry Lane.
F. North Larchmont and Surrey Hills.
(1) North and south on Barren Road at Devon Drive.
(2) North and south on Barren Road at Dutton Drive.
(3) North and south on Barren Road at Hilltop Road.
(4) North on Delmont Road at North Line Road.
(5) East on Devon Drive at Barren Road.
(6) East on Dutton Drive at Northwood Road.
(7) East on Hilltop Road at Barren Road.
(8) East and west on Hilltop Road at Rodney Drive.
(9) North and south on North Line Road at Green Valley Road.
(10) North on Northwood Road at Dutton Drive.
(11) North and south on Radnor Drive at Hilltop Road.
(12) North and south on Rockwood Road at Dutton Drive.
(13) South on Rockwood Road at Hilltop Road.
(14) South on Rodney Drive at Hilltop Road.
(15) East and west on Hilltop Road at Radnor Drive.
(16) East and west on Dutton Drive at Barren Road.
(17) North and south on Barren Road at Springhouse Road.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:465
(18) North on Deer Lane at Northwood Road.
G. South St. Albans.
(1) South on Ashley Road at Rhoads Avenue.
(2) South on Beechwood Road at Winding Way.
(3) West on Brookside Road at Ashley Road.
(4) North and south on Brookside Road at Furlong Avenue.
(5) South on Ridgefield Road at Rhoads Avenue.
(6) North on Ridgefield Road at Brookside Road.
(7) East and west on Rhoads Avenue at Ashley Road.
(8) East on Winding Way at St. Albans Avenue.
(9) East and west on Woodcrest Avenue at Ashley Road.
(10)West on Woodcrest Avenue at St. Albans Avenue.
(11) North and south on Ridgefield Road at Furlong Avenue.
(12) North and south on Brookside Road at Ridgefield Road.
(13) East on Winding Way at Ashley Road.
H. North St. Albans and Hunt Club.
(1) South on Butler Drive at Tyson Road.
(2) West on Caley Road at Tyson Road (3500 block on Caley Road).
(3) North on Caley Road at Tyson Road (3500 block on Tyson Road).
(4) North and south on Caley Road at Lewis Road.
(5) West on Horton Road at Tyson Road.
(6) East on Hunt Club Lane at Malin Road.
(7) North on Lewis Road at Horton Road (3400 block).
(8) North on Lewis Road at Horton Road (3500 block).
(9) East and west on Lewis Road at Caley Road.
(10)West on Overbrook Drive at Horton Road.
(11) East on Overbrook Drive at Aronimink Drive.
(12) East on Mansion Road at Malin Road.
(13) East on Caley Road at Tyson Road.
§ 165-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-1
1:466
(14) North on Tyson Road at Horton Road.
(15) East on Tyson Road at Horton Road.
(16) East and west on Horton Road at Caley Road.
(17) South on Robbins Lane at Tyson Road.
(18) South on Tyson Road at Horton Road.
I. Oak Hill — Earles Lane — Hansell Road.
(1) East and west on French Road at Earles Lane.
(2) East and west on Jeffrey Lane at Earles Lane.
(3) North and south on Earles Lane at Jeffrey Lane.
J. Saw Mill — Greene Countrie.
(1) North on Martins Road at Saw Mill Road.
(2) South on Martins Road at Greene Countrie Lane.
(3) West on Aspen Lane at Route 252.
(4) East on Aspen Lane at Sugar Maple Drive.
(5) North on Sugar Maple Drive at Sawmill Road.
(6) East on Sugar Maple Drive at Roberts Road.
(7) North on Roberts Road at Sawmill Road.
(8) East on Boulder Creek Lane at Sawmill Road.
(9) East on Timber Lane at Sawmill Road.
K. Aronwald — Wyola — Dunminning — Harrison.
(1) North on Hunt Valley Lane at Wayland Road.
(2) East on Wayland Road at Whitehorse Road.
(3) West on Whitehorse Road at Wayland Road.
(4) East on Wayland Road at Hunt Valley Lane.
(5) North and south on Andover Road at Glendale Road.
(6) West on Glendale Road at Andover Road.
(7) Northeast on Waynesfield Drive at Valerie Road.
(8) East and West on Andover Road at Golf Club Road.
(9) North on Golf Club Road at Andover Road.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:467
(10)West on Valerie Road at Wyola Drive.
(11) North on Iddings Lane at Harrison Drive.
(12) North on Green Gable Lane at Harrison Drive.
(13) South on Bridle Lane at Farrier Lane.*
(14) East on Withers Lane at Bridle Lane.*
(15) North on Bridle Lane at Whitehorse Road.*
* Note: Future Township streets upon dedication of streets to the
Township.
L. Echo Valley — Boot Road.
(1) East on Battles Lane at Echo Valley Lane.
(2) East on Phillips Lane at Boot Road.
(3) North on Echo Valley Lane at Battles Lane.
(4) North and south on Echo Valley at Meadow Lane.
(5) West on Carriage Lane at Springhouse Lane.
M. Springton Pointe Estates.
(1) Northwest on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Old Forest Road.
(2) North on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Mill Court.
(3) Northwest on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Rose Glen Court.
(4) Southeast on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Rose Glen Court.
(5) South on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Mill Court.
(6) South on Stoney Brook Boulevard at Old Forest Road.
(7) West on Laurel Lane at Stoney Brook Boulevard.
(8) East on Old Forest Road at Stoney Brook Boulevard.
(9) East on Maplewood Drive at Stoney Brook Boulevard.
(10)West on Mill Court at Stoney Brook Boulevard.
(11) East on Rose Glen Court at Stoney Brook Boulevard.
(12) South on Cherry Lane at Old Forest Road.
(13) Southeast on Stoney Brook at Gradyville Road.
(14) North on Heather Way at Hempstead Road.
(15) South on Heather Way at Hempstead Road.
§ 165-1 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-1
1:468
§ 165-2. Additional stop intersections. [Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-7]
In addition to the stop intersections listed in § 165-1, all Township streets as
they intersect state highways shall be designated as stop intersections, with
the state highways being designated the through highway.110
§ 165-3. Erection of stop signs.
After the designation of stop intersections by the Board of Supervisors, the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate stop
signs at stop intersections, such signs to be in conformity with the Vehicle
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.111
§ 165-4. Truck exclusion streets; signs.
(16) South on Hempstead Road at Old Forest Road.
(17) South on Heather Way at Old Forest Road.
(18) North on Heather Way at Old Forest Road.
(19) North on Bakers Lane at Old Forest Road.
(20) Northwest on Hempstead Road at Heather Way.
(21) Southeast on Hempstead Road at Heather Way.
(22)West on Troop Farm Road at Merlin Drive.
(23) East on Troop Farm Road at Guinevere Drive.
N. Ellis Preserve.
(1) North on Charles Ellis Drive 502 feet from West Chester Pike.*
(2) North on Charles Ellis Drive 763 feet from West Chester Pike.*
(3) North on Charles Ellis Drive 2,273 feet from West Chester Pike.*
(4) West on Charles Ellis Drive 555 feet from North Newtown Street
Road.*
(5) Southwest on Charles Ellis Drive 2,058 feet from North Newtown
Street Road.*
* Note: Future Township streets upon dedication of streets to the
Township.
110. Editor's Note: Original Section 503.02, Additional stop intersections by motion or
resolution, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2.
111. Editor's Note: Original Sections 503.04, 503.05 and 503.06, dealing with the operation of
vehicles at stop signs and exceptions relating thereto, were repealed 4-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-4
1:469
A. No person shall operate any truck, trailer, semitrailer or other
commercial motor vehicle over or upon the following streets or
highways and portions thereof in the Township:
Andover Road
Aronimink Drive
Barren Road
Brookside Road
Butler Drive
Caley Road
Chapel Road
College Avenue
Crum Creek Lane
Echo Valley Lane
Elgin Road
Ellis Avenue southwesterly from Bishop Hollow Road to its terminus
Glendale Road
Golf Club Road
Hunt Club Lane
Mansion Road
Mulberry Lane
North Line Road
Northwood Road
Partridge Lane
Pickwick Lane
Radnor Drive
Rhoads Avenue
Robbins Lane
School Lane from West Chester Pike to Smedley Lane
St. Albans Avenue
Surrey Drive
Tyson Road
Valley View Lane
Winding Way from Beechwood Road to Ashley Road
Wisteria Drive
Wyola Drive
B. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs at
the entrance to all highways referred to in § 165-4A.
§ 165-4 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-5
1:470
§ 165-5. Exceptions on truck exclusion streets.
The provisions of § 165-4 shall not apply to buses and vehicles transporting
passengers for pay or hire, to vehicles of any fire company or to vehicles of
any public utility company engaged in the performance of public utility work
or to vehicles making local deliveries or rendering service to the owners
of property or to occupants of buildings or other persons on any of the
highways or streets referred to in § 165-4 or to any vehicle owned by or
performing work for the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any political subdivision thereof.112
§ 165-6. Speed limits. [Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-8;
7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-9; 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-13;
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-3; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-4;
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2; 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-3;
5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-11;
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02; 5-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
higher than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Andover Road 25 Entire length
Aronimink Drive 25 Entire length
Ashley Road 25 Entire length
Aspen Drive 25 Entire length
"B" Street 25 Entire length
Bakers Lane 25 Entire length
Barren Road 25 Entire length
Battles Lane 25 Entire length
Beechwood Road 25 Entire length
Berman Street 15 Entire length
Boot Road 35 Entire length
Boulder Creek Lane 25 Entire length
Bradford Terrace 25 Entire length
Bridle Lane* 25 Entire length
Brookhill Road 25 Entire length
112. Editor's Note: Original Sections 503.10 and 503.105, as amended, dealing with additional
truck exclusion streets and authority to use Vascar, respectively, were repealed 4-24-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2.
§ 165-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:471
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Brookmawr Drive 25 Entire length
Brookside Road 25 Entire length
Butler Drive 25 Entire length
Caley Road 25 Entire length
Carriage Lane 25 Entire length
Chapel Road 25 Entire length
Charles Ellis Drive* 25 Entire length
Cherry Lane 25 Entire length
Chestnut Street 25 Entire length
Clark Drive 25 Entire length
Clayton Place 25 Entire length
Clearbrook Road 25 Entire length
Clover Lane 25 Entire length
Clyde Lane 25 Entire length
College Avenue 25 Entire length
Columbia Avenue 25 Entire length
Crum Creek Lane 25 Entire length
Deer Lane 25 Entire length
Deggs Circle 25 Entire length
Delmont Road 25 Entire length
Denford Drive 25 Entire length
Devon Drive 25 Entire length
Doe Lane 25 Entire length
Dogwood Lane 25 Entire length
Dogwood Place 25 Entire length
Dudie Drive 25 Entire length
Dunminning Road 25 Entire length
Dutton Drive 25 Entire length
Earles Lane 25 Entire length
Echo Valley Lane 25 Entire length
Elgin Circle 25 Entire length
Elgin Road 25 Entire length
Ellis Avenue 25 Entire length
Fairview Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 165-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-6
1:472
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Farrier Lane* 25 Entire length
Farview Avenue 25 Entire length
Fawn Lane 25 Entire length
First Avenue 15 Entire length
Florida Avenue 25 Entire length
Fourth Avenue 15 Entire length
Fox Chase Circle 25 Entire length
Fox Hill Lane 25 Entire length
French Road 25 Entire length
Frog Hollow Drive 25 Entire length
Furlong Avenue 25 Entire length
Gallagher Way 25 Entire length
Gartley Drive 25 Entire length
Gilbert Street 15 Entire length
Glendale Road 25 Entire length
Golf Club Road 25 Entire length
Gradyville Road 35 From Newtown Street Road to
Bishop Hollow Road
Green Gable Lane 25 Entire length
Greenbriar Lane 25 Entire length
Greene Countrie Drive 25 Entire length
Green Valley Road 25 Entire length
Gregory Lane 25 Entire length
Hansell Road 25 Entire length
Harrison Drive 25 Entire length
Harvey Lane 25 Entire length
Heather Way 25 Entire length
Hempstead Circle 25 Entire length
Hempstead Road 25 Entire length
Hickory Lane 25 Entire length
Hidden Spring Circle 25 Entire length
Hilltop Road 25 Entire length
Horton Road 25 Entire length
Hunt Club Lane 25 Entire length
§ 165-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:473
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Hunt Valley Circle 25 Entire length
Hunt Valley Lane 25 Entire length
Iddings Lane 25 Entire length
Ivy Lane 25 Entire length
Jeanette Drive 25 Entire length
Laurel Lane 25 Entire length
Lewis Road 25 Entire length
Llangollen Lane 25 Entire length
Locust Street 25 Entire length
Main Street 25 Entire length
Malin Road 25 Entire length
Malley Street 15 Entire length
Mansion Road 25 Entire length
Maplewood Drive 25 Entire length
Martin's Circle 25 Entire length
Martin's Road 25 Entire length
Mary Jane Lane 25 Entire length
Masons Way* 25 Entire length
Meadow Lane 25 Entire length
Mill Court 25 Entire length
Millview Lane 25 Entire length
Morton Street 15 Entire length
Mulberry Lane 15 Entire length
Munger Lane 25 Entire length
Newby Drive 25 Entire length
Newtown Woods Road 25 Entire length
North Line Road 25 Entire length
Northwood Road 25 Entire length
Oak Hill Road 25 Entire length
Old Forest Road 25 Entire length
Overbrook Drive 25 Entire length
Paper Mill Lane 25 Entire length
Paper Mill Road 25 Entire length
Park Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 165-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-6
1:474
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Partridge Lane 25 Entire length
Pheasant Lane 25 Entire length
Phillips Lane 25 Entire length
Pickwick Lane 15 Entire length
Pine Street 25 Entire length
Plymouth Road 25 Entire length
Pomona Avenue 25 Entire length
Poplar Road 25 Entire length
Radnor Drive 25 Entire length
Reese Avenue 25 Entire length
Rhoads Avenue 25 Entire length
Richards Ridge 25 Entire length
Ridgefield Road 25 Entire length
Robbins Lane 25 Entire length
Roberts Road 25 Entire length
Rockwood Road 25 Entire length
Rodney Drive 25 Entire length
Roe Lane 25 Entire length
Rose Glen Court 25 Entire length
Saw Mill Road 25 Entire length
School Lane 25 Entire length
Second Avenue 15 Entire length
Sleepy Hollow Lane 25 Entire length
Sleepy Hollow Road 25 Entire length
Smedley Lane 25 Entire length
Springhouse Lane 25 Entire length
Springhouse Road 25 Entire length
Spring Water Lane 25 Entire length
St. Albans Avenue 25 Entire length
St. Albans Circle 25 Entire length
Stoney Brook Boulevard 25 Entire length
Sugar Maple Drive 25 Entire length
Summit Avenue 25 Entire length
Surrey Drive 25 Entire length
§ 165-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:475
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Tennis Avenue 25 Entire length
Third Avenue 15 Entire length
Timber Lane 25 Entire length
Troop Farm Road 25 Entire length
Tuxedo Lane 25 Entire length
Tyson Road 25 Entire length
Valerie Drive 25 Entire length
Valley Forge Road 25 Entire length
Valley View Lane 15 From its intersection with
Mulberry Lane to Media Line Road
Walnut Street 25 Entire length
Wayland Road 25 Entire length
Waynesfield Drive 25 Entire length
Wedgewood Road 25 Entire length
Whitehorse Road 25 Entire length
Winding Way 25 Entire length
Winding Way Bypass 35 Entire length
Wisteria Road 25 Entire length
Withers Lane* 25 Entire length
Woodcrest Avenue 25 Entire length
Woodhill Road 25 Entire length
Woodview Road 25 Entire length
Woolman Drive 25 Entire length
Wyola Drive 25 Entire length
NOTE:
* Future Township streets upon dedication of streets to the Township.
§ 165-7. Erection of speed signs.
The Chief of Police shall erect on the right-hand side of the street or
highway facing the traffic to be controlled, or on the left-hand side of oneway
streets, official signs setting forth the speed limit at 15 miles an hour or
25 miles an hour or 35 miles an hour for that particular street or highway as
designated by this article and in conformity with the applicable provisions
of the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania.113
§ 165-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-8
1:476
§ 165-8. One-way streets. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-21; 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6]
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or bicycle over or upon the
following highways and portions thereof in the Township in a direction
contrary to that hereinafter provided:
(1) Traffic shall only travel on Valley View Lane between Media Line
Road and West Chester Pike in a northerly direction so that the
direction of travel shall proceed from Media Line Road to West
Chester Pike.
(2) Traffic shall only travel on Smedley Lane between Bishop Hollow
Road and School Lane in a westerly direction so that the direction
of travel shall proceed from Bishop Hollow Road to School Lane.
B. The Roadmaster is hereby authorized and directed to erect signs
indicating that the aforesaid streets are one-way streets, such signs to
be erected at the entrance and the exit of the aforesaid streets and at
such other locations on such streets or intersection or bisecting streets
as are necessary.
113. Editor's Note: Original Sections 503.15 and 503.155, as amended, dealing with additional
speed streets and use of excessive speed preventer equipment, respectively, were repealed
4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2.
§ 165-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-8
1:477

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 165-9. Definitions.
The terms used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
the Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania.
§ 165-10. Duties of Roadmaster.
This article shall be administered by the Police Department. The
Roadmaster is authorized to purchase, secure, erect, repair and maintain
all necessary official traffic signs, markings, tickets, notices and equipment
in order to carry out the provisions of this article.
§ 165-11. Parking and standing restrictions.
A. No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, upon a highway in any of the following places:
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless there is indicated a different length by signs or markings.
(4) Within 30 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, within
20 feet of the intersection of the property lines at an intersection of
highways.
(5) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any official flashing signals,
stop sign or traffic signal located at the side of the roadway.
(6) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(7) In front of a private driveway.
(8) On a sidewalk.
(9) Alongside any street or highway excavation or obstruction or
opposite the same, unless a clear and unobstructed width of not
less than 20 feet upon the main traveled portion of the street or
highway is left free for passage of other vehicles thereon.
(10)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or
edge of the highway.
(11) At any place where official signs have been erected prohibiting
standing and parking.
(12) Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals or where angle parking is permitted, the operator
§ 165-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-11
1:479
§ 165-12. Overnight parking.
No person shall park or permit a vehicle to stand within the limits of any
public highway of the Township between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. local time.
§ 165-13. Specific parking restrictions.
of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle on the
highway within a business or residence district other than parallel
with the edge of the highway, headed in the direction of traffic and
with the curbside of the vehicle within six inches of the edge of
the highway or curb. Vehicles which cannot load or unload parallel
to the curb because of type or construction shall be exempt, while
loading or unloading only, from the requirements of standing
parallel to the curb.
(13) In front of any fire station, moving-picture house or theater.
(14)Within 50 feet of the entrance of any school, church or building
used for public meetings.
(15) At any place where temporary official signs have been erected by
the Newtown Township Police Department, prohibiting parking for
a specific time period, with seven days' posted notice, for street
paving or other Township business or activities. The Newtown
Police Department is authorized to have any vehicle parked during
the restricted time period to be towed by a towing service with all
towing and storage expenses to be paid by the registered owner of
the vehicle. [Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
A. Prohibitions at all times. No person shall park or permit a vehicle to
stand in those sections or zones of the following highways of the
Township as are hereinafter set forth:
(1) The north side of West Chester Pike between the Marple Township
boundary line and Radnor Drive; and between Surrey Drive and
Clyde Lane. [Amended 7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-10]
(2) North side of Munger Road from Newtown Street Road to Clyde
Lane. [Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(3) Both sides of North Line Road from the north side of West Chester
Pike a distance of 200 feet to the north.
(4) South side of West Chester Pike between Bryn Mawr Avenue and
Bishop Hollow Road. [Amended 10-11-1976 by Ord. No.
1976-6]
(5) Northerly side of Media Line Road from Marple Township line to
the westerly boundary line of Valley View Acres.
§ 165-11 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-13
1:480
(6) 114Both sides of Pennsylvania Route 252 (Darby-Paoli Road, North
Newtown Street Road and South Newtown Street Road) between
the northern Township line and the southern Township line.
[Amended 10-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-6; 11-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-12]
(7) Both sides of Valley View Lane from West Chester Pike to Mulberry
Lane.
(8) North side of Smedley Lane from Bishop Hollow Road to School
Lane. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12]
(9) Alice Grim School. [Amended 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-10]
(a) Both sides of Bishop Hollow Road from West Chester Pike to
Hollow Road. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
(b) North side of Bishop Hollow Road from Hollow Road to
Wisteria Drive. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
(c) South side of Bishop Hollow Road from a point 210 feet west of
School Lane to a point 175 feet east of Wisteria Drive.
(10) Both sides of Clyde Lane from West Chester Pike to Winding Way
Road. [Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(11) Both sides of Radnor Drive between West Chester Pike and Hilltop
Road.
(12) Both sides of the road known as "St. Albans Circle."
(13)West side of St. Albans Avenue from West Chester Pike to Chapel
Road.
(14) South side of Hilltop Road between Rodney Road and Radnor
Drive.
(15) South side of Woodcrest Avenue from St. Albans Circle to a point
225 feet east thereof to the end of the business section.115
(16)West side of Clover Lane from West Chester Pike in a southerly
direction to the end of Clover Lane.
(17)West side of Earles Lane from Radnor Township line to a point on
Earles Lane which is 3,175 feet southwest from Radnor Township
line.
(18) South side of Caley Road from Newtown Street Road easterly to a
point 30 feet east of Tyson Road.
114. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding Newtown Street Road, was repealed
11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-12. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsection A(7) through A(44) as Subsection A(6) through A(43), respectively.
115. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(17), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-10.
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-13
1:481
(19) All the culs-de-sac in the Township.
(20) Both sides of Valley View Lane for a distance of 175 feet north of
Media Line Road.
(21) East side of North Line Road between the north side of West
Chester Pike and a point located on the east side of North Line
Road 260 feet north of the north side of West Chester Pike.
(22)West side of North Line Road between West Chester Pike and
Delmont Road.
(23)West side of Delmont Road from North Line Road to a point on the
west side of Delmont Road, a distance of 120 feet north from North
Line Road.
(24) The west side of St. Albans Avenue from St. Albans Circle
northward to Winding Way.
(25) The north side of Winding Way from the east side of Newtown
Street Road for a distance of 970 feet to the east. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12]
(26) The south side of Winding Way from the east side of Newtown
Street Road for a distance of 550 feet to the east.
(27) The south side of Winding Way commencing 905 feet from the east
side of Newtown Street Road and continuing for a distance of 365
feet to the east.
(28) (Reserved)116
(29) The south side of Munger Lane from the west side of Newtown
Street Road to Clyde Lane.
(30) The north side of Munger Lane from the west side of Newtown
Street Road to Clyde Lane.
(31) The north and south sides of Mary Jane Lane, commencing at the
west side of South Newtown Street Road and extending westerly,
on each side, for a distance of 280 feet.
(32) The north and south sides of Gradyville Road commencing at the
Township boundary line with Edgmont Township and extending
easterly on each side to a point 300 feet east of Hunter Run.
[Amended 4-12-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-3]
(33) Both sides of Llangollen Lane extending from Gradyville Road to its
cul-de-sac.
116. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (29), regarding the west side of Clyde Lane, was
repealed 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03.
§ 165-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-13
1:482
(34) Both sides of Roe Lane from West Chester Pike to School Lane.
[Amended 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-3]
(35)On the west side of Barren Road from West Chester Pike 250 feet
north. [Amended 12-13-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-14]
(36)On the north side of West Chester Pike extending from the Fox Trail
Farm property line east for a distance of 1,070 feet.117 [Amended
8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-9]
(37) The east side of Northwood Road from a point 487 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Dutton Road to a point 603 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Dutton Road. [Amended 10-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-13]
(38) The southerly side of Rhoads Avenue from St. Alban's Circle to the
northern side of West Chester Pike. [Amended 3-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-1; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-4]
(39) The north side of Chapel Road to a point 140 feet from the easterly
curbline of Newtown Street Road. [Added 2-8-1983 by Ord. No.
1993-2]
(40) The south side of West Chester Pike from the westerly curbline of
Ellis Avenue for a distance of 200 feet in a westerly direction from
the curbline of Ellis Avenue. [Added 5-8-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-3]
(41) The south side of Bishop Hollow Road from the easterly curbline of
Campus Boulevard to a point 450 feet from the westerly curbline of
Ellis Avenue. [Added 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-1a]
(42) Southerly side of Brookside Road from Ridgefield Road to Bryn
Mawr Avenue. [Added 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
(43)Westerly side of Media Line Road from Mulbeny Lane to a point
230 feet north on Media Line Road. [Added 2-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-1]
(44) The west side of Pickwick Lane from Mulberry Lane to Media Line
Road. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12]
B. Maximum 30 minutes. No person shall park or permit a vehicle to stand
for a period of more than 30 minutes in those sections or zones of the
following highways of the Township as are hereinafter set forth:
[Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) (Reserved)
117. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(39), which prohibited parking on the south side of
Rhoads Avenue from St. Alban's Circle easterly for 300 feet, as amended, was repealed
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-4.
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-13
1:483
C. Maximum two hours. No person shall park or permit a motor vehicle to
stand for a period of more than two hours in those sections or zones of
the following highways of the Township as are hereinafter set forth:
(1) Chapel Road from Newtown Street Road to St. Albans Avenue.
(2) Rhoads Avenue from St. Albans Avenue to West Chester Pike.
(3) Both sides of West Chester Pike from Newtown Street Road to Bryn
Mawr Avenue at such points where there are upright curves on the
sides of the road.
(4) East side of St. Albans Avenue from St. Albans Circle to Woodcrest
Avenue. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
D. No parking 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. No person shall park or
permit a vehicle to stand between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
local time on Sundays in those sections or zones of the following
highways of the Township:
(1) South side of Hilltop Road from Radnor Drive to Barren Road.
(2) Both sides of Radnor Drive from Hilltop Road to Surrey Drive.
(3) Northern and western sides of Rodney Drive from its western
intersection with Surrey Drive to its northern intersection with
Surrey Drive.118
E. No parking 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.;
maximum 30 minutes 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. No person shall park or
permit a vehicle to stand between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. or park or permit a vehicle to stand for
more than 30 minutes between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in
that section or zone of the following highway of the Township:
[Amended 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) (Reserved)
F. No parking 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. No person
shall park or permit a vehicle to stand between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in that section or zone of the
following highway of the Township: [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-6; 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-4]
(1) The northerly side of Rhoads Avenue from the easterly curbline of
St. Alban's Road to the northerly curbline of West Chester Pike.
G. Trucks are prohibited from parking on the north side of Chapel Road to
a point 315 feet from the easterly curbline of Newtown Street Road.
[Added 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-2]
118. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (e), No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-24-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2.
§ 165-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-13
1:484
§ 165-14. Waiver of prosecution. [Amended 11-10-1975 by Ord. No.
1975-5]
In all cases where a notice is given of any violation of this article by either
handing to the offending driver or affixing to the vehicle in question a ticket
or notice on which there has been noted the time and place of and nature
of the offense or violation charged, no prosecution shall be instituted for 48
hours thereafter, and if during that period the offender voluntarily appears
at the Township offices, voluntarily enters a plea of guilty and pays the
minimum fine established in § 165-15 to the Township, no prosecution for
the offense shall thereafter be brought.
§ 165-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-1979 by Ord.
No. 1979-6]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $5
nor more than $15.
H. No parking 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. No person shall park or permit a vehicle to stand
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. in that section or zone of the following highway of the Township:
[Added 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-2]
(1) 119The westerly side of Media Line Road from Pickwick Lane to the
entrance of Marple Newtown High School.
119. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H(1), which listed both sides of Pickwick Lane to
Mulberry Lane, was repealed 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12. This ordinance also
redesignated former Subsection H(2) as Subsection H(1).
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-15
1:485

ARTICLE III
Commercial Vehicle Parking and Storage
[Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-3]
§ 165-16. Purpose.
This article, entitled "Commercial Vehicle Parking and Storage," is hereby
enacted for the purpose of regulating the parking and storage of trucks and
construction vehicles on private property and streets within the Township
of Newtown.
§ 165-17. Word usage; definitions.
§ 165-18. Parking and storage limitations.
A. Word usage. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.
B. Terms defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and phrases shall be construed throughout this article to have the
meanings indicated in this section:
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES — A vehicle used for construction or
landscaping purposes, such as backhoes, tractors, excavators,
bulldozers and similar type vehicles.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The values specified
on the federal weight certification label by the manufacturer as the
loaded weight of a single vehicle (as defined by the Vehicle Laws of
Pennsylvania).
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of Newtown
Township.
STREET — Any street, public or private, intended primarily as means of
pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of persons or property as defined by the Vehicle
Laws of Pennsylvania, as amended.
A. No owner or operator of any truck having a gross vehicle weight rating
in excess of 9,200 pounds shall park or store such vehicle on any
residential street within an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 Residential Zoning
District or residential property located within an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4
Residential Zoning District. Parking or storing of construction vehicles
shall also be prohibited by this article, provided that this provision shall
not apply to recreational vehicles or to agricultural vehicles/trucks used
in conjunction with a permitted agricultural use and vehicles parked for
the purpose of making deliveries or improvements to a property or a
street shall be allowed.
§ 165-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-18
1:487
§ 165-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine to the
Township of Newtown of not less than $100 or no more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution.
B. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police
Department.
§ 165-18 NEWTOWN CODE § 165-19
1:488
Chapter 168
WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 121.
Sewers — See Ch. 130.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
§ 168-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include, among other things, the specific enforcement of the
Clean Water Act and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law120 and the various
regulations promulgated by DELCORA, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, and such other agencies which may succeed the aforementioned
agencies, and the implementation of the Delaware County Wastewater
Management Plan and the National Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 401 et
seq.
§ 168-2. Wastewater treatment regulations.
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations of 1991, attached hereto
as Exhibit A, and the amendments thereto set forth in DELCORA
Resolutions 95-06 and 95-12, attached hereto as Exhibits B and C,
respectively, are hereby collectively adopted as the wastewater treatment
regulations for Newtown Township.121
§ 168-3. Local limitations.
The DELCORA Local Limitations for the Eastern Service Area (the Eastern
Limitations) and the DELCORA Local Limitations for the Western Service
Area (the Western Limitations), as set forth in DELCORA Resolution Nos.
91-04 and 91-05, attached hereto as Exhibits D and E, respectively, are
jointly adopted as the local limitations for all discharges of wastewater in
Newtown Township. All such discharges of wastewater shall comply with
both the Eastern Limitations and the Western Limitations.122
120. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq, respectively.
121. Editor's Note: Exhibits A, B and C are on file in the Township offices and may be examined
during regular business hours.
122. Editor's Note: Exhibits D and E are on file in the Township offices and may be examined
during regular business hours.
§ 165-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:489
Chapter 172
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 33.
Building construction — See Ch. 69.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 79.
Natural features and landscaping — See Ch.
104.
Slope conservation — See Ch. 134.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
138.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
148.
§ 168-3 NEWTOWN CODE § 168-3
1:490
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 172-1. Word usage.
The present tense includes the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular. The word "building" includes the word
"structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof." The word "occupy" includes the words "designed or intended to
be occupied." The word "use" includes the words "arranged, designed or
intended to be used." The word "shall" is always mandatory. "May" is always
discretionary.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated in this article:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure subordinate to the main building
on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the
main building. A building or use which satisfies the definition of
"accessory building" or "accessory use" may not be a principal use on a
lot. Where an owner or applicant owns or controls adjoining parcels and
wishes to place an accessory building on the separate parcel, this may
only be done by consolidating the said parcels so that the accessory use
or building is in fact accessory to the principal use on the consolidated
lot and not a principal use on a separate tax folio.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the main use of land or of a
building on a lot and customarily incidental thereto. A building or use
which satisfies the definition of "accessory building" or "accessory use"
may not be a principal use on a lot. Where an owner or applicant owns
or controls adjoining parcels and wishes to place an accessory building
on the separate parcel, this may only be done by consolidating the said
parcels so that the accessory use or building is in fact accessory to
the principal use on the consolidated lot and not a principal use on a
separate tax folio.
APARTMENT — A room or group of rooms in an apartment house
designated for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one
family.
APARTMENT HOUSE BUILDING — A building designated for and
occupied exclusively as a residence for three or more families living
independently of one another and which building is a single building
unit for purpose of operation, management and maintenance, and/
or a group of one or more townhouses or row houses.[Amended
10-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-4]
APPLICATION — The required form to request relief under this chapter.
An application is docketed when received, and the fee is paid and noted
on the face of the form.
§ 172-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:491
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this Chapter 172
have been prepared. For purposes of this Chapter 172, a flood which
has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, which is a flood referred to as the one-hundred-year flood.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The water surface elevation
resulting from a base flood (i.e., the one-hundred-year-flood elevation).
Within an approximated floodplain as delineated in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS), or other areas subject to flooding outside of the Flood
Insurance Study, the base flood elevation shall be established as a
point on the boundary of the Floodplain Management District closest
to a subject property. When available, information from other federal,
state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the onehundred-
year-flood elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible.
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.[Amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A house in which one or
more people are sheltered or fed for profit and where the person or
persons occupying the premises are not members of the same family.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy. All manufactured homes and trailers to be used for
human habitation are buildings.[Amended 10-15-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
BUILDING AREA — The net lot area a building may be built upon
after subtracting the building area driveway. Portions of structures
that extend from the building need not be located within the building
area. These include cornices, eaves, gutters, steps or ramps, chimneys,
balconies, unroofed terraces (patios), and unroofed porches. However,
decks sufficient for purposes of seating and terraces or patios large
(1) BUILDING (DETACHED) — A building which has no party wall.
BUILDING (SEMIDETACHED) — A building which has only one
party wall.
(2)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:492
enough for that same purpose must be within the building area if they
exceed 16 square feet.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — Any area formed by lines connecting all
setback lines on a lot, but excluding floodplains, rights-of-way and other
areas where building is prohibited.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical measurement of a building from the
mean or average level of the ground abutting the building to the highest
point of the main roof, provided that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator
penthouses, tanks and similar projections of the building shall not be
included in calculating the height.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle which exceeds a gross vehicle
weight of 9,200 pounds or is greater than 84 inches in height, whether
or not engaged in a commercial enterprise, trade, profession or
industry, and which may or may not bear commercial aspects, such as
signs or attached ladder or tool racks, shall be considered a commercial
vehicle in this chapter.[Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-2]
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure designed and constructed to prevent the
intrusion of water and water vapor.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon demonstration that such use in a specified location
will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as specified by this condition and authorized
by the Board of Supervisors, which compliance is demonstrated by
drawings and related documents.[Amended 1-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-1; 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes and
construction as otherwise defined under the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
CONTIGUOUS BUILDABLE LOT AREA — The area of a lot on which the
principal permitted building is located, comprised of those adjoining
horizontal areas exclusive of the following environmentally sensitive
areas:[Added 1-7-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-1]
The one-hundred-year-floodplain areas, as defined in Chapter 91,
Flood Damage Prevention.123
(1)
123. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-12, as amended, was repealed 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5. See now Art. XXB, Flood
Hazard District, of this chapter.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:493
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A
development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care
for senior persons, including a combination of residential living units,
personal care living units, a skilled nursing facility and accessory
uses.[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility providing care, supervision and
organized educational and recreational activities for more than six
children, 12 years of age or younger, unrelated to the operator. This
facility shall be located in a building with appropriate area, designed
and intended for day care in compliance with the approval and/or
licensure requirements as specified by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Public Welfare and the Department of
Education.
DAY CARE, HOME-BASED — A day-care program, operating in a
residential single-family dwelling, for six children or less, 12 years of
age or younger, including the children of the operator.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to construction, alteration, or
repair of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured
homes, streets, paving, and utilities; mining, dredging, filling, grading,
excavation or drilling operations; the storage of materials and
equipment on the land; the subdivision of land; and development as
otherwise defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-03]
DOMESTIC AND OTHER ANIMALS — Cats, dogs, birds and other
domesticated animals may be kept in any residential district, except
that all such animals must be kept on the premises in a fenced space
unless on a leash. Livestock and poultry may be kept so long as suitable
shelter is provided in a fenced space and so long as they are kept no
less than 50 feet from any street line or property line. Horses may be
kept in a ratio of one horse to every two acres so long as an adequate
stable is provided and the space wherein the horse(s) are kept is fenced
and no closer than 50 feet to any street line or property line.
DWELLING — A building suitable for human occupancy under the
Codified Ordinances of Newtown Township. No dwelling may be eligible
for relief under this chapter unless it has access to water and sewage
disposal at the time of the application for zoning relief.
Wetland areas (including buffers) within the subject matter
jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.
(2)
Areas of very steep slopes [25% or greater], as defined in Chapter
134, Slope Conservation.
(3)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:494
EFFECTIVE DATE — The effective date of this chapter is February 4,
1938, except that, as to amendments with respect to minimum lot area,
minimum habitable floor area, off-street parking, minimum lot width
and similar requirements, the effective date shall be the date when the
particular amendment became or becomes effective.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the intrusion of some water vapor or minor
seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the intrusion of
water.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-03]
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) was completed before September 17, 1980.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
EXISTING STRUCTURE or EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — A structure
for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 17,
1980.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-03]
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are
to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FAMILY — Any number of persons living and cooking together as
a single housekeeping unit, but shall not include more than three
unrelated persons living and cooking together as a single cooperative
housekeeping unit, and said persons may not be purely transient.
FLOOD — A temporary, partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow of a watercourse.[Added 10-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for one family. (See also the
definition for "family.")
(1)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families, with one
family living wholly or partly over the other.
(2)
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building on a lot designed, altered
or used exclusively as a residence for three or more families.
(3)
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:495
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 10-15-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby body
of water including a stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area
subject to inundation by the base flood through the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.[Added 10-15-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be preserved to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That part of the floodplain adjacent to and
extending from the floodway and subject to inundation by the onehundred-
year flood. Also referred to by the FIS and FIRM as the AE
Area with an identified or delineated floodplain.[Added 10-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management.[Added 10-15-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
GARAGE —
NONRESIDENTIAL GARAGE — An accessory building used for the
storage of motor vehicles, not trucks or commercial vehicles, only
two of which may be owned and used by persons other than the
owner or tenant of the lot on which the private garage is erected.
(1)
RESIDENTIAL GARAGE — A building or group of buildings, other
than a private garage, one story in height, used for the storage of
automobiles and not used for making repairs thereto. A residential
garage may be integral to a residential dwelling or an accessory
building to a residential dwelling. Where a residential garage is
(2)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:496
GARAGE SPACE — A parking space within a garage.
GRADE — The actual level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls
of a building.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of each floor of a
building suited for occupancy as measured within the perimeter of the
outside surface of the walls of each floor, including basements, without
deduction for hallways, stairwells, elevators, closets, lavatories, utility
rooms, utility raceways and thickness of walls, but with deductions
for indoor parking and those open spaces of partial floors which are
airspace above a lower floor when those areas exceed 200 square feet
per area. Open areas of partial floors shall include, but not be limited
to, atriums and enclosed courtyards within the outside surface of the
walls of a building.[Added 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-2]
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating or sleeping purposes, not including bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other
accessory floor spaces.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES — All nonresidential uses and
apartment buildings shall provide for handicapped access by motor
vehicles by providing handicapped spaces, sized and marked in
accordance with the Building Code124 and Motor Vehicle Code.125
HELIPORT — An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure,
licensed or approved for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any
appurtenant areas which are designed to be used for helicopter support
facilities, such as maintenance, refueling and parking.[Amended
5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-3]
an accessory building, it may be only one story in height, unless
a second story is added in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Where a residential garage is attached to a residential
dwelling, a second story which will be integral to the residential
dwelling may be added and be part of the ordinary residential use
of the property.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building, other than a residential garage or
nonresidential garage, one or more stories in height, used for the
storage or repair of automobiles.
(3)
PERSONAL USE HELIPORT — Any heliport that is used exclusively
by the owner and/or operator. Personal use heliports are owned by
individuals, companies or corporations.
(1)
PUBLIC USE HELIPORTS — Any heliport open to the general
public and not requiring prior permission of the owner and/or
operator to land.
(2)
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
125. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:497
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of
a structure.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE or HISTORIC BUILDING — A building or other
structure that is:[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08;
amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — A residence occupied generally by
older or retired persons, which contains housekeeping,
semihousekeeping or nonhousekeeping dwelling units especially
designed for elderly persons or families.[Amended 1-28-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-2]
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
LOT — A parcel of land which is occupied or is to be occupied by
one principal use and/or building (except where multiple buildings/
uses are authorized), together with any accessory uses and/or buildings
authorized and customarily incidental to such principal use and/or
building and such open spaces as are arranged or desired to be used in
connection with such use and/or principal building, such open spaces
to be not less than the minimum required by this chapter. A lot is a
single tax parcel, notwithstanding that a deed may contain reference to
several lots. See also "single and separate ownership."
LOT AREA — The area of land included within the title lines of a
lot.[Added 1-7-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-1; amended 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-4]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; or
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(2)
Individually listed on a Pennsylvania inventory of historic
resources; or
(3)
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic resources.
The following shall not be calculated in determining the minimum
lot area:
(1)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:498
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner
lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side
lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than
135°. A corner lot shall be considered as having two front yards for
the purpose of setback requirements of the zoning district wherein the
corner lot is located. A corner lot shall have one rear yard. See "lot
frontage" below for determination of the front of a corner lot. See also
§§ 172-109 and 172-112 for further guidance.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance along the street line of a lot. The
frontage of a corner lot is the shorter street line distance.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area,
including the basement of a building. An unfinished, flood-resistant,
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, and incidental storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered the lowest floor of a building provided that such space
is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements.[Added 10-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
MAJOR HIGHWAY — West Chester Pike and Newtown Street Road, but
only that portion also known as "State Route 252."
MANUFACTURED HOME (also referred to as MOBILE HOME) — A
structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis, and is designed for occupancy as a dwelling,
office, school, or other place of assembly with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to required utilities. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.[Added
Seventy-five percent of any land lying within the Flood
Conservation District or located in wetlands.
(a)
Area within the title lines set aside as right-of-way for a street,
public or private utilities and all areas of easements, including,
but not limited to, storm drainage easements, sewage
easements and easements of access.
(b)
Fifty percent of the land containing very steep slopes and 25%
of the land containing steep slopes.
(c)
If the lot area (non-residential), as determined in accordance with Subsection
(1)(a) and (b) above, is three acres or more, then the area of
steep slope and very steep slope lands is not required to be
deleted from the lot area.
(d)
In case of an interior (flag) lot, any portion connecting such interior
(flag) lot to a road or street shall not be included in the calculation
of minimum lot area.
(2)
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:499
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for
the placement thereon of a single manufactured home.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel of land
under single ownership which has been planned and improved for
the placement of manufactured homes for nontransient use, consisting
of two or more manufactured home lots. "Manufactured home parks"
shall include manufactured home developments.[Added 10-15-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exit-way requirements. "Minor
repairs" shall not include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical
or other work affecting public health or general safety.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
MOTOR VEHICLES SALES AGENCY — An area of land, together with
structures thereon, used primarily for the sales, service and repair
of new motor vehicles under a manufacturer's franchise agreement,
including the sales of goods and products normally provided in
connection with such sales, repairs and service, together with a
permitted component for used motor vehicles sales, repairs and
service.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
NET FLOOR SPACE — The floor area of the inside perimeter of the
outside walls of the building or part of the building under consideration,
with deductions for hallways, stairs, lavatories and structural features.
For the purpose of determining the minimum net floor space for a
business entity or building in an SU-1 Zone District, only areas totally
under the control of the business entity shall be included as net floor
space.[Added 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-6]
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
article and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Any construction started after September 17, 1980, and before the
effective date of the floodplain management article is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the
start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.[Added
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:500
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be placed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed on or after September 17, 1980.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A lawful business use
conducted solely by the resident of a dwelling unit, but not an
apartment which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of
the dwelling. A no-impact home-based business may include a for-profit
home business or a home office for a resident of a dwelling unit who
may be self-employed or work for another employer or contract with
another company or individual, whether full-time or part-time. See also
§ 172-101.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For
the purposes of this chapter, base flood.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
PARKING LOT — An open area on a lot used for the parking of motor
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A space on a lot used for the storing or temporary
parking of motor vehicles, the space for which shall measure at least
10 feet by 20 feet, and to which there is an access road of not less
than nine feet wide from a street or alley. Where parking spaces within
a building are used for vehicle storage only, such spaces may be less
than 10 feet by 20 feet, but only where the spaces are not accessible to
or used by the general public, but, in any event, no space may be less
than nine feet by 18 feet. All parking spaces are to be constructed to
Township standards, are to be paved, and, in commercial applications,
are to be striped. Where this chapter requires all-weather parking
spaces, these are intended to be under roof. See also other provisions
of this chapter which pertain specifically to parking.[Amended
10-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-9]
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
PERSONAL CARE LIVING UNIT — A dwelling unit within a personal
care home licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which
food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a
period exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:501
of the operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed longterm
care facility, but who do require assistance or supervision in such
matters as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of
a residence in the event of any emergency, or medication prescribed for
self administration.[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after September 17, 1980 (the initial
FIRM for Newtown Township), and as such would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP).[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before September 17, 1980
(the initial FIRM for Newtown Township), and as such would not be
required to be compliant with the regulations of the NFIP.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
PROFESSION — A vocation, including lawyers, doctors, dentists,
architects and similar callings, which the Zoning Hearing Board deems
to be of the same general nature as the above.[Amended 9-8-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980-16]
PUBLIC PARKING SPACE — A parking space made available by the
owner(s) for use by all persons without the expressed permission from
the owner(s).[Amended 10-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-9]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (also referred to as a TRAILER HOUSE) — A
vehicle which is:[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (also referred to as a TRAILER
HOUSE PARK) — Any premises used as a parking space for more than
one recreational vehicle.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08;
amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts
eligible for a revitalization program and identified in an adopted
revitalization plan.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08;
amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
(1) Built on a single chassis; and
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; and
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:502
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation to which
development is regulated for purposes of elevation and/or dry
floodproofing. Within the Township, it is equal to the base flood
elevation plus a freeboard of two feet.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on at least two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which
the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average,
cumulatively equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damages occurred.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
RESIDENTIAL LIVING UNIT — A dwelling unit in a building of multiple
dwelling units, or standing alone, used exclusively for occupancy by
one or more senior persons in a continuing care retirement
community.[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — See "street line" and "street right-of-way."
SECONDARY ROAD — Any road in the Township having a paved
cartway not less than 30 feet wide and further having access to a major
highway via secondary roads, as defined herein.
SERVICE OFFICE BUILDING — A building containing sales or business
offices or the offices of a bank, doctor, dentist, physician, mortician,
surgeon, optician, attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker,
accountant, tax consultant, Magisterial District Judge, teacher,
architect, engineer, draftsman, artist and no other. No office building
shall include a store or personal service shop for retail trade or with
a service to the general public. Personal service shops include
barbershops, beauty parlors, dry cleaners, tailors, decorators and
similar uses. No sales of merchandise or goods shall be permitted in
the service office building. Eating facilities and personal service shops
such as barbershops are permitted as accessory uses when designed or
located to serve the occupants of an office building(s) or an apartment
building(s). Such facilities shall not have storefronts or store windows
and shall not be located and designed to attract the trade of persons
other than the occupants or clients of the office building(s) or
apartment building(s) if located within such buildings. All signs related
to such eating or service facilities shall satisfy the criteria for the
district within which they are located. Where a separate building is
located on the same premises or an adjoining property to office
building(s) or apartment building(s), personal service shops are
permitted by special exception upon demonstration that the personal
service shop will serve the needs of these residents and will not be
detrimental to the neighborhood within which it is located.
SETBACK LINES — See also the definition for "yards." The setback is
that part of the front side or rear yard measured from the right-of-way
line within which construction of any improvement is prohibited unless
specifically permitted by provisions of this chapter. This definition
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:503
incorporates by reference the specific definitions of "yards" set forth in
this section.
SIGN — Any surface, fabric, device or display which is viewed from
the exterior of a building and intended to advertise the business within
and/or its goods and services and which bears lettered, pictorial or
sculptured matter, including forms shaped to resemble any human,
animal or product, designed to convey information visually and which is
exposed to public view. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "sign"
shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to be
a display surface or device containing organized and related elements
composed to form a single unit. In cases where matter is displayed
in a random or unconnected manner without organized relationship
of the components, each such component shall be considered to be
a single sign. Ordinary window displays of goods and services which
are not signs as defined herein are excluded from the measurements
contained in this chapter. Included within the definition of "sign" are
the following types of signs. Notwithstanding anything set forth above,
ordinary window displays of goods and services may not constitute a
sign as determined by the Zoning Officer.[Amended 4-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984-1]
BANNER — Any sign intended to be hung either with or without
frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind.
Flags of any government shall not be considered banners for the
purpose of this chapter except when displayed in connection with
commercial promotions.
(1)
BILLBOARD SIGN — A non-point-of-sale sign which advertises a
business, organization, event, person, place or thing, unless such
sign is more specifically defined herein.
(2)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that
characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
(3)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign giving the name or names
of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions
responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed,
together with other information included thereon.
(4)
DIRECT PUBLIC ENTRANCE — The direct access to a premises
from grade level exterior to a building without transversing
corridors, halls, stairwells, elevators or the like.
(5)
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names or locations of
occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include office
buildings and church directories.
(6)
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any portable sign or sign structure not
securely attached to the ground or to any other structure.
(7)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:504
GROUND AND/OR POLE SIGN — Any sign which is supported by
structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of
support from any building.
(8)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated in any manner by an
artificial light source.
(9)
INTEGRAL SIGN — Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings
and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials mounted on
the face of a building.
(10)
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to and made a part of a
marquee. A "marquee" is defined as a permanent roof-like structure
projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building
or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and
generally designed and constructed to provide protection against
the weather.
(11)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which does not conform to
the regulations of this chapter.
(12)
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign installed or maintained by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Delaware, or the
Township of Newtown or mandated by statutes or ordinance.
(13)
POINT-OF-SALE SIGN — Any sign which carries only the name
of the firm, major enterprises or products offered for sale on the
premises where the sign is located, or a combination of these
things.
(14)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign, other than a wall sign, affixed
to any building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such
building or wall.
(15)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any sign which is used to offer for sale,
lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed.
(16)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected or constructed wholly upon and
over the roof of any building and supported on the roof structure.
(17)
SNIPE SIGN — Any sign of any material whatsoever that is
attached in any way to a utility pole, tree or any object located or
situated on public property.
(18)
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign mounted on a vehicle and used for
advertising or promotional purposes, such as a trailer normally
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(19)
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted on or attached to and erected
parallel to the face of or erected and confined within the limits
of the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or
building and which displays only one advertising surface.
(20)
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:505
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by
one or more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership
is separate and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
A lot is a tax parcel as distinguished from the common use of the
term "lot" in many deeds. Where two or more tax parcels are used
as one lot, these tax parcels cease to exist as single and separate
lots. The single usage is determined based on the character of usage,
and such factors as placement of structures in relation to property
lines are to be considered in addition to the placement of supporting
accessory building and amenities. For example, a house that straddles
a property line loses the separation of the parcels. Similarly, a garage
or pool placed on a parcel separate from but adjoining another parcel
where the principal building is located nullifies the separateness of the
parcels.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY — A facility which provides for personal
health care in a continuing care retirement community and is licensed
to provide nursing care by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added
8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — An authorization granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board in instances where provision therefor is specifically
made by the terms of this chapter.
SIGN AREA — That area enclosed by continuous straight lines
connecting the extreme points of edges of a sign. The area shall be
determined using the largest sign area or silhouette visible at any
one time from any one point. This area does not include the main
supporting sign structure, but all other ornamental attachments,
inner connecting links, etc., which are not a part of the main
supports of the sign are to be included in determining sign area.
In addition, sign area shall be determined in accordance with the
following:
Freestanding or attached. The area includes all lettering,
wording and accompanying design and symbols, together with
the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed. This includes the spaces between the sections of a
paneled sign. The area does not include minimal supporting
framework or bracing, but it does include any decorative
structure.
(a)
Painted upon or applied to a building. The area includes all
lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols,
together with any background of a different color than the
natural or primary color of the building.
(b)
Individual letters or figures. When attached or painted on a
surface, a building, canopy, awning, wall or window, the area
is that of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(c)
(21)
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:506
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A or AE.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
SPECIAL FLOODPLAIN AREA — An area where one-hundred-year flood
elevations have been identified, but no floodway has been delineated.
Also referred to as AE Area without floodway by the FIS and
FIRM.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Unless otherwise specified by the
Uniform Construction Code, and including substantial improvement
and other proposed new development, the date a building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a lot.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
STORY — That part of a building comprised between a floor and the
floor or roof next above. See also the definition for "basement."
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street or a
proposed street on which the lot abuts (right-of-way line).
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street opened or available to the general
public, excluding, however, private drives and private roads with
restricted access to authorized persons/entities, employees or business
invitees. See also the definition of "cartway." Also, notwithstanding any
provision of this definition, public use other than for specific Township
needs does not extend beyond the actual cartway of the street in
question.[Added 9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-7]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object or facility having an
ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or
not affixed to the land. A walled and roofed building, including a gas
or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:507
manufactured home.[Amended 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08;
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted; and as otherwise defined by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.[Added 10-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONS TO MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — Any
repair, reconstruction, or improvement of an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, where such repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads will
equal or exceed 50% of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads
before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement was started.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the
structure's market value before the damage occurred.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the structure's market value before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.[Added
10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — A single-family dwelling unit, one or
more stories in height, attached to one or more dwellings by one or
more party walls.[Amended 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-1]
TRACT — An area of land comprised of a single parcel or multiple
parcels which are either in single ownership or, in the case of multiple
ownership, subject to an agreement of all owners that development will
be governed by and will be completed in accordance with a unified land
development plan. A tract may contain parcels that are separated by
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:508
public or private street rights-of-way.[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06; amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The Pennsylvania
statewide building code first adopted by the Pennsylvania General
Assembly in 1999 under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as
amended, and applicable to construction in all municipalities whether
administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department
of Labor and Industry, and applicable to residential and commercial
buildings.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the Township's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed
to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.[Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; amended
9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
YARDS — See also the definition of "setback."
FRONT YARD — The required open space between the street line
of any street on which a lot abuts and the nearest point of any
structure on the lot, exclusive of cornices, eaves and gutters;
chimneys and bay windows projecting not over 18 inches; balconies
projecting not over 30 inches; and porches, steps and ramps
projecting not over 42 inches. A corner lot shall contain two front
yards. Fences, unless otherwise permitted by provisions of this
chapter, are not permitted in the front yards of a residential
property but may be constructed to the front edge of the building.
(1)
SIDE YARD — The required open space extending from the side
lot line, other than a street line, to the nearest structure on the
lot, exclusive of cornices, eaves and gutters; chimneys and bay
windows projecting not over 18 inches; balconies projecting not
over 30 inches; porches not exceeding 36 inches; and steps and
ramps projecting not over 42 inches. Residential garages or other
accessory buildings which are not an integral structural part of a
main building must satisfy the requirements of § 172-103.
(2)
REAR YARD — The required open space extending from the rear
lot line, other than a street line, to the nearest structure on the
lot, exclusive of cornices, eaves and gutters; chimneys and bay
windows projecting not over 18 inches; balconies projecting not
over 30 inches; porches not exceeding 36 inches; and steps and
ramps projecting not over 42 inches. Residential garages or other
accessory buildings which are not an integral part of a main
building must satisfy the requirements of § 172-103. A corner lot
shall contain one rear yard. [Amended 1-23-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-1]
(3)
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-2
1:509
ZONING ORDINANCE — Ordinance No. 1959-2, passed March 30,
1959, as amended, which is codified as Chapter 172 of this Code. See
also the effective date of this chapter, which is February 4, 1938.
B. Definitions contained in Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land
Development, including figures contained at the end of Chapter 148,
shall also apply to provisions in this chapter. [Amended 6-9-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986-9]
§ 172-2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-2
1:510
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 172-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township by
lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and
other dangers, including but not limited to negative environmental impacts;
providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land;
avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and public
requirements; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land, including but not limited to adequate recreational
facilities and green or open space, for concentrations of population.
§ 172-4. Community development objectives. [Amended 11-12-1984
by Ord. No. 1984-12]
This chapter is intended to foster the general development of the Township
in accordance with the Newtown Township Comprehensive Plan, as
amended, which is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this
article as it relates to community facilities and services, transportation, land
use, historic resources and intergovernmental cooperation.
§ 172-5. Intent.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
chapter is not intended to repeal the original Zoning Ordinance No. 1 of
1938 or any of its supplements or amendments, but is intended to be an
amendment or supplement thereto, revising the same in the form stated in
this chapter, and that it is further intended that the continuity of the original
Zoning Ordinance No. 1 of 1938, from its effective date of February 4, 1938,
remain in full force and effect.
§ 172-6. Interpretation; conflicting provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul the Township
Building Code or Uniform Construction Code,126 as applicable, or any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued thereunder and not in
conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation, including but not limited to the Codified
Ordinances of the Township, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-6
1:511
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 172-6 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-6
1:512
ARTICLE III
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 172-7. Appointment; composition. [Amended 1-4-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-1]
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the Zoning Hearing Board,
consisting of five members and alternate member(s), as provided by law.
§ 172-8. Powers. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the governing body pursuant to 53 P.S.
§§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial Zoning
Ordinance of the municipality and a Zoning Hearing Board has not
been previously established, the appeal raising procedural
questions shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by a Municipal Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under 53 P.S.
§ 10916.2.
§ 172-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-8
1:513
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.127
B. The governing body or, except as to Subsection B(3), (4) and (5), the
planning agency, if designated, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII, pursuant to the provisions of 53 P.S. § 10702.
(2) All applications pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10508 for approval of
subdivisions or land developments under Article V. Any provision in
a subdivision and land development ordinance requiring that final
action concerning subdivision and land development applications
be taken by a planning agency rather than the governing body shall
vest exclusive jurisdiction in the planning agency in lieu of the
governing body for purposes of the provisions of this subsection.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10603(c)(2).
(4) Applications for curative amendments to this chapter, pursuant to
53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in 53 P.S. § 10609. Any action on such
petitions shall be deemed legislative acts, provided that nothing
contained in this subsection shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish
existing law with reference to appeals to court.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Municipal Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
application for land development under Articles V and VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.128 Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the
Zoning Officer or the Municipal Engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to Subsection A(9). Where the applicable
land use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the planning
agency, all appeals from determinations under this subsection shall
be to the planning agency, and all appeals from the decision of the
planning agency shall be to court.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-8 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-8
1:514
§ 172-9. Authority to make rules. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall make rules, consistent with Township
ordinances or laws of the commonwealth, as to the manner of filing appeals
or applications for special exceptions or for variances from the terms of this
chapter.
§ 172-10. Meetings.
Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open
to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such facts, and shall keep records of its examinations and of the
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.
§ 172-11. Appeals. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
Appeals and applications to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any
person aggrieved by a decision hereunder in the manner and within the
time limits specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code129
and regulations of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 172-12. Public hearings; notice. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-4]
(7) Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 10405 and applications for a permit pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10406.
A. Upon the filing with the Zoning Hearing Board of an appeal or of an
application for special exception or for variance from the terms of this
chapter, the Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public
hearing to be held within 60 days of the docketing of the application by
the Township thereon and shall give public notice thereof, as well as
due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the same within 45
days of the last hearing. Any party may appear at the public hearing in
person or by attorney or authorized representative. The notice of public
hearing shall state the location of the building or lot and the general
nature of the question involved and shall be given as follows:
(1) By publishing a notice thereof once a week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
(2) By serving a notice thereof on the Township Secretary and on the
Board of Supervisors.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-12
1:515
§ 172-13. Special exceptions. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-14]
(3) By serving a notice thereof upon the owner, if his residence in the
Township is known, and upon the tenant or occupier of every house
on the same street within 200 feet of the lot or building in question
and of every house not on the same street within 100 feet of such
lot or building, provided that failure to give notice required by this
section shall not invalidate any action taken by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
B. The applicant shall cause notice of said hearing to be conspicuously
posted on the affected property at least one week prior to the hearing.
Failure to post notice as required shall result in the postponement of
the hearing until such requirement is met. In the event of a
postponement of the hearing, the applicant shall pay the same fees for
the postponed hearing as for a continuance. Proof of posting shall
satisfy this requirement.
C. All parties, including party protestants, are entitled to the notice of the
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board. Notice may be verbal in the case
where the application is approved or denied; however, where findings of
fact and conclusions of law are made, all parties shall receive copies of
said written decision. Further, any appeal taken by any party, including
party protestants, shall entitle all parties, including party protestants,
to notice of the appeal to be given by the party filing said appeal.
A. Where an application for a special exception is made, the applicant
shall have the burden of showing that the proposed use is appropriate
and in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
Specifically, the applicant shall show the following:
(1) That his application falls within the provision of this chapter which
accords the applicant the right to seek a special exception.
(2) That the use is not prejudicial to the character of the immediate
vicinity and will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring
properties.
(3) That the use is suitable for the property in question and is
designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be in harmony
with and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the immediate vicinity.
(4) That water, sewage, stormwater drainage, fire and police
protection are or can be provided for the use.
(5) That the use is physically suitable for the site, and there are not
topographical, soil, geologic, drainage or environmental features
which would cause the proposed development to adversely affect
the health, safety and welfare of the neighboring property or the
Township.
§ 172-12 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-13
1:516
(6) That the use is consistent with the statement of community
development objectives of the Township Planning Study, adopted
December 31, 1971, as amended and/or supplemented, including
the revised Comprehensive Plan of December 27, 2001.
B. In all cases, the applicant's burden of proof shall include the duty of
presenting credible evidence sufficient to persuade the Zoning Hearing
Board that the applicant has satisfied the criteria set forth in § 172-13A
and B and that the proposal is not contrary to the public interest.
C. General standards. In determining whether the allowance of the special
exception is contrary to the public interest, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider whether the application, if granted, will: [Amended
9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-14]
(1) Substantially increase traffic congestion on streets to such a high
degree of probability that it will adversely affect the health, safety
and welfare of the community;
(2) Increase the danger of fire or panic or otherwise endanger the
public safety;
(3) Overcrowd the land or create an undue congestion of population;
(4) Impair stormwater management or cause soil erosion;
(5) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;
(6) Be consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood;
(7) Be detrimental to other properties in the area;
(8) Affect the character of the immediate neighborhood by failing to
conserve the values of existing buildings and to encourage the most
appropriate use of the land;
(9) Adversely affect the community development objectives as set forth
in this chapter;
(10) Adversely affect off-street parking;
(11) Substantially burden water, sewers, groundwater, schools, parks
and other public facilities; and/or
(12) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, morals or
public welfare.
D. Specific standards. The following are specific physical requirements
governing the granting of special exceptions:
(1) Nonprofit clubs or lodges in residential districts shall be permitted
only under the following limitations:
(a) Where the club or organization proposes the operation of a
swimming pool, it shall either own or have available for its use
§ 172-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-13
1:517
a tract of land in one piece of not less than 10 acres devoted
and committed exclusively for swimming pool purposes.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether or not
appropriate arrangements can be made for the following items
and, if so, shall impose conditions and restrictions with respect
to:
[1] Location of the pool and buildings, such as a clubhouse or
change or pump house on the tract.
[2] Hours of operation.
[3] Off-street parking facilities.
[4] Lighting.
[5] Amplification system.
[6] Landscaping.
[7] Sanitary and safety regulations and noise control.
[8] Allied activities.
[9] Number of members.
[10] Drainage regulations.
[11] Regulations governing water supply.
[12] Operation of the pool, including requirements for
lifeguards, watchmen or supervisors.
[13] Such other regulations as may be determined by the
Board.
(2) A golf course may be permitted on a tract of land of not less than
100 acres for an eighteen-hole course and not less than 50 acres for
a nine-hole course when all of such land is devoted and committed
exclusively for golf purposes. The Board, in granting an exception,
shall require appropriate conditions and provisions with respect to:
(a) Location of the golf course on the tract, as well as the location
of a clubhouse and parking facilities.
(b) Hours of operation.
(c) Off-street parking facilities.
(d) Outside lighting.
(e) Outside amplification system.
(f) Allied activities.
§ 172-13 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-13
1:518
§ 172-14. Table of special exceptions.
The following are references to specific special exceptions as provided for
in this chapter:
District or Subject Section Description
R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3
Residence Districts
§ 172-29A(1)(c) Nonprofit club
§ 172-29A(1)(b) Nonprofit school,
church, religious or
philanthropic use,
excluding residential
clientele
§ 172-29A(1)(g)[1] Multistory garage as an
accessory use
R-1 Residence District § 172-29A(1)(g)[2] Professional office as an
accessory use
(g) Number of members.
(h) Drainage regulations.
(i) Such other regulations as may be determined by the Board.
(3) Nonprofit clubs conducting activities other than swimming pools
and golf courses shall be required to provide adequate off-street
parking for members and guests of the club and shall submit to the
Board a plan showing the proposed operation of the club and the
construction and location of the building to be used for the
purposes of the club, including parking facilities, and, if the Board
is satisfied that the club may be operated in a residential
community without being detrimental thereto, an exception may be
granted for the use of the property or building by such nonprofit
club. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-17]
(4) Professional offices in residence districts shall: [Amended
9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-16]
(a) Not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the building.
(b) Be contained within the principal dwelling of the professional.
(c) Not employ more than two persons, other than the resident
occupant of the property.
(d) Provide adequate off-street parking for both employees and
clients.
(e) Provide landscape buffering for abutting residential uses.
(f) Provide signage in accordance with Article XXII of this chapter.
§ 172-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-14
1:519
District or Subject Section Description
R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 § 172-29A(1)(g)[3] No-impact home-based
business
R-4 and R-4A Residence
Districts
§§ 172-37C(4) and
172-44A
Professional office as an
accessory use
A-O Apartment Office
District
§ 172-58C Recreational use as an
accessory use
§ 172-59G Building frontage,
length, depth and
attachment angle
§ 172-60G Mixed use of apartments
and service offices
C-1 Commercial
District
§ 172-70G Building used as a
restaurant, cafe,
catering establishment
or for food cooking or
dispensing for offpremises
consumption
§ 172-70L Building used as a
public garage, motor
vehicle service station,
sales agency, repair
shop or battery service
station
§ 172-70M All accessory uses
C-2 Commercial
District
§ 172-74F Building used as a
restaurant, cafe or
catering establishment
§ 172-74I Motor vehicle repair
shop and/or outdoor
garden center as
accessory to retail store
§ 172-74K All accessory uses
§ 172-74L Outdoor or unenclosed
uses
Setbacks § 172-107 If setbacks are greater
than minimum in any
district or less than 20
feet in commercial
districts
R-1, R-2, and R-3
Residence and SU-1
and SU-2 Special Use
Districts
§ 172-111 Building conversion into
two-family or
multifamily dwelling
§ 172-14 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-14
1:520
District or Subject Section Description
Signs § 172-127B Nonconforming signs
Outdoor lighting § 172-129A Height increase over 25
feet for areas over
50,000 square feet
Prior off-street parking Appendix A130 Minimum spaces
required (but may not in
fact be possible)
Nonconforming uses § 172-141B Extension of
nonconforming use
§ 172-141C Changes to
nonconforming use of
building or land
§ 172-15. Variances.
A variance is a deviation from the use permitted in a zoning district or
the dimensional requirements in a zoning district for the uses permitted
therein. In order to establish the right to a variance, the applicant must
satisfy the following:
A. Proof required for the grant of a variance:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot, size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 172-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-15
1:521
§ 172-16. Expiration of special exceptions or variances; extensions.
Unless extended by the Zoning Hearing Board or otherwise specified by the
Board, a special exception or a variance shall expire if the applicant fails to
obtain a building permit within the following time frames and provisions:
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation and use.
B. Standards of proof. The criteria required to establish the right to a
variance must demonstrate that there is a hardship related to the
property itself and not the personal circumstances of the owner, lessee
or other party with standing to make application or appeal under the
Municipalities Planning Code.131
C. Special provisions related to historic buildings. These provisions are
being adopted for the following reasons:
(1) To promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the
historic resources of Newtown Township.
(2) To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes on historic
resources.
(3) To encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate
their appropriate reuse.
(4) To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
A. A residential approval will be valid for a period of six months. An
applicant may obtain a six-month extension by requesting such an
extension from the Zoning Hearing Board, in writing, in sufficient time
for that to be considered at the zoning hearing immediately prior to the
expiration of the original approval. A residential extension may be
granted by the Board for an additional six-month period. Subsequently,
any additional request for an extension must be justified by the
applicant specifically as it relates to any changed circumstances that
might affect the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding
neighborhood. If the Board determines that an additional extension
should be granted, it may do so for an additional period of six months
only.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a nonresidential applicant relief
from this chapter for an initial period of one year or more, up to a
maximum of two years, when, in the Board's opinion, the applicant will
require additional time to obtain a building permit because of the scope
or complexity of the proposed project. Such approvals may be extended
for an additional time period up to a maximum of two years upon a
showing of a good faith effort to pursue the required approvals and
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-15 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-16
1:522
§ 172-17. Appeals to court.
The Township or any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may appeal to the Court of Common
Pleas by petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal in
whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board, such date (filing date) to be one day after the date
the decision was mailed to the Township.
where there are no changed circumstances that would cause the Board
to deny the application were it being considered for the first time.
C. The procedure for the grant of extensions for nonresidential
applications shall be that notification is provided to the Township and
the neighboring property owners who would have received mail
notification prior to the initial hearing, provided that failure to give
notice required by this section shall not invalidate the action taken by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Such applications shall be approved unless circumstances have
changed. If opposition is registered by the Township or other eligible
parties, the Board shall conduct a hearing to determine if changed
circumstances have affected the health, safety and welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood. If such circumstances are found, the
request may be denied, and a new application for relief must be filed.
E. All special exceptions and variances granted for residential properties
shall expire six months from the date of the entry of the original
decision unless extended by the Board. All nonresidential special
exceptions and variances are void at the end of the initial period
granted in the order from the date of the entry of the original decision
unless extended by the Board. In the absence of a specific period, all
nonresidential special exceptions and variances are void one year from
the date of entry of the original decision.
§ 172-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-17
1:523

ARTICLE IV
Conditional Uses
§ 172-18. Requirements for approval. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984-2]
§ 172-19. Approval procedure.
A. The Board of Supervisors may permit a conditional use when the
standards and criteria set forth below are considered and when the
procedures set forth below are followed.
B. Application for conditional use approval shall be subject to and comply
with the land development and subdivision ordinances contained in
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, of this Code. In
addition, trees and other green areas shall also be shown on the plans.
A. Planning Commission review. In reviewing an application for approval
of any preliminary or final plans for a proposed conditional use, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following factors:
(1) All provisions contained in § 172-89A(1)(a) through (p), which
relate to conditional uses.
(2) All provisions of § 172-13 related to special exceptions.
(3) Whether the proposed conditional use complies with all sections of
this article, all zoning provisions applicable to the districts within
which the conditional use will lie and the provisions of the land
development and subdivision standards of the Township.
B. Planning Commission recommendation. On the basis of the above
review, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Board of Supervisors as to whether the application and plans should be
approved, approved subject to conditions or rejected. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider but shall not be bound by the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
C. Board of Supervisors. In reviewing an application for approval of
preliminary or final plans for a conditional use, the Board of
Supervisors shall consider the following factors:
(1) The recommendations of the Planning Commission.
(2) The factors set forth in Subsection A hereof.
(3) Each of the following criteria shall be satisfied:
(a) All provisions contained in § 172-89C(1) through (10).
(b) All provisions of this article.
D. Board of Supervisors dispositions. On the basis of the above review, the
Board of Supervisors shall either approve, approve subject to
§ 172-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-19
1:525
§ 172-20. Other applicable provisions. [Amended 1-13-1986 by Ord.
No. 1986-3]
The following provisions relating to special use districts shall also apply to
all conditional uses: §§ 172-19D and 172-93 through 172-96.
§ 172-21. Additional regulations for residence districts. [Amended
11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13]
Conditional uses within residence districts shall comply with the following
additional regulations:
conditions or reject the application. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984-2]
A. Application requirements. The applicant, as part of his conditional use
application, shall include the following information as set forth in
Subsection A(1) through (4) below:
(1) Proposed use program: a description of all proposed uses and
activities associated with the applicant's conditional use request,
including:
(a) Program objectives and program experience of the applicant.
(b) Types of activities associated with the proposed conditional
use.
(c) Numbers of persons for which the facility will be designed and
is expected to accommodate at any one time, average day, and
peak hour and day, by the following categories of residents:
staff, volunteers and visitors. Information shall also be
provided, if applicable, on the proposed occurrences of
employee work shifts.
(2) Site plan and proposed improvements: a description of the
applicant's property and all proposed improvements, including:
(a) Existing property conditions with respect to property
configuration, existing uses, topography, soils, drainage and
vegetation, as well as conditions on adjoining properties with
respect to existing uses and the extent to which the applicant's
property is currently visible to those uses.
(b) Locations, sizes and uses of all proposed buildings and other
facilities, including illustrative architectural plans of such
improvements.
(c) The locations and sizes of all proposed streets, driveways,
parking areas and loading and unloading areas. Proposed
vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns shall also be
indicated.
§ 172-19 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-21
1:526
(d) Types, locations and preliminary plans of proposed facilities
for water supply, sewage collection and treatment, solid waste
collection, emergency water supplies for fire suppression,
utilities services, including aboveground and underground
storage tanks and emergency power, and stormwater
management.
(e) A plan showing facility changes and impact on public facilities,
including roads, water and sewer systems, private water and
sewer systems and health, safety and welfare of the
surrounding area, which the applicant contemplates for a
period of five years from commencing operation or approval of
application, whichever is later. Omission of this plan shall be
deemed a waiver of any right to expansion of facilities under
this article for a period of five years from the date of the
application.
(3) Operations plan: a description of the operational aspects of the
proposed use, including:
(a) A listing of all mandatory federal, state and county operating,
licensing and approval requirements for undertaking and
maintaining the proposed conditional use, including the
current status of the applicant with respect to their
compliance, as well as approximate dates when such licenses
and approvals are anticipated to be received.
(b) A listing of the positions and locations of persons responsible
for operating the proposed conditional use during a normal
twenty-four-hour period, as well as during emergencies.
(c) If residential clientele are anticipated to have either physical
or mental limitations that would impair their mobility or
judgment, an emergency evacuation plan.
(d) An administratively feasible means for the Township to verify
that the applicant would comply with all statements contained
in the application should such application be approved by the
Township.
(4) Community impact assessment: a description of anticipated
impacts of the proposed conditional use on the community and
those measures proposed by the applicant to mitigate adverse
impacts. Minimum requirements for such an assessment shall
include:
(a) An assessment of site disturbances, including but not
necessarily limited to vegetation removal, earth movement and
alteration of natural drainage, and the impacts of such actions
on the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 172-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-21
1:527
(b) An assessment of the traffic, noise and visual impacts of the
applicant's proposed improvements and activities on the
surrounding area, taking into account average and peak
activity conditions occurring during daylight and nighttime
hours. The traffic impact assessment shall include a report of
current and projected traffic counts and computations for
parking requirements, prepared by an individual with
professional qualifications acceptable to Newtown Township.
(c) An assessment of impacts of the applicant's proposed sewage
facilities and stormwater management systems.
B. Standards and criteria for approval. In addition to those standards and
criteria contained in §§ 172-19 and 172-20, the following standards and
criteria shall be used by the Township in reviewing applications for
conditional uses within residential districts:
(1) Density. It is the intent of these regulations to allow only those
conditional uses which would not adversely impact the residential
areas in which they are located. Every conditional use granted
under this section shall contain specific provisions limiting the
density of the proposed use. The Board of Supervisors, taking into
consideration the impact and the degree of intrusion of a proposed
use upon surrounding residential land uses, if the use is
determined acceptable, shall establish maximum limits for the
following, as applicable:
(a) The number of persons or families that may reside on the
property.
(b) The number of clients and/or recipients of the services,
including school students.
(c) The number of employees and volunteers engaged during any
twenty-four-hour period and during any one shift.
(d) The number of motor vehicles and parking spaces permitted.
(2) Frontage, area and bulk standards. The following standards shall
apply to all conditional uses in residential districts:
(a) Lot area and ownership. Every lot shall meet the minimum
area and dimension standards of the residence district in
which it is located. The tract of land on which each permitted
use is conducted shall be held in single ownership and shall be
operated under unified contract or management.
(b) Frontage on a public street. Every lot shall meet the minimum
road frontage requirements of the residence district in which it
is located. Such frontage shall be on a through street, as
opposed to a cul-de-sac, except in the case of an enlargement
§ 172-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-21
1:528
to a special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
prior to the adoption of this section.
(c) Coverage. No more than 15% of the total area for each lot for
which a conditional use is proposed shall be occupied by
buildings, and no more than 40% of the lot shall be occupied by
a combination of buildings, parking areas and all other
impervious surfaces.
(d) Setbacks. Minimum setback standards contained in § 172-20
for all conditional uses shall be waived for such uses in
residence districts. Applicable minimum setbacks shall be
those specified for the residence district in which the proposed
conditional use is located. No parking shall be permitted within
any setback area required for a conditional use in a residence
district unless specifically approved to limit disturbance to
adjacent properties.
(e) Height. No building shall include more than three floor levels,
and the height of any building shall not exceed 35 feet when
measured from the lowest point of grade at the building.
(3) Driveways and off-street parking. Where possible, as determined by
the Township, vehicle access shall be provided by two or more
driveways or streets, and, where such access points are from one
street, they will be located at least 500 feet apart. These standards
are intended to facilitate efficient and safe traffic movement and
provide for more than one point of ingress and egress during times
of emergencies. All parking requirements of the proposed use must
be met by off-street parking areas. No on-street parking shall be
permitted.
(4) Water and sewage facilities. The property and the proposed uses
thereon shall be served by public water or a private water system
capable of supplying adequate domestic needs and fire-suppression
needs, as determined by the Township, using current NFPA Life
Safety Code 101 and other NFPA standards. Sanitary sewage
systems shall be controlled or operated by the Township or the
Township Sewer Authority.
(5) Accessory buildings. The provisions of § 172-103 shall not apply to
conditional uses in residence districts.
C. Contingent approval.
(1) Any approval of a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors is
contingent upon the applicant receiving and maintaining all
necessary federal, state and county licenses and approvals for
constructing and operating all proposed improvements and uses, as
outlined in the application requirements of Subsection A(3)(a)
hereof.
§ 172-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-21
1:529
§ 172-22. Existing special exceptions now deemed conditional uses.
[Amended 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13]
To the extent permitted by law, all uses, requirements and conditions which
were authorized by special exception prior to the date of this chapter
pursuant to § 172-29A(1)(b) and (c), prior to its amendment, and herein
described as conditional uses in § 172-29A shall be deemed conditional uses
under this article for purposes of amendments, modifications, expansions or
other matters.
§ 172-23. Request for relief from mandatory provisions. [Amended
1-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-4]
§ 172-24. Table of conditional uses. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-05]
The following are references to specific conditional uses as provided for
in this chapter, the Floodplain Conservation District and the Slope
Conservation District:
(2) Failure of the applicant to comply with Subsection A hereof shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of § 172-25.
A. If a mandatory provision under these regulations is shown by the
applicant, to the satisfaction of the majority of the Board of Supervisors,
to be unreasonable and to cause undue hardship as it applies to his
application, the Board of Supervisors may grant relief to such applicant
from such mandatory provisions so that substantial justice may be done
and the public interest secured, provided that such variation will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may require other conditions to be imposed in
their place.
B. Where an applicant petitions for relief from one or more of the
mandatory provisions of these regulations, the Board of Supervisors, as
part of a public hearing, shall consider the request in conjunction with
the overall application and shall vote on the specific relief requested
separately from the decision concerning the total application. Such a
vote shall take place only after the question has been advertised in the
same manner as required for a petition to the Zoning Hearing Board
under this chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code.132
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-21 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-24
1:530
District Section Description
R-1, R-1A, R-2 and
R-3
§ 172-29A(1)(b) Nonprofit school, church,
religious or philanthropic use,
when including residential
clientele
§ 172-29A(1)(c) Nonprofit club, when
including residential clientele
SU-1 § 172-88B Scientific research
laboratories, offices, R-5 uses,
historic structures on sites,
golf courses or accessory
uses, including cafeterias
SU-2 § 172-99B SU-1 uses, nurseries and
greenhouses, new car sales,
golf courses and recreational
uses, convalescent and
nursing homes, service office
buildings, schools,
dormitories, church, religious
or philanthropic uses or
restaurants, if food consumed
on premises
All districts except
A-O, A and C-1
§§ 172-145 and
172-148
Heliports landing between
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
Slope conservation § 134-7 Conservation and recreation,
cultivation and agriculture,
sealed water supply wells,
accessory uses or road or
access driveways
Floodplain § 91-7133 Sanitary and storm sewers,
outpost and pumping
stations, aboveground utility
lines, drains, culverts and
bridges, grading or
degrading, paved roads,
drives and parking lots,
impounding basins or similar
structures
R-1, R-1A, R2 and
R-3
§ 172-29A(2), Article
XXD
Cluster Development
Community Overlay District
133. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-12, as amended, was repealed 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5. See now Art. XXB, Flood
Hazard District, of this chapter.
§ 172-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-25
1:531
§ 172-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-2; 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13]
All violations of the provisions of conditional use permits issued pursuant to
this article shall be deemed to be violations of this chapter for purposes of
the enforcement provisions of Article XXXI.
§ 172-25 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-25
1:532
ARTICLE V
Districts and Zoning Map
§ 172-26. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 1-28-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-1; 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-2; 1-28-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-5; 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-6; 1-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-1]
For the purpose of this chapter, Newtown Township is hereby divided into
15 classes of districts, which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Residence District
R-1A Residence District
R-2 Residence District
R-3 Residence District
R-4 Residence District
R-4A Residence District
R-5 Residence District
A Apartment District
A-O Apartment Office District
O Office District
C-1 Commercial District
C-2 Commercial District
I Light Industrial District [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-4]
SU-1 Special Use District
SU-2 Special Use District
CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community District [Added
8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
§ 172-27. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the districts shall be as shown on the map attached to
and made a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the "Zoning
Map of Newtown Township." The map and all notations, references and
dates shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.134
§ 172-28. District boundaries.
134. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 172-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-28
1:533
A. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets or other rights-of-way or such lines
extended or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto.
B. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the time of the adoption of this chapter, the regulations as
to the use in the less-restricted district shall extend over the portion of
the lot in the more-restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the district boundary line, provided that, in the case of a lot
other than a corner lot, the regulations as to the use in the lessrestricted
district may extend a distance more than 50 feet beyond the
district boundary line when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing.
§ 172-28 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-28
1:534
ARTICLE VI
R-1 Residence Districts
§ 172-29. Use regulations; lot and area requirements.
In R-1 Residence Districts, there are numerous regulations and definitions
within this chapter that will also apply, including but not limited to such
things as corner lots, accessory buildings, swimming pools, fences and
many others. The requirements of this chapter and all other rules and
regulations incorporated herein apply to each of the zoning districts. Please
review the definitions and Table of Contents135 to investigate any other
potential application of this chapter to your specific issue. In addition to
these other requirements, the following regulations apply to this zoning
district:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Public school, parochial school, nonprofit school, church,
religious use or philanthropic use when authorized as a special
exception, when residential clientele are included, only if
determined by the Board of Supervisors, in its sole and
unconditional discretion, to be a harmonious and compatible
use, and when authorized as a conditional use. "Residential
clientele," for purposes of this section, means persons using
the facility for overnight occupancy, other than staff members.
(c) Nonprofit club when authorized as a special exception, when
residential clientele are included, only if determined by the
Board of Supervisors, in its sole and unconditional discretion,
to be a harmonious and compatible use, and when authorized
as a conditional use. The operation of a club principally as a
business is prohibited. "Residential clientele," for purposes of
this section, means persons using the facility for overnight
occupancy, other than staff members. [Amended 11-11-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-13]
(d) Tilling of soil.
(e) Municipal building and municipal use.
(f) 136Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses and not
135. Editor's Note: See the scheme at the beginning of this chapter.
136. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(f), Cluster development communities, was repealed
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection
A(1)(g) as Subsection A(1)(f).
§ 172-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-29
1:535
seriously detrimental to a residential neighborhood. The term
"accessory use" does not include a business use but includes:
[1] One-story garages, provided that an additional story may
be added when authorized as a special exception. See also
§ 172-103.
[2] Professional offices when authorized as a special
exception. See § 172-14. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-16]
[3] Other no-impact home occupations permitted by special
exception in accordance with the provisions of § 172-101.
[4] Parking in accordance with Article XXIV, provided that no
private driveway or off-street parking area shall be used
for the storage or parking of any commercial vehicle,
except in such cases when construction or other work is
being done on the premises or the parking or storage is of
a temporary nature. For the purpose of this section,
"storage or parking" and "nontemporary nature" shall be
defined as the leaving of such vehicle or truck unattended
for a period in excess of two hours. [Added 11-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-2]
[5] Accessory buildings in accordance with § 172-103. A
building or use which satisfies the definition of "accessory
building" or "accessory use" may not be a principal use on
a lot. Where an owner or applicant owns or controls
adjoining parcels and wishes to place an accessory
building on the separate parcel, this may only be done by
consolidating the said parcels within a deed so that the
accessory use or building is in fact accessory to the
principal use on the consolidated lot and not a principal
use on a separate tax folio.
[6] Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXII.
[7] Domestic and other animals.
[a] Cats, dogs, birds and other domesticated animals may
be kept in any residential district, except that all such
animals must be kept on the premises in a fenced
space unless on a leash.
[b] All horses, livestock and poultry may be kept so long
as suitable shelter is provided in a fenced space and so
long as the shelter is no less than 50 feet from any
street line or property line. Horses may be kept in a
ratio of one horse to every two acres so long as an
adequate stable is provided and the space wherein the
§ 172-29 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-29
1:536
horse(s) are kept is fenced and the shelter is no closer
than 50 feet from any street line or property line.
(2) Cluster development communities shall be permitted with
conditional use approval of the Board of Supervisors purusant to
the provisions and requirements of Article XXD, Cluster
Development Community Overlay District. [Added 8-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-6; 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
(3) Conditional uses proposed shall be processed pursuant to Article
IV. [Amended 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13]
B. Frontage and area regulations. [Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1]
(1) Lot area and frontage.
(a) A lot area of not less than 60,000 square feet shall be provided
for every building hereafter erected or used, in whole or in
part, as a dwelling. Such lot shall have a frontage of at least
175 feet.
(b) Whenever the Board of Supervisors, after a public hearing for
which notice of the time and place of the hearing has been
given by posting at the Township Municipal Building and by
publishing notice once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Township, finds that
the grade of the ground, its terrain or its shape is such that lots
cannot be developed without creating an undue hardship, the
Board of Supervisors may reduce the lot frontages and the
square foot requirements, provided that the lot frontages are
not less than 150 feet and that the lots in the tract of ground
under subdivision average not less than 60,000 square feet.
[Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
(c) See also §§ 172-107, 172-110, 172-112 and 172-103F for
properties in excess of three acres.
(2) Contiguous buildable lot area. The minimum contiguous lot area
shall consist of not less than 30,000 square feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 15% of the lot
area.
(4) Total impervious surface shall not exceed 25% of lot area.
(5) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts, which shall be not less than 75 feet in depth.
(6) Side yards. There shall be two side yards which shall be not less
than 85 feet in aggregate width, and neither of which shall be less
than 40 feet in width. See also § 172-107.
§ 172-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-29
1:537
§ 172-30. Nonseverability of certain sections. [Amended 11-11-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-13]
It is the intent of this section that § 172-29A(1)(b) and (c), (2) and (3)
and §§ 172-21 and 172-22 shall not be severable, and therefore, if any
of § 172-29A(1)(b) and (c), (2) and (3) shall be determined to be illegal
by virtue of the discretion vested in the Board of Supervisors or for any
other reason, then uses defined as "conditional uses" herein shall not be
permitted uses in residence zones. In such event, the rights of any thenexisting
such uses shall be defined by the laws applicable to nonconforming
uses.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 50 feet in depth.
(8) Driveways and/or parking spaces shall be no closer than five feet
from any property line.
(9) Building height shall be no more than 45 feet, as measured in
accordance with Article I, § 172-2, Definitions. [Amended
5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
C. Regulations for nonresidential uses in residential districts. [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
(1) General regulations.
(a) A fifty-foot special or primary buffer shall be installed between
any proposed nonresidential use and a residential use or
zoning district. The buffer shall conform to the requirements of
§ 104-14D of Chapter 104, Natural Features and Landscaping,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
(b) The maximum impervious area permitted is 50% of the lot
area, exclusive of the road rights-of-way.
(2) Parking lot paving setback.
(a) There shall be no parking or paving permitted in the required
front yard except to provide an access drive to the site.
(b) There shall be no parking or paving permitted from the lot line
to 1/2 the distance to the nearest building in the required side
or rear yard.137
137. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Cluster housing option, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05.
§ 172-29 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-30
1:538
ARTICLE VII
R-1A Residence Districts
§ 172-31. Use regulations; lot and area requirements.
In R-1A Residence Districts, there are numerous regulations and definitions
within this chapter that will apply, including but not limited to such things
as corner lots, accessory buildings, swimming pools, fences and many
others. The requirements of this chapter and all other rules and regulations
incorporated herein apply to each of the zoning districts. Please review
the definitions and Table of Contents138 to investigate any other potential
application of this chapter to your specific issue. In addition to these other
requirements, the following regulations apply to this zoning district:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Any use permitted in R-1 Residence Districts.
(2) The provisions of § 172-29A(1), (2) and (3) also apply.
B. Frontage and area regulations. [Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1]
(1) Lot area and frontage. A lot area of not less than 45,000 square feet
shall be provided for every building hereafter erected or used, in
whole or in part, as a dwelling. Such lot shall have a frontage of at
least 150 feet. See also §§ 172-107, 172-110 and 172-112.
(2) Contiguous buildable lot area. The minimum contiguous lot area
shall consist of not less than 22,500 square feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 15% of the lot
area.
(4) Impervious surface shall not exceed 25% of lot area.
(5) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 75 feet in depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards which shall be not less
than 60 feet in aggregate width, and neither of which shall be less
than 25 feet in width. See also §§ 172-107 and 172-109.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 50 feet in depth.
(8) Driveways and/or parking spaces shall be no closer than five feet
from any property line.
138. Editor's Note: See the scheme at the beginning of this chapter.
§ 172-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-31
1:539
§ 172-32. Exceptions.
In R-1A Residence Districts, a building may be erected or altered on any lot
held on November 5, 1961, in single and separate ownership which is not
of the required minimum area or frontage or is of such unusual dimensions
that the owner would have difficulty in providing the required open spaces
specified in the R-1A Residence District and on lots heretofore subdivided
by a plan approved under Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
(9) Building height shall be no more than 45 feet, as measured in
accordance with Article I, § 172-2, Definitions. [Amended
5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
C. Regulations for nonresidential uses in residential districts. [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
(1) General regulations.
(a) A fifty-foot special or primary buffer shall be installed between
any proposed nonresidential use and a residential use or
zoning district. The buffer shall conform to the requirements of
§ 104-14D of Chapter 104, Natural Features and Landscaping,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
(b) The maximum impervious area permitted is 50% of the lot
area, exclusive of the road rights-of-way.
(2) Parking lot paving setback.
(a) There shall be no parking or paving permitted in the required
front yard except to provide an access drive to the site.
(b) There shall be no parking or paving permitted from the lot line
to 1/2 the distance to the nearest building in the required side
or rear yard.
§ 172-31 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-32
1:540
ARTICLE VIII
R-2 Residence Districts
§ 172-33. Use regulations; lot and area requirements.
In R-2 Residence Districts, there are numerous regulations and definitions
within this chapter that will apply, including but not limited to such things
as corner lots, accessory buildings, swimming pools, fences and many
others. The requirements of this chapter and all other rules and regulations
incorporated herein apply to each of the zoning districts. Please review
the definitions and Table of Contents139 to investigate any other potential
application of this chapter to your specific issue. In addition to these other
requirements, the following regulations apply to this zoning district:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Any use permitted in R-1 Residence Districts.
(2) The open space option, in accordance with Articles IV and XXA of
this chapter. [Added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-6]
(3) The provisions of § 172-29A(1), (2) and (3) also apply.
B. Frontage and area regulations. [Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1]
(1) Lot area and frontage. A lot area of not less than 25,000 square feet
shall be provided for every building hereafter erected or used, in
whole or in part, as a dwelling. Such lot shall have a frontage of at
least 125 feet. See also §§ 172-107, 172-110 and 172-112.
(2) Contiguous buildable lot area. The minimum contiguous lot area
shall consist of not less than 12,500 feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 15% of the lot
area.
(4) Impervious surface shall not exceed 30%.
(5) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 60 feet in depth.
(6) Side yards. There shall be two side yards which shall be not less
than 45 feet in aggregate width, and neither of which shall be less
than 20 feet width. See also §§ 172-107 and 172-109.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 40 feet in depth.
(8) Driveways and/or parking spaces shall be no closer than five feet
from any property line.
139. Editor's Note: See the scheme at the beginning of this chapter.
§ 172-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-33
1:541
(9) Building height shall be no more than 45 feet, as measured in
accordance with Article I, § 172-2, Definitions. [Amended
5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
C. Regulations for nonresidential uses in residential districts. [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
(1) General regulations.
(a) A fifty-foot special or primary buffer shall be installed between
any proposed nonresidential use and a residential use or
zoning district. The buffer shall conform to the requirements of
§ 104-14D of Chapter 104, Natural Features and Landscaping,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
(b) The maximum impervious area permitted is 50% of the lot
area, exclusive of the road rights-of-way.
(2) Parking lot paving setback.
(a) There shall be no parking or paving permitted in the required
front yard except to provide an access drive to the site.
(b) There shall be no parking or paving permitted from the lot line
to 1/2 the distance to the nearest building in the required side
or rear yard.
§ 172-33 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-33
1:542
ARTICLE IX
R-3 Residence Districts
§ 172-34. Use regulations; lot and area requirements.
In R-3 Residence Districts, there are numerous regulations and definitions
within this chapter that will apply, including but not limited to such things
as corner lots, accessory buildings, swimming pools, fences and many
others. The requirements of this chapter and all other rules and regulations
incorporated herein apply to each of the zoning districts. Please review
the definitions and Table of Contents140 to investigate any other potential
application of this chapter to your specific issue. In addition to these other
requirements, the following regulations apply to this zoning district:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Any use permitted in R-2 Residence Districts.
(2) The open space option, in accordance with Articles IV and XXA of
this chapter. [Added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-6]
(3) The provisions of § 172-29A(1), (2) and (3) also apply.
B. Frontage and area regulations. [Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1]
(1) Lot area and frontage. A lot area of not less than 12,000 square feet
shall be provided for every building hereafter erected or used, in
whole or in part, as a dwelling. Such lot shall have a frontage of at
least 80 feet. See also §§ 172-107, 172-110 and 172-112.
(2) Contiguous buildable lot area. The minimum contiguous lot area
shall consist of not less than 6,000 square feet.
(3) Building area. Building area shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
(4) Impervious surface shall not exceed 40%.
(5) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 45 feet in depth. See also
§§ 172-107, 172-110 and 172-112.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards which shall not be less
than 35 feet in aggregate width, and neither of which shall be less
than 15 feet in width. See also §§ 172-107 and 172-109.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 25 feet in depth.
(8) Driveways and/or parking spaces shall be no closer than five feet
from any property line.
140. Editor's Note: See the scheme at the beginning of this chapter.
§ 172-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-34
1:543
(9) Building height shall be no more than 35 feet, as measured in
accordance with Article I, § 172-2, Definitions, and shall be
constructed not to exceed 2 1/2 stories because of density in the
R-3 District. [Added 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
C. Regulations for nonresidential uses in residential districts. [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
(1) General regulations.
(a) A fifty-foot special or primary buffer shall be installed between
any proposed nonresidential use and a residential use or
zoning district. The buffer shall conform to the requirements of
§ 104-14D of Chapter 104, Natural Features and Landscaping,
of the Code of the Township of Newtown.
(b) The maximum impervious area permitted is 50% of the lot
area, exclusive of the road rights-of-way.
(2) Parking lot paving setback.
(a) There shall be no parking or paving permitted in the required
front yard except to provide an access drive to the site.
(b) There shall be no parking or paving permitted from the lot line
to 1/2 the distance to the nearest building in the required side
or rear yard.
D. An existing building may be used as a cellular communications facility
by conditional use.
(1) Purposes. Purposes shall be as follows:
(a) To further accommodate the need for cellular communications
antennas while regulating their location in the Township.
(b) To minimize adverse visual effects of cellular communications
antennas through proper design, citing and vegetative
screening for equipment shelters.
(c) To encourage the joint use of any new cellular communications
facility so as to reduce the number of such facilities needed in
the future.
(d) To protect the safety and welfare of residents of Newtown
Township.
(2) Use regulations.
(a) A wireless communications facility is permitted on an existing
building by conditional use in an R-3 Residence District,
subject to the restrictions set forth in this chapter.
§ 172-34 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-34
1:544
(b) In addition to the notice requirements for a conditional use
hearing provided in Chapter 172, Article IV, the Board of
Supervisors shall also mail a notice of the conditional use
hearing, at the applicant's expense, to all property owners
within 500 feet of the proposed antenna structure, provided
that failure to receive notice required by this subsection shall
not invalidate any action taken by the Board.
(c) Business offices, maintenance depots, and vehicle storage
buildings are prohibited from the site of a wireless
communications facility, except for accompanying equipment
shelters needed for the operation of the cellular
communications facility.
(3) Additional standards of approval of conditional use.
(a) The wireless communications company is required to
demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the proposed
height of the antenna is the minimum height necessary to fill a
gap in service.
(b) Antenna height. Communications antennas attached to an
existing building shall be permitted to exceed the height of the
existing building roofline by no more than 20 feet.
(c) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna is
structurally sound.
(d) Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building shall submit evidence from a
Pennsylvania-registered professional engineer certifying that
the proposed installation will not exceed the structural
capacity of the building, considering wind and other loads
associated with the antennas location.
(e) Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building shall submit detailed construction and
elevation drawings indicating how the antennas will be
mounted on the structure for review by the Township for
compliance with the Newtown Township Building Code141 and
other applicable laws.
(f) Wireless communications facilities shall comply with all
applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation. The applicant shall submit an
annual report to the Township confirming that the applicant's
antenna facility is operating within the FCC guidelines.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-34
1:545
(g) Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency
interference with other communications facilities located in
the Township that are regulated by the FCC.
(4) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required to screen as much as
possible of any equipment storage facility in order to soften the
appearance of any equipment storage facility. The Township may
permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences, or other features, instead of landscaping, if they
achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping.
When an antenna is mounted on an existing structure, and other
equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall
not be required. However, existing vegetation on and around the
site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
(5) The wireless communications company must demonstrate that it is
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate
the wireless communications facility for which application is sought
and must provide the Township annually with documentation that it
continues to be so licensed. The wireless communications company
shall submit, upon application, a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license, the name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications support structure and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the
specific wireless communications facility for which the application
if filed.
(6) A full site plan shall be required for all wireless communications
facilities, showing the antenna, antenna support structure,
building, landscaping and all other requirements for Chapter 148,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(7) When proposing to mount a wireless communications facility on a
building, the applicant shall submit evidence of agreements and/or
easements necessary to provide access to the building on which the
antennas are to be mounted so that installation and maintenance of
the facility can be accomplished.
(8) All antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in
diameter.
(9) Building-mounted cellular communications antennas shall not be
located on any pole or any building used as a single-family
dwelling, two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, buildings used
as active primary and secondary educational facilities at the time of
adoption of this chapter or any accessory building.
(10) All other types of cellular communications facilities are prohibited
except antennas mounted on buildings as aforesaid described, and
§ 172-34 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-34
1:546
such buildings shall not include structures, the primary purpose of
which is to enhance the structures or place the communications
facilities on them.
§ 172-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-34
1:547

ARTICLE X
R-4 Residence Districts
[Added 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-1]
§ 172-35. Applicability.
In R-4 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-36. Purpose.
R-4 Residence Districts are designed to make special provisions for
townhouses and row house residential housing developments in appropriate
land areas.
§ 172-37. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 172-38. Frontage and area regulations.
A. Detached single-family dwellings.
B. Townhouses or row houses.
C. Accessory uses designed for use of the residents of an R-4 Residence
District shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Accessory recreational uses, such as tennis courts, swimming
pools, tot-lots or sauna baths, or other recreational uses or facilities
used with and customarily incidental to the foregoing permitted
uses and not seriously detrimental to a residential neighborhood.
(2) Management offices, for sale or rental, superintendent or
maintenance offices and facilities.
(3) Attached or one-story detached private garages.
(4) Professional offices when authorized as a special exception.
D. Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXII.
A. Land shall be developed in accordance with the Township subdivision
and land development procedures on a parcel of land of a minimum of
10 acres, hereinafter referred to as the "tract." The tract shall have a
frontage along a street that permits public access. A maximum of four
dwelling units per acre shall be permitted when averaged over the net
area of the entire tract, herein defined to exclude all public street
rights-of-way.
B. The following regulations shall apply:
§ 172-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-38
1:549
(1) Each dwelling unit lot shall be developed as part of a multibuilding
tract of at least 10 acres, with structural units containing not more
than six dwelling units arranged in harmonious groupings, with
building coverages not to exceed 15% of the net area of the tract.
The paved area, exclusive of the area covered by building and
allowed accessory uses, shall not exceed 30% of the net area of the
tract.
(2) Buildings shall be set back from streets and property lines of the
tract by 100 feet where abutting R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Residence
Districts and 75 feet in all other cases.
(3) Setback requirements.
(a) No building shall be closer than 10 feet to any parking area or
cartway, excluding driveways to a garage held for the sole use
of any dwelling unit, except where preservation of natural
features is dictated when authorized as part of an overall land
development plan. Dwelling units may be constructed in
clusters; provided, however, that each cluster or attached
group of dwelling units shall be separated from any other
cluster or attached group as follows:
[1] At blank walls: 30 feet.
[2] At walls with windows: 50 feet.
(b) Where a dwelling unit cluster faces upon an inner court, the
minimum dimensions of the court shall be 60 feet by 60 feet.
(4) Each dwelling unit shall be separated from others by party walls
extending to the roof.
(5) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than 1,200 square feet of
habitable floor space which shall be exclusive of any floor space
contained in the cellar or basement and garage. The habitable floor
space shall be that space which is included in the area within the
walls of any dwelling unit which can be used principally and
primarily for living quarters of one or more human beings.
(6) Not less than 30% of all dwelling units within the development
tract shall have a garage.
(7) If, in accordance with Section 106 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code142 or any statute of similar import,
the owner(s) and/or developer(s) offer(s) to dedicate any portion(s)
of the tract to Newtown Township, and if the offer of dedication is
accepted by Newtown Township, then, in such event or events, the
owner(s) and/or developer(s) of the tract shall have the right to
include the donated portion(s) of the tract as part of the overall
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10106.
§ 172-38 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-38
1:550
§ 172-39. Height regulations. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-4]
No building shall exceed three stories, including the basement, or,
alternatively, 35 feet in height, as measured in accordance with the
definition of "building height" in this chapter.
§ 172-40. Tract ownership; division.
Except as hereinabove set forth in § 172-38B(7), all land in the tract,
together with any improvements thereon, shall remain, exclusively and
in perpetuity, in single or undivided common ownership for the benefit
of the dwelling unit owner or owners, including an owner or owners of
condominium units, except that the tract may be divided, in whole or
in part, into separate lots for the conveyance and transfer of individual
dwelling unit lots; provided, however, that, in such event, all other land
in the tract, together with any improvements thereon, shall remain,
exclusively and in perpetuity, in single or undivided common ownership for
the benefit of the dwelling unit owner or owners, including an owner or
owners of condominium units.
§ 172-41. Common open space.
tract for purposes of computing, where applicable, density, lot area,
frontage requirements, building area, front, side and rear yards,
building frontage depth, buffer area and total lot area coverage.
A. Not less than 40% of the tract area shall be designated in the
subdivision or land development plan as common open space.
B. Common open space shall be land that is appropriate and in suitable
condition for recreation, park sites, woodland conservation, floodplains,
tennis courts, swimming pools, tot-lots or a similar recreation or open
space purpose.
C. Common open space shall be contiguous to the development and be
reasonable and safely accessible from the dwelling units.
D. Consideration shall be given to take advantage of physical
characteristics of the site and to place common open space within easy
access and view of dwelling units while at the same time preserving and
enhancing natural features. Areas set aside for common open space
shall contain no structure other than a structure related to recreation.
E. Common open space, within the meaning of this article, shall consist of
a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or streams or a
combination of land and water or streams within the tract designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development as
accessory recreation uses. Common open space shall not include
cartways, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public or
§ 172-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-41
1:551
§ 172-42. Design and development of tract.
Every reasonable effort shall be made in connection with each tract to avoid
excessive earth moving, undue tree clearance and destruction of natural
features. The following priorities, when applicable and practical, shall be
used in designing and developing the tract:
§ 172-43. Common lands.
private utilities or facilities or improvements which are not accessory
recreation uses.
F. A planted area, not less than 25 feet in width, of grass, lawn, shrubbery,
evergreens and trees, consistent with the preservation of natural
features such as floodplains or steep slopes, shall be placed and
continuously maintained in a proper and attractive manner along the
perimeter of the tract, exclusive of cartway crossings. All plantings
shall be installed so as not to inhibit a clear line of sight at the
intersections of vehicles and pedestrian circulation. Planting
arrangements shall be submitted to and approved by the Newtown
Township Planning Commission.
A. Preservation of lakes, streams and wooded and steep slope areas.
B. The development plan for the tract shall specify the means for
protecting trees and other natural features during and after
construction.
C. The location and preservation of trees and other natural features must
be given first consideration in planning common open space, location of
dwellings, walks, paved areas and finished grade levels.
D. Landscaping shall be regarded as essential to every development plan.
Not only must natural features, trees and slopes of the site be
preserved to the utmost extent possible, but careful attention must be
given to landscaping of parking areas and to provide trees along
cartways.
E. Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to disturbed areas,
including steep slopes, to preserve and enhance the appearance of open
space.
F. Street and other lighting shall not shine directly into habitable dwelling
windows located inside or outside of the tract.
G. The tract shall be serviced with public water and fire hydrants.
H. The tract shall be serviced with public sanitary sewer facilities.
I. The tract shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and
shall be designed as a single architectural theme.
§ 172-41 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-43
1:552
A. Land development plans and documents shall describe the plan for
ownership and maintenance of common lands.
B. The cost of maintenance of common lands and all costs of operating and
using all facilities within the tract shall be paid only by the residents
and/or owners of the tract.
C. The Board of Supervisors may require easements and/or deed
restrictions covering all or portions of the common lands.
D. The Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to provide for and
establish an organization similar to that required by the Unit Property
Act of July 3, 1963, P.L. 196,143 or statutes of a similar nature or import,
including supplements and amendments thereto, and require that such
organization and/or dwelling unit owners shall hold undivided interests
in the common lands and shall not convey, transfer, dispose of or
otherwise alienate the common lands from the tract. In determining
whether the organization described in the plan is adequate, the Board
of Supervisors shall consider the type and structure of the organization
from the standpoint of its capacity to raise revenue, meet obligations
and properly maintain facilities.
E. In the event that the common lands, in the judgment of the Board of
Supervisors, are permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in
reasonable condition in accordance with the approved plan, the
ordinances of the Township of Newtown and/or applicable statutes of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, whether the same are now in force
or hereafter effective, the Township shall have the option of taking
whatever steps are afforded by law to require compliance therewith
and/or to enter upon the common lands and properly maintain the
same, and, in the latter event, prior to entering upon the property, the
Board of Supervisors shall give notice of the condition complained of to
the tract owner(s) and afford the latter a period of not less than 30 days
to remedy and correct the same. The cost of such proceedings and/or
maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably against the
properties within the development tract which have a right of
enjoyment of the common lands and shall become a lien upon such
properties upon filing thereof as required by law.
143. Editor's Note: The Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L. 286, No. 82. See now
68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 172-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-43
1:553

ARTICLE XI
R-4A Residence Districts
[Added 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-6]
§ 172-44. Use regulations.
In R-4A Residence Districts, the following regulations shall apply:
§ 172-45. Density requirements; setbacks.
All regulations of this chapter which apply to an R-4 Residence District shall
also apply for this district, with the exception that:
A. Permitted uses. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-4 Residence District.
A. A maximum of 2.25 dwelling units per acre shall be permitted when
averaged over the net area of the entire tract, herein defined to exclude
all public street rights-of-way.
B. Buildings shall be set back from all streets and property lines of the
tract by 75 feet.
§ 172-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-45
1:555

ARTICLE XII
R-5 Residence Districts
[Added 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-2]
§ 172-46. Applicability.
In R-5 Residence Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-47. Purpose.
R-5 Residence Districts shall be designed to make special provisions for
housing for retired and elderly people, utilizing housing types suited to
their needs on adequate land areas, with appropriate specialized accessory
facilities to make such developments especially desirable to the retired and
elderly, consistent with reasonable and appropriate land use regulations.
§ 172-48. Permitted uses.
A building or buildings may be erected or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for the following purposes and no other:
A. Housing for the elderly utilizing apartment house buildings and/or
townhouses or row houses and/or single-family detached dwelling
units.
B. Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XXII.
C. Only the following accessory uses are permitted under the conditions
specified. Unless indicated otherwise, no accessory use is permitted
within a rear yard, side yard, front yard or courtyard as required
herein:
(1) Parking areas, private garages and minor garages.
(2) Maintenance garages, so that all storage for other than passenger
vehicles shall be structurally enclosed.
(3) Laundry, provided it is for the exclusive use of the residents of the
site.
(4) Laundry drying areas, provided they are screened from adjoining
property and public view by walls, fences or hedges.
(5) Recreation facilities and eating facilities, provided that they are for
the exclusive use of the residents of the site and their guests.
(6) Medical care facilities, including intermediate skill care facilities
for the exclusive use of residents of the site, so long as the number
of beds provided for such care does not exceed one bed for each
four beds provided under Subsection A hereof. [Amended
9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-10]
§ 172-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-48
1:557
§ 172-49. Frontage, area and height regulations.
(7) Swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar recreational uses
and patios or terraces for the exclusive use for the residents of the
site and their guests.
(8) Refuse collection centers accessible to the street system, provided
that they are screened from adjoining property and from public
view by walls, fences or hedges.
(9) Management offices.
(10) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth above in this
subsection and that are customarily incidental to and related to
housing for the elderly, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.144
A. Lot area and frontage. Where a lot is to be used for housing for the
elderly, there shall be a street frontage of not less than 50 feet, a
minimum lot area of 10 acres and a maximum of 10 dwelling units per
acre.
B. Building area. Not more than 20% of each lot shall be occupied by
buildings, and not more than 40% of the lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces and buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street upon which the lot
abuts, the depth of which shall be at least 75 feet where abutting an
R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Residence District and 50 feet where abutting all
other districts. The front yard area shall be planted with trees,
shrubbery and ground cover for screening in accordance with an
overall landscape plan approved by the Newtown Township Planning
Commission and shall be maintained continuously in a neat and
attractive manner by the property owner, with existing trees and
grading preserved insofar as possible.
D. Height regulations. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
(1) The height of any building shall not exceed three floors or 45 feet,
and the height of any building shall not exceed the distance from
adjacent property lines as determined below:
(a) The difference in elevation between the top of any element of
the building and the elevation at the property line shall not
exceed the horizontal distance from the property line to the
building element. This requirement shall be met for all points
along the property line and for all elements of the building.
(2) The height of the building shall be measured in accordance with
the definition of "building height" contained in this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding private, profit-making and charitable uses,
which immediately followed, was repealed 8-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02.
§ 172-48 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-49
1:558
§ 172-50. General regulations.
E. Side and rear yards. For each building, there shall be separate side and
rear yards, neither of which shall be less than 50 feet. Further, in the
case of a group of buildings, there shall be not less than 50 feet between
buildings at any point where walls contain windows, excluding enclosed
walkways. In all other cases, there shall be no less than 30 feet between
buildings.
F. Buffer area. There shall be a buffer area along each property line, the
depth of which shall be at least 20 feet measured from the property line.
The buffer area may be included in any front, side or rear yard areas
required under the provisions of this article. The buffer area shall be
planted with trees, shrubbery and ground cover for screening in
accordance with an overall landscape plan approved by the Newtown
Township Planning Commission and shall be maintained continuously in
a neat and attractive manner by the property owner. Existing trees and
grades are to be preserved insofar as possible.
G. Building frontage, depth or length. The greatest dimension in frontage,
length or depth of the building section erected, altered or used under
this article, excluding covered walkways, enclosed corridors and
bridges, shall not exceed 150 feet. However, the Board of Supervisors,
upon recommendation of the Newtown Township Planning Commission,
may, in connection with any land development application, approve
buildings with greater dimensions if it determines that such buildings
are architecturally pleasing and suitable for housing elderly people and
avoid monotony and excessive bulk.
A. No part of any front yard shall be used for off-street parking purposes.
B. There shall be no outside storage of any kind.
C. A separate toilet room and bathing facilities shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
D. All driveways and off-street parking facilities shall be paved.
E. All facilities shall be designed and constructed for use by the
handicapped and elderly. Site design and traffic circulation design shall
allow for the safe movement of handicapped and elderly people.
F. Each development shall be serviced with public water and fire
hydrants.
G. The development shall be serviced with public sanitary sewer facilities.
H. All utility services in the development shall be underground, and any
aboveground equipment shall be screened by landscaping.
I. The development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall
plan and shall be designed as a single architectural theme with
appropriate common landscaping. All buildings shall be arranged in a
§ 172-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-50
1:559
§ 172-51. Pedestrian circulation. [Amended 9-24-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-10]
Pedestrian circulation shall be provided as follows:
group or groups, and mechanical and site utility equipment projecting
from buildings shall be screened from public view.
J. In addition to requirements contained within the Township Building
Code145 and other Township and state requirements, the following
safety provisions shall be provided:
(1) Ramps or elevators shall be provided for access to all areas to be
utilized by residents. Elevators shall be designed for handling
litters.
(2) Nonskid floors shall be provided.
(3) Doors of sufficient width to accommodate wheelchairs into all
rooms shall be provided.
(4) Where cooking facilities are provided, they shall be electric.
(5) In at least 50% of all dwelling units, showers in place of tubs shall
be provided.
(6) Electrical outlets shall be at least 24 inches above the floor.
(7) Grab bars around bathroom tubs and around toilets shall be
provided.
(8) Handle-type spigots and door knobs shall be provided.
(9) Emergency signals which ring at a central location shall be
provided.
A. Exterior walks. Concrete walks not less than six feet in width shall be
constructed to Township standards along all public streets by which the
site is bounded, except that the Board of Supervisors, as part of a land
development application, may reduce the width to that required by
other provisions of Township ordinances if it is demonstrated by the
applicant that such a requirement is unnecessary.
B. Interior walks. Concrete walks not less than six feet in width shall
provide convenient and safe pedestrian access from all building
entrances to other buildings and to accessory recreation areas,
including laundry facilities, parking compounds, carports or garages,
and to sidewalks adjacent to public streets, provided that, upon
demonstration by the applicant, as part of a land development
application, that such a requirement in unnecessary, the Board of
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-50 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-51
1:560
Supervisors may reduce the width at specific locations to not less than
four feet in width.
C. Where interior walks cross vehicle areas, such as parking compounds
or driveways, the walkway shall be continued uninterrupted across the
vehicular area in such a way that it is permanently and readily
distinguishable therefrom. In addition, other appropriate means, such
as signs, curbing, wheel blocks, differentiation in elevation and other
similar devices, shall be used to lessen the likelihood of any parked
vehicles encroaching on such walks.
§ 172-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-51
1:561

ARTICLE XIII
A Apartment Districts
§ 172-52. Applicability.
In A Apartment Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-53. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the
following purposes and no other:
§ 172-54. Frontage, area and height regulations.
A. Apartment house building.
B. Only the following accessory uses are permitted under the condition
specified. Unless indicated otherwise, no accessory use is permitted
within a rear yard, side yard, front yard or courtyard as required
herein:
(1) Parking areas and private garages in conformance with § 172-56.
(2) Storage garages so that all storage for other than passenger
vehicles shall be structurally enclosed.
(3) Living accommodations for watchmen and caretakers employed
upon the premises, provided that any such accessory living
accommodation shall be located within an apartment house.
(4) Laundry, provided that it is for the exclusive use of residents of the
site.
(5) Laundry drying areas, provided that they are screened from
adjoining property and public view by a wall, fence or hedge.
(6) Recreation building, eating or medical care facility, provided that it
is for the exclusive use of residents of the site and their guests.
(7) Swimming pools and patios or terraces are permitted, provided
that safety and sanitary standards, as specified by the Board of
Supervisors, are maintained.
(8) Refuse collection centers accessible to the street system, provided
they are screened from the adjoining property and public view by a
wall, fence or hedge.
(9) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth in this subsection
and that are customarily incidental to an apartment house, subject
to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Lot area and frontage. The following lot areas shall be provided: Where
a lot is to be used for an apartment house building or for a group of
§ 172-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-54
1:563
apartment house buildings, there shall be a street frontage of not less
than 150 feet on a major highway (West Chester Pike and Newtown
Street Road, where it is known as "State Route 252," only), a minimum
lot area of two acres and a maximum of 12 living or family units per
acre where public sewerage is available. If public sewerage is not
available, the maximum shall be seven living or family units per acre.
In locations where there is no available connection to an operating
municipal sewage treatment plant, one or more on-site sewage
treatment plants shall be provided, excluding septic tanks and
cesspools, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors and the
requirements of the Sanitary Water Board and/or the Department of
Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Building area. Not more than 20% of each lot shall be occupied by
apartment house buildings.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street of which the lot
abuts, the depth of which shall be at least 75 feet. The area shall be
planted with trees, shrubbery and ground cover for screening in
accordance with an overall landscape plan approved by the Planning
Commission and shall be maintained continually in a neat and attractive
manner by the property owner, with existing trees and grades
preserved insofar as possible.
D. Height regulations. The height of an apartment house building shall not
exceed 55 feet, and the height of a building shall not exceed the
distance from the adjacent property line as determined as follows: The
difference in elevation between the top of any element of a building and
the elevation at the property line shall not exceed the horizontal
distance from the property line to the building element. This
requirement shall be met for all points along the property line and for
all elements of the building.
E. Side yards. For each building there shall be two separate side yards,
neither of which shall be less than 50 feet. Further, in the case of a
group of apartment house buildings, there shall be not less than 50 feet
between buildings at any point.
F. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at
least 40 feet.
G. Buffer area. There shall be a buffer area along each lot boundary line,
the depth of which shall be at least 20 feet measured from the lot
boundary line. The buffer area may be included in any front, side or rear
yard areas required under the provisions of this article. The buffer area
shall be planted with trees, shrubbery and ground cover for screening
in accordance with an overall landscape plan approved by the Planning
Commission and shall be maintained continually in a neat and attractive
manner by the property owner. There shall be an immediate dense
screen of evergreen trees at a minimum height of six feet in the buffer
area of the lot, placed so as to give maximum protection to the
§ 172-54 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-54
1:564
§ 172-55. Off-street parking regulations. [Amended 10-9-1978 by
Ord. No. 1978-9]
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with Article
XXIV. A parking plan, including exterior lighting and suitable buffer area
within the parking area, shall be presented to and approved by the Planning
Commission.
§ 172-56. General regulations.
residential area against light, noise, dust, visual or other similar
nuisances or disturbances and continuously maintained in a neat and
attractive manner by the property owner. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the Zoning Officer or his or her designee is satisfied
that the requirements of this provision have been met. Should the
planting of trees not be feasible at the time a certificate of occupancy
is sought, a bond or other acceptable security will be required to
guarantee the planting. There shall be erected in areas on or adjacent
to side and rear of property lines a fence of the type and height
approved by the Planning Commission. Existing trees and grades are to
be preserved insofar as possible. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
H. Building frontage, depth or length. The greatest dimension in frontage,
length or depth of a building section erected, altered or used under this
article shall not exceed 150 feet, and not more than three such sections
may be attached to each other, and sections so attached shall be at an
angle of 90° under the requirements of this Subsection H hereof.
A. No part of any front yard shall be used for off-street parking purposes,
unless the area used for such purposes is beyond 75 feet from the street
and the Planning Commission approves such use.
B. There shall not be outside storage of any kind.
C. A separate toilet room and facilities shall be provided for each separate
apartment or housekeeping unit.
D. All driveways and off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance
with Township standards.
E. All exterior lighting shall be properly shielded from traffic on any public
right-of-way and from any residential district.
§ 172-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-56
1:565

ARTICLE XIV
A-O Apartment Office Districts
§ 172-57. Applicability.
In A-O Apartment Office Districts, the regulations contained in this article
shall apply.
§ 172-58. Permitted uses. [Added 11-19-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-04;146 amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02;147 10-28-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-11]
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 172-59. Frontage, area and height regulations. [Added
11-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04;148 amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02;149 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
A. Multifamily dwellings.
B. Service office building.
C. Townhouses.
D. Two-family dwellings.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
foregoing permitted uses. The term "accessory use" does not include a
business, but may include a recreational use when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, when using, as
standards and guides generally, the requirements of this chapter, and
specifically, the requirements of this article.
A. Tract area and frontage. The following tract areas shall be provided:
(1) In locations where there is no access to an operating municipal
sewage treatment plant, one or more on-site sewage treatment
systems must be provided, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and the requirements of the Sanitary Water Board and/
or Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Where a tract will contain a multifamily dwelling building or a
group of multifamily dwelling buildings, there shall be a street
frontage of not less than 150 feet on a major highway or a
secondary road, having a minimum tract area of two acres and a
maximum of 12 living or family units per gross acre.
146. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-15-2012.
147. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-15-2012.
148. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-15-2012.
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-15-2012.
§ 172-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-59
1:567
(3) Where a tract will contain townhouses, the overall tract shall have
a minimum lot area of two acres and a maximum density of 10
dwelling units per gross acre. Each individual townhouse shall have
a minimum front yard of 20 feet from the right-of-way along which
the townhouse fronts. If the townhouse fronts on a major highway,
arterial or collector street, then such townhouse shall have a
minimum front yard of 40 feet except that all buildings shall be set
back a minimum distance of 200 feet from the current right-of-way
of both Route 252 north of Winding Way and along Goshen Road,
but in no case shall a building be set back less than 100 feet from
any property outside of the tract zoned R1 or R2. Driveways and
parking are permitted in the foregoing setback. If there is no rightof-
way, each townhouse building shall be set back a minimum of 20
feet to the edge of an adjacent sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk,
then to the edge of the adjacent curb.
(4) The height of a townhouse shall not exceed 35 feet or three stories,
whichever is more. The height of a two-family dwelling building
shall not exceed 3 1/2 stories or 45 feet, whichever is greater. The
height of a multifamily building shall be no more than five stories or
65 feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Where a tract will contain two-family dwellings, the overall tract
shall have a minimum lot area of two acres and a maximum density
of 12 units per gross acre. For each individual two-family dwelling,
there shall be a minimum building width of 20 feet.
(6) Where an overall tract is used for a mixed residential development
consisting of townhouses, two-family dwellings and/or multifamily
dwellings, the maximum density for the overall development shall
be 12 dwelling units per gross acre, regardless of other density
provisions contained herein.
B. Building area. Not more than 25% of the overall tract shall be occupied
by multifamily dwelling buildings; townhouse buildings in the
aggregate may occupy not more than 25% of the overall tract; and an
office building may occupy up to 40% of the overall tract.
C. Impervious coverage. Maximum impervious coverage shall not exceed
50% of the overall tract.
D. Side yards. Whether there is one or more separate buildings, there shall
be two separate side yards measured from the perimeter of the overall
tract boundary lines, neither of which shall be less than 40 feet for
multifamily dwelling buildings, 20 feet for townhouse and two-family
dwelling buildings or less than 30 feet for office buildings. However, in
case of a group of multifamily dwelling buildings, there shall not be less
than 50 feet between buildings at any point. When located at the end of
a row of townhouses, there shall be a minimum side yard of five feet.
Each group or row of attached townhouses and/or two-family dwelling
buildings shall have a minimum separation distance of 20 feet from
§ 172-59 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-59
1:568
§ 172-60. General regulations.
another group or row of attached townhouses and/or two-family
dwelling buildings.
E. Rear yards. With respect to the overall tract, there shall be a rear yard
measured from the perimeter of the overall tract rear boundary line,
the depth of which shall be at least 30 feet. Each townhouse and twofamily
dwelling shall have a minimum rear yard of 20 feet, which may
include:
(1) Attached decks or patios having a maximum width of 10 feet from
the rear wall of the townhouse or two-family dwelling building;
(2) Vehicular parking spaces; and/or
(3) Retaining walls.
F. Building frontage, depth or length. The greatest dimension in frontage,
length or depth of a building erected, altered or used under this article
shall not exceed 220 feet, and not more than three such buildings may
be attached to each other, and buildings so attached shall be at an angle
of 90° under the requirements of this subsection, but may be altered or
changed upon application by way of special exception to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
G. Buffer area. There shall be a buffer area along each tract boundary line,
the depth of which shall be at least 15 feet measured from the tract
boundary line. The buffer area may be included in any tract setback,
front, side or rear yard areas required under the provisions of this
section. The buffer area shall be planted with trees, shrubbery and
ground cover for screening in accordance with an overall landscape
plan approved by the Planning Commission and shall be maintained
continually in a neat and attractive manner by the property owner. As
applied to townhouses and two-family dwelling buildings, the required
buffer area shall apply only to the overall tract boundaries.
H. Total office lot area coverage. Not more than 70% of each tract shall be
used for the construction of service office buildings, office parking
facilities and/or other commercial improvements of any nature so that
not less than 30% of the tract area shall remain as open space.
A. Except for townhouse lots, no part of any front yard is to be used for
garage, storage or off-street parking purposes. [Amended 3-26-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-02150]
B. There is to be no outside storage of any kind.
C. A separate toilet room and facilities are to be provided for each
separate apartment or housekeeping unit.
150. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-12-2012.
§ 172-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-60
1:569
§ 172-61. Pedestrian circulation.
Pedestrian circulation shall be provided as follows:
§ 172-62. Vehicular circulation.
Vehicular circulation shall be provided as follows:
D. In service office buildings, there is to be at least one separate toilet
room and facilities on each floor for men, at least one separate toilet
room and facilities on each floor for women and in no case fewer than
two separate toilet rooms and facilities for each 10 users, tenants and
occupiers.
E. Each apartment house building or service office building shall have a
service driveway of at least 12 feet in width, as well as a service
entrance not in the front of the building.
F. All driveways and off-street parking facilities shall be hard-surfaced.
G. The Zoning Hearing Board may, as a special exception, permit the use
of a building containing both apartments and service offices, using, as
standards and guides generally, the requirements of this chapter and,
specifically, the requirements of this article.
A. Exterior walks. Concrete sidewalks, not less than four feet in width,
shall be constructed to Township standards along all public streets by
which the site is bounded. In townhouse developments, concrete
sidewalks not less than four feet in width shall be provided along a
minimum of one side of all streets, regardless of whether the streets are
public or private. [Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02151]
B. Interior walks. Concrete walks, not less than four feet in width, shall
provide convenient and safe pedestrian access from all apartment and
office entrances to other apartment and office entrances and to
accessory recreation areas, laundry facilities, parking compounds,
carports or garages and to the sidewalks along bounding public streets.
(1) Such interior walks may be surfaced with brick or flagstone.
(2) Where interior walks cross vehicular areas, such as parking
compounds or driveways, the walkway shall be continued
uninterrupted across the vehicular area in such a way that it is
permanently and readily distinguishable therefrom. In addition,
other appropriate means, such as signs, curbing, wheel blocks,
difference in elevation, etc., shall be used to lessen the likelihood of
any parked vehicle encroaching on such walk.
151. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would become effective on 3-12-2012.
§ 172-60 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-62
1:570
§ 172-63. Usable open space.
Not less than 10% of the lot area shall be devoted to usable open space for
the benefit of residents if the lot is used for construction of apartment house
buildings. Such usable open space shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards:
A. Interior drives. Hard-surfaced driveways of concrete or bituminous
concrete shall provide vehicular access from the public street to all
buildings, parking spaces, carports and garages.
B. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) Multifamily dwellings shall have not less than 1.75 garage spaces
or paved off-street parking spaces for each unit. [Amended
10-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-9; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11]
(2) Service office buildings shall have one parking or garage space for
each 200 square feet of gross floor area, including basement floor
area, but in no event fewer than three parking or garage spaces for
each separate office, such spaces to be 200 square feet.
(3) Where angle parking spaces front toward a walk, building or usable
open space area, curbing or firmly anchored wheel block devices
shall be provided not less than six feet from the far edge of the
walk, six feet from the wall of the building or three feet from the
near edge of the usable open space area.
(4) The boundary lines between all adjacent parking spaces shall be
embedded or marked upon the pavement in a conspicuous and
durable manner.
(5) Areas of adequate size and number for loading and unloading of
delivery trucks, moving vans and other vehicles and for the
servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other services shall be
provided, so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of driveways or automobile parking
facilities.
(6) No part of any required front yard is to be used for parking or
loading.
(7) In addition to the above, parking facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Article XXIV. [Amended 10-9-1978 by Ord. No.
1978-9]
A. Usable open space requirements may be met in one or several areas
within the lot boundaries.
B. Usable open space may be developed for any of the following uses, or a
combination thereof:
§ 172-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-63
1:571
(1) Active recreation facilities for any age group.
(2) Outdoor cooking areas.
(3) Landscaped lawn or garden areas.
(4) Other similar outdoor living activities.
C. The following shall not be eligible for meeting usable open space
requirements:
(1) Vehicular or pedestrian circulation areas, including parking.
(2) Required front yards.
(3) Buffer areas.
§ 172-63 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-63
1:572
ARTICLE XV
O Office Districts
§ 172-64. Applicability.
In O Office Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall apply.
§ 172-65. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for the
following purposes and no other:
§ 172-66. Frontage, area and height regulations.
A. Service office building.
B. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to a
service office building, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Lot area and frontage. The following lot areas shall be provided: For
each office building, there shall be a street frontage of not less than 75
feet and a minimum lot area of 35,000 square feet.
B. Height regulations. The height of an office building shall not exceed 55
feet, exclusive of basement, and the height of a building shall not
exceed the distance from the adjacent property line as determined as
follows: The difference in elevation between the top of any element of a
building and the elevation at the property line shall not exceed the
horizontal distance from the property lines to the building element. This
requirement shall be met for all points along the property line and for
all elements of the building.
C. Side yards. For each building, there shall be two separate side yards,
neither of which shall be less than 30 feet. Further, in the case of a
group of office buildings, there shall be not less than 30 feet between
buildings at any point.
D. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard, the depth of which shall be at
least 40 feet.
E. Building frontage, depth or length. The greatest dimension in frontage,
length or depth of a building section erected, altered or used under this
article shall not exceed 150 feet, and not more than three such sections
may be attached to each other, and sections so attached shall be at an
angle of 90° under the requirements of this Subsection E.
F. Total lot area coverage. Not more than 70% of each lot used for the
construction of service office buildings shall be occupied by buildings,
parking areas, parking facilities and/or improvements of any nature,
such that not less than 30% of the lot area shall remain as green area.
[Amended 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-10]
§ 172-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-66
1:573
§ 172-67. Parking regulations.
Service office buildings shall have one parking or garage space for each
200 square feet of gross floor area, including basement floor area, but in no
event fewer than three parking or garage spaces for each separate office,
such parking spaces to be a minimum of 200 square feet in area. A parking
plan, including exterior lighting and suitable buffer areas within the parking
area, shall be presented to and approved by the Planning Commission.
§ 172-68. General regulations.
G. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which the lot
abuts, the depth of which shall be at least 40 feet. The area shall be
planted with trees, shrubbery and ground cover for screening in
accordance with an overall landscape plan approved by the Planning
Commission and shall be maintained continually in a neat and attractive
manner by the property owner, with existing trees and grades
preserved insofar as possible.
H. Buffer area. There shall be a buffer area along the district boundary line
within the Office District when adjacent to residential areas, the depth
of which shall be at least 20 feet measured from the district boundary
line. The buffer area may be included in any front, side or rear yard
areas required under the provisions of this article. The buffer area shall
be used for no other purpose other than planting and screening. The
buffer area shall be planted with trees, shrubbery and ground cover for
screening in accordance with an overall landscape plan approved by the
Planning Commission and shall be maintained continually in a neat and
attractive manner by the property owner. There shall be an immediate
dense screen of evergreen trees at a minimum height of six feet in the
buffer area of the lot, placed so as to give maximum protection to the
residential area against light, noise, dust, visual or other similar
nuisances or disturbances and continuously maintained in a neat and
attractive manner by the property owner. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the Zoning Officer or his or her designee is satisfied
that the requirements of this provision have been met. Should the
planting of trees not be feasible at the time a certificate of occupancy is
sought, a bond or other acceptable security shall be required to
guarantee the planting. There shall be erected in areas on or adjacent
to side and rear of property lines a fence of the type and height
approved by the Planning Commission. Existing trees and grades are to
be preserved insofar as possible. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
A. No part of any front yard shall be used for garage, storage or off-street
parking purposes, unless the area used for such purposes is beyond 40
feet from the street and the Planning Commission approves such use.
B. There shall not be outside storage of any kind.
§ 172-66 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-68
1:574
C. All driveways and off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance
with Township standards.
D. All exterior lighting shall be properly shielded from traffic on any public
right-of-way and from any residential district.
§ 172-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-68
1:575

ARTICLE XVI
C-1 Commercial Districts
§ 172-69. Applicability.
In C-1 Commercial Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-70. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Retail store.
B. Personal service shop, tailor, barber, beauty shop, shoe repair,
dressmaking shop and other personal service shop or store.
C. Bank and other similar institutions.
D. Offices.
E. Club. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-17]
F. Places of amusement, recreation or assembly, when authorized as a
special exception. [Amended 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-2]
G. Restaurant, cafe, catering establishments and establishments where
food is cooked and dispensed for off-premises consumption, where
authorized as a special exception. Establishments dispensing or serving
food for consumption on the premises outdoors or in cars or vehicles
parked on the premises, including drive-in food stands, shall not be
considered as restaurants, cafes, catering establishments or
establishments dispensing food for off-premises consumption and are
not permitted in this zoning district.
H. Confectionery, retail bakery.
I. Mortuary.
J. Plumber, electrician, paperhanger and similar occupations.
K. Residential or nonresidential parking lot or public parking facility.
L. Public garage, motor vehicle service station, car wash, motor vehicle
sales agency, motor vehicle repair shop and battery service station,
when authorized as a special exception. [Amended 9-8-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-15]
M. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses and not seriously detrimental to the
neighborhood when authorized as a special exception.
§ 172-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-70
1:577
§ 172-71. Area regulations.
N. The uses permitted by right and the uses permitted by special exception
shall not include adult entertainment uses, as defined in this chapter.
[Added 1-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
O. Residential restrictions. After May 19, 1973, single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings and apartments shall not be
permitted to be erected or used in the commercial districts of the
Township, except by special exception of the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall not be less than 20 feet in depth.
B. Building area. The building area shall not exceed 70% of the lot area.
C. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less
than 15 feet in depth.
D. Height regulations. No buildings shall exceed three stories, excluding
basement, or 45 feet in height.
E. Loading and unloading space. All buildings shall be provided with
adequate off-street loading and unloading spaces located on other than
the streets upon which the lot abuts.
F. Parking space. Parking spaces shall comply with the numerous
regulations established in Article XXIV.
G. Minimum lot area. No building permit shall be issued in commercial
districts with on-lot sewage disposal unless the minimum area of the lot
for each family unit or for each store or for each combination of store
and family unit in the building to be erected is 6,000 square feet.
§ 172-70 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-71
1:578
ARTICLE XVII
C-2 Commercial Districts
[Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2]
§ 172-72. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — A district designed to contain multifacility
structures used for retail and commercial sales and services, hotels, motels,
cultural entertainment, recreational purposes and a lifestyle village, as
hereinafter limited, fronting on West Chester Pike.
LIFESTYLE VILLAGE — An integrated and comprehensively designed
development consisting of any combination of three or more of the uses
permitted to be developed on the same tract, intended to be pedestrianoriented
and to promote a mix of commercial development with community
interaction and cultural activities.
§ 172-73. Purpose.
The C-2 Commercial District contemplates the establishment of a wellplanned
and integrated shopping center, hotel, motel and business district
and lifestyle village designed to:
A. Foster the development of a group or groups of property-related
businesses and compatible facilities comprising a single architectural
scheme with appropriate landscaping.
B. Foster the development of the aforesaid in accordance with
comprehensive design requirements relating, inter alia, to access and
related traffic considerations, land use and coverage thereof, building
placement, highway protection, off-street parking, buffering,
landscaping and screening.
C. Foster the development of the aforesaid in accordance with the
purposes set forth in §§ 172-3 and 172-4 and, by virtue of the physical
size of such development, as well as the extent, concentration and
duration of activities anticipated on and adjacent thereto, foster the
design and operation thereof consistent with:
(1) The Comprehensive Plan of the Township of Newtown.
(2) The promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the facility patrons and tenants, adjoining property owners and the
residents of the Township at large.
(3) The preservation of the physical, social, cultural and economic
environment of the community.
(4) The management of the community's natural resources, utility
services, movement of pedestrian and vehicle traffic and the
§ 172-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-73
1:579
§ 172-74. Permitted uses.
An integrated building system and supporting facilities may be created,
occupied or used for the following purposes and no other purpose:
municipal services of the Township of Newtown, including but not
limited to police and fire protection.
A. Retail store.
B. Retail service shop or custom shop; other personal service shop or
store, such as a barbershop, beauty, bakery, confectionery, ice cream or
similar shop; custom tailoring, dressmaking, millinery or similar shop;
and shoe, clock, watch, jewelry, radio, television, household appliance
or similar repair shop; and laundry, dry-cleaning or clothes-pressing
shops (provided that the equipment and materials to be employed will
not involve danger from fire or explosion and that use will not detract
from the predominant character of the development); provided,
however, that:
(1) Any processing activity, other than a singular artisan
demonstrating a given processing activity, shall be not less than 15
feet from the front of the unit in which the activity is conducted,
and the same shall be screened from view by a wall or partition
from the front portion of the unit used by customers.
(2) Any article made or services provided shall be sold at retail from
the premises.
(3) The area devoted to processing shall not be greater than the retail
sales of the same store.
C. Library, veterans' memorial and community buildings or rooms for
civic, religious and/or charitable purposes.
D. Bank and similar institutions.
E. Offices.
F. Restaurant, cafe and catering establishments, including outdoor
seating and service areas when authorized as a conditional use.
G. Medical and/or dental clinics.
H. Indoor theater, cultural center, radio or television studios.
I. Outdoor garden centers as an accessory use to and in conjunction with
a retail store.
J. Hotel or motel.
K. Lifestyle village.
§ 172-73 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-74
1:580
§ 172-75. Lot and building requirements for uses other than
lifestyle village.
L. Accessory use on the same lot and customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses and not detrimental to the neighborhood.
Accessory uses may include storage within a completely enclosed
building in conjunction with a permitted use.
A. Provisions relating solely to nonmotel, nonhotel and nonoffice/clinic
uses.
(1) Lot area. The minimum development lot shall be not less than 30
contiguous acres of land.
B. Provisions relating solely to motel/hotel uses.
(1) Lot area. The minimum development lot shall be not less than five
contiguous acres of land.
(2) Number of rental units. The number of hotel/motel units shall not exceed
22 hotel/motel units per acre, and, further provided, the maximum
number of hotel/motel units on the development lot, regardless of its size
and acreage content, shall not exceed 250 rental units.
C. Provisions relating to all uses.
(1) Lot width. The minimum width of each development lot shall have
not less than 300 feet of frontage on a major highway, as defined in
§ 172-2.
(2) Green area. Not less than 15% of the gross land area of the
development lot shall be devoted to green area, excluding green
area required under § 172-135 ("green area" being defined herein
to include any areas not covered by buildings, garden center areas,
structures or by paved streets or parking areas), and the same shall
be planted with grass, shrubs or trees.
(3) Building area. Not more than 25% of the gross land area of the
development lot shall be covered by buildings and/or garden center
areas.
(4) Building setback. All buildings shall be set back according to the
following table:
§ 172-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-75
1:581
§ 172-75.1. Tract and building requirements for lifestyle village.
Motels,
Hotels, Office
Buildings,
Medical and/
or Dental
Clinics
(feet)
Drive-In
Banks
(feet)
All Other
Buildings
(feet)
From four-lane
highway rightsof-
way
125 75 150
From all other
street rights-ofway
100 75 150
From property
lines of singlefamily
residential uses
150 150 150
From all other
property lines
75 75 75
(5) Building height. No building shall be more than four stories
(excluding basement) or 45 feet in height, whichever is less.
(6) Public access. Public access to all units shall be directly to the outof-
doors and not through any common indoor accessway or
promenade or mall; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to the uses hereinabove set forth in Subsections E, G and J of
§ 172-74.
A. Minimum gross tract area: 50 acres.
B. Minimum tract width: 2,000 feet.
C. Maximum building area: 20% of the tract.
D. Minimum building setback from West Chester Pike: 150 feet.
E. Minimum building setback from other adjacent streets: 20 feet.
F. Minimum green area of the tract, exclusive of green area of parking
areas: 25%.
G. Minimum green area in parking areas: 15%.
H. Maximum building height: four stories (excluding basement) or 45 feet.
I. Minimum planted buffer from street right-of-way: 10 feet.
§ 172-75 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-76
1:582
§ 172-76. Traffic and pedestrian circulation.
The following shall be required in each C-2 Commercial District
development:
A. Entranceways and exitways, including deceleration and acceleration
lanes providing access to and from the development, shall be sufficient
in number and length to safely and conveniently accommodate the flow
of traffic to and from the site, as approved by the Board of Supervisors
and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, where applicable.
B. Internal site circulation shall be provided for vehicle access to all
buildings and facilities, shall be part of a closed-circuit system enabling
continuous flow of traffic and shall be of sufficient width and turning
radii to allow access without entrapment of emergency vehicles.
C. Parking shall not be permitted on interior streets, except in a lifestyle
village use.
D. Interior streets shall be separated from all parking, loading or service
areas used by motor vehicles by the use of buffer strips or other
effective and suitable barriers against unchanneled motor vehicle
ingress or egress, except in a lifestyle village use.
E. The minimum cartway width of interior streets shall be predicated upon
the requirements of traffic volume, flow and rate set by the traffic
analysis. For each lane of traffic flow, a width of 12 feet shall be
required. In no case shall the minimum width of internal streets be less
than 24 feet for two-way and 18 feet for one-way traffic flow.
F. Appropriate signs and street markings for warning and use regulations
of pedestrians and vehicles shall be erected and maintained.
G. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles
and for refuse collection, fuel and other service vehicles shall be
provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that
they may be used without blocking or interfering with the use of access
roads or lanes and automobile parking spaces. All loading areas shall be
shielded by a planting screen in accordance with § 172-77B and/or by
screen walls, berms or fencing, when approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
H. Loading facilities, excepting those for underground storage of liquids
such as fuel oil, shall be designed to maintain all off-loading and onloading
operations within the building structure, so that no materials
are stored above ground outside of the building.
I. Pedestrian crosswalks and sidewalks shall be required at any location
where the Board of Supervisors shall determine they are necessary for
public safety or convenience. Crosswalks shall have minimum rights-ofway
of 10 feet abutting the street curbline. Sidewalks shall have a
minimum paved walk of five feet in width.
§ 172-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-76
1:583
§ 172-77. Landscaping and screening requirements for other than
lifestyle village.
Landscaping and screening within each C-2 Commercial District
development shall meet the following requirements:
J. Internal pedestrian circulation may be provided for by natural walks,
aggregate, wood chips or bituminous materials where pedestrian traffic
is light or the landscaping theme is enhanced by such installation,
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
A. A planted area, no less than 25 feet in width, of grass, lawn, shrubbery,
evergreens and trees shall be placed and continuously maintained in a
proper and attractive manner along the perimeter of the property,
exclusive of driveway crossings. All plantings shall be installed so as not
to inhibit clear sight at intersections of vehicle and pedestrian
circulation. The width of the strip shall be increased to no less than 50
feet and be provided with high- and low-level screening along any part
of the property line that is in common with a residential zone. In this
case, the buffer shall be fenced from the adjoining property, except that
the Board of Supervisors may, upon application, permit exceptions to
this requirement relating to fences.
B. Screening for the purpose of providing a visual barrier shall be
composed of plants and trees arranged to form both a low-level and a
high-level screen. The high-level screen shall be composed of evergreen
trees at least five feet in height. Such trees shall be planted in two
parallel rows, eight feet apart. The rows shall be offset and shall be
planted with trees spaced at intervals of not more than eight feet. The
low-level screen may be any plant materials approved by the Newtown
Township Planning Commission. Plants shall be not less than two feet in
height and spaced at intervals of not more than five feet.
C. Trees shall not be destroyed, unless necessary for the construction of
the proposed buildings and improvements, and adequate tree planting
shall be completed by the owner, developer or builder. Street trees shall
be a minimum of 40 feet and a maximum of 50 feet apart. The trunks of
the trees shall not be less than two to 2 1/2 inches in diameter and 3 1/2
feet in height at time of planting.
D. The owner, developer or builder shall preserve or incorporate natural
features, such as woods, streams, floodplains and open space areas,
which add to the overall cohesive development of the C-2 Commercial
District and adjacent districts.
E. Any area not used for buildings, structures, paved areas or screening
shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and other landscaping
materials in accordance with the landscaping and screening plan.
Existing vegetative materials shall be preserved wherever practical.
§ 172-76 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-77.1
1:584
§ 172-77.1. Landscaping and screening requirements for lifestyle
village.
Landscaping and screening requirements for a lifestyle village use shall
meet the following requirements:
§ 172-77.2. Parking requirements for lifestyle village.
In the event of any conflict between the requirements of § 172-132E or any
other provisions, the following parking requirements for a lifestyle village
use shall supersede, govern and control:
A. A planted area, no less than 10 feet in width, of grass, lawn, shrubbery,
evergreens and trees shall be placed and continuously maintained in a
proper and attractive manner along the perimeter of the tract,
exclusive of driveway crossings. All plantings shall be installed so as not
to inhibit clear sight at intersections of vehicle and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Screening for the purpose of providing a visual barrier from parking
shall be composed of plants and trees arranged to form a low-level
screen. The low-level screen may be any plant materials approved by
the Newtown Township Board of Supervisors after recommendations of
the Planning Commission. Plants shall be not less than two feet in
height and spaced at intervals of not more than five feet.
C. Trees shall not be destroyed, unless necessary for the construction of
the proposed buildings and improvements, and adequate tree planting
shall be completed by the owner, developer or builder.
D. The owner, developer or builder shall preserve or incorporate natural
features, such as wetlands, woods, streams, floodplains and open space
areas, which shall add to the overall environment of the lifestyle village.
E. Any area not used for buildings, structures, paved areas or screening
shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and other landscaping
materials in accordance with the landscaping and screening plan.
Existing vegetative materials shall be preserved wherever practical.
A. For all retail, commercial, office and other permitted uses, other than a
hotel and cultural center, four parking spaces shall be required for each
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.
B. For a hotel, a minimum of one parking space shall be provided for each
rental room or suite.
C. For a cultural center, a minimum of one parking space shall be provided
for every 10 seats in an assembly or performance area and four parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for areas other than an
assembly or performance area.
§ 172-77.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-77.3
1:585
§ 172-77.3. Signage requirements for lifestyle village.
In the event of any conflict between the requirements of § 172-123 or any
other provisions, the following signage requirements for a lifestyle village
tract shall supersede, govern and control:
A. Freestanding lifestyle village identification signs shall be permitted,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) One lifestyle identification sign shall be permitted at each entrance
of the lifestyle village tract.
(2) The maximum surface display area of any one face of the sign shall
not exceed 100 square feet.
(3) The maximum height shall not exceed 30 feet.
B. Freestanding signs for individual buildings or tenants or multiple
tenants. Freestanding signs identifying individual buildings, individual
tenants or multiple tenants shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each entrance of the
lifestyle village tract.
(2) The maximum surface display area of any one face of the sign shall
not exceed 50 square feet, unless there are three or more
occupants, in which case 75 square feet shall be permitted.
(3) The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet.
C. Wall signs. Signs mounted on the walls or facades of a building shall be
permitted, provided that the following regulations are met:
(1) The total area of all wall signs may not exceed 1 1/2 square feet of a
sign area per linear foot of wall, including windows, doors and
cornices.
(2) Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the supporting
wall and project no more than 18 inches from the face of such wall
and shall not extend above the roofline of such building.
D. Under-canopy signs. Under-canopy signs, not to exceed 10 square feet
in aggregate sign area per tenancy or occupancy, shall be permitted.
E. Directory signs. At each entrance to the lifestyle village tract, signs for
the direction of traffic to or identification of individual buildings or
tenants within the development shall be permitted, provided that the
following regulations are met:
(1) The maximum surface display area of each sign shall not exceed 40
square feet on any one face.
(2) The maximum height shall not exceed 12 feet.
§ 172-77.3 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-77.3
1:586
§ 172-78. General regulations.
§ 172-79. Site review.
(3) Each sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the right-ofway
line of any public or private drive or collector, measured from
the vertical plane established by the leading edge of the sign. In no
event shall the sign be installed in a sight triangle necessary for the
clear view of traffic.
(4) Any directory sign may identify only the development's subarea
name, building name and/or tenants.
F. Traffic control directional signs. Signs for the directional control of
vehicular traffic shall be permitted, provided that the area of each sign
shall not exceed four square feet in size. Except for street signs
approved for use on public streets, no directional sign shall exceed
three feet in height.
G. Flags. Flags of the United States of America, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Delaware County, Newtown Township and the corporate
flags of the lifestyle village or its tenants shall be permitted, provided
that the total number and location of such flags shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Board of Supervisors.
H. Such other signs or banners that may be approved by the Board of
Supervisors shall be permitted.
A. The development shall be serviced with public water and fire hydrants.
B. The development shall be serviced with public sanitary sewer facilities.
C. All utility services in the center shall be underground.
D. The development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall
plan and shall be designed as a single architectural theme with
appropriate common landscaping. All buildings shall be arranged in a
group or groups; mechanical and site utility equipment projected from
the buildings shall be screened from public view.
E. There shall be facilities to handle, in adequate fashion, the flow of
surface waters in a manner so that no undue burden of surface water
drainage is imposed upon abutting streets, highways, properties and
existing watercourses.
F. Lighting standards shall not exceed 25 feet in height, and all luminaires
shall be shielded to prevent flooding of adjacent properties.
G. Noise from the facility at the property line adjoining residential zoning
shall not exceed 40 decibels when measured at night with the facility
unoccupied.
§ 172-77.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-79
1:587
A. In a C-2 Commercial District, any site development, including erection
of any building, addition to any building, construction of streets or
parking facilities or installation of sewers or utilities, requiring permits
shall be permitted only after plans have been submitted and approved
in accordance with procedures for review of a subdivision.
B. Drafting standards. Documents submitted for site review shall meet all
drafting standards for a subdivision. In addition, the following will be
required:
(1) On landscaping and screening plans, the minimum scale shall be
one inch equals 100 feet, and contours shall be shown at five-foot
intervals; provided, however, that the same shall provide sufficient
detail to clearly show such landscaping and screening.
(2) On maps and plans, a key map indicating portions of the total site
or area covered by the map or plan.
(3) A key map locating the site under consideration with the region,
the Township or an area within the Township, as may be
appropriate to fully understand the subject presented.
C. Submission of plans and drawings. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, as amended, the
proposed site development plan shall also comply with the provisions of
this chapter. The plans and drawings may be submitted as separate
exhibits or included in the basic plot or site plan. In either case, the
following features shall be included:
(1) Architectural plans for proposed developments shall show
buildings, including elevations, fences, sidewalks, roads or other
paved areas, parking and landscaping and screening. All buildings,
streets, alleys, highways, streams and other topographical features
within 150 feet of any boundary line shall be shown.
(2) An outdoor lighting plan, with a description or sketches of
proposed standards and type of luminaires.
(3) A sign location plan.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal
of stormwater, sewage and wastewater and the handling of other
utilities and traffic flow.
(5) Landscaping plans for buffer areas and open areas shall show the
general location, size and species of all existing trees over six
inches in caliper, with designations as to those which are to be
removed and those which are to remain. The plan shall also include
the location, size and species of all proposed vegetative material.
D. Submission and reports and statements. Supporting documents shall be
submitted. Documentation shall include proposed solutions to deter,
diminish or remove casual elements that adversely affect property and
§ 172-79 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-79
1:588
persons on adjacent property and within the Township as a whole. The
documents shall include the following:
(1) A legal description by metes and bounds of the area to be devoted
to the C-2 Commercial District development site.
(2) A general listing and description of the classes and uses to be
conducted upon the site.
(3) A traffic impact report giving traffic volume and flow as it currently
exists and as it is expected to exist during and at completion of the
development proposal upon the streets and highways of the
Township and within the internal circulation system of the
shopping center. The description of traffic volume and flow shall be
in terms of average daily traffic for both the highways and the
shopping center during their average hour and the peak a.m. and
p.m. hours of trips. This report is to be presented at the time of
zoning submission.
(4) A physical environmental assessment and impact statement as
required by federal, commonwealth and county law, as may be
applicable, and presented at the time of zoning submission.
(5) An assessment and impact statement concerning utilization of
public facilities and services.
(6) The owner, developer or builder shall prepare a solid waste
management plan indicating estimated amounts of solid waste
generated upon the site by character of waste and a system for the
collection, storage and disposal of generated waste. The system
shall prevent combustion, vermin infestation, generation of odors,
release of toxic substances and wind dispersal of waste materials.
The system shall also provide for the maintenance of litter and
other site debris through periodic sweeping and the installation of
trash and refuse containers for litter.
(7) A statement of traffic-regulating devices required, including
automatic signalization, signing and painting, and manpower
requirements for direction and enforcement. The statement should
generally describe the devices to be used, provisions for their
maintenance and the considerations of aesthetics and good
graphics designs. Also, a plan showing design and location of
parking lot locator signs shall be submitted for approval.
(8) A detailed cost estimate for execution of the approved landscaping
plan. A performance bond or other surety approved by the
Township Solicitor shall be filed with the Township. Such surety
shall be in an amount equal to the cost of purchasing, planting,
maintaining and replacing all vegetative materials for a period of
two years.
§ 172-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-80
1:589
§ 172-80. Amendments to site plan.
Where, from time to time, the owner, developer or builder of a C-2
Commercial District development, which has been approved under the
provisions of this chapter, wishes to request an amendment to the plan, the
following procedures shall be used:
A. The applicant shall submit sufficient data and a plan insert showing the
amendment to the previously approved plan to the Zoning Officer, who
shall verify the accuracy of the documents submitted.
B. The application and documents shall be submitted by the Zoning Officer
to the Board of Supervisors, which shall determine whether the
proposed amendment is of sufficient substance to warrant extensive
site review under the procedures of § 172-79 with respect to the
amendment. Zoning fees established under §§ 172-153 and 172-126
shall apply in this instance.
C. If the application is not of sufficient substance to warrant extensive
review, the Board of Supervisors shall make a determination on the
application and advise the Zoning Officer. [Amended 11-14-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-4]
§ 172-80 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-80
1:590
ARTICLE XVIII
I Light Industrial District
[Amended 6-10-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-4; 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
§ 172-81. Applicability.
In I Light Industrial Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-82. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Administrative offices, executive offices, professional offices, sales
offices and offices for other similar uses. [Amended 9-23-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-7]
B. Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, packaging and/or processing
of the following: scientific and precision instruments and controls,
electronic components, computers, pharmaceutical and optical goods,
metalized and coated plastic film, photographic reproduction, film and
equipment, jewelry and timepieces, candy, cosmetics, dairy products,
drugs and perfume.
C. Cinema, radio and television productions.
D. Newspaper, job printing or bookbinding establishment.
E. Distribution plants, parcel delivery, cold storage plants and bottling
plants.
F. Electric transforming substations, microwave towers or other similar
service uses. [Amended 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-4]
G. Laboratories, experimental manufacturing and research.
H. Accessory uses incidental to any of the above permitted uses, not
detrimental to the neighborhood, including a cafeteria and other similar
services operated by or for the employer for the exclusive use of its
employees and business visitors.
I. Public or commercial parking.
J. Uses approved by the Board of Supervisors of the same general
character as any of the above, subject to conditional use approval.
K. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of §§ 172-88, 172-89 and
172-90. [Added 1-6-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
(1) Adult entertainment uses, which uses shall not be permitted in any
other zoning district in Newtown Township, are as follows:
§ 172-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-82
1:591
(a) Adult arcades.
(b) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores.
(c) Adult cabarets.
(d) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(e) Adult theaters.
(f) Escort agencies.
(g) Nude model studios.
(h) Sexual encounter centers, to include, but not be limited to,
massage parlors.
(2) As used herein in Subsection K(1), the following words shall have
the meanings herein indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or, for any form
of consideration, electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors, video or
laser disc players or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as its principal purpose,
offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or
video reproductions, slides or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
[1]
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
[2]
(a)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of
(b)
§ 172-82 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-82
1:592
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances
which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise, and whether or not
said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the
operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods
to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide or date for another person or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform
a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association which
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of
its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
its business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(b)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(c)
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;
(a)
§ 172-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-82
1:593
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical
areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any form of consideration. "Nude model studio"
shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university
which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible
turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in
which clothing partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical
areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers, for
any form of consideration:
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(b)
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
(c)
(d) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person
is available for viewing.
(a)
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class.
(b)
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any one time.
(c)
Physical contact in the form of massage, wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
(a)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or seminudity.
(b)
§ 172-82 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-82
1:594
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret,
adult motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic
region, anus, buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately
above the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor area
occupied by a sexually oriented business by more than 25%, as the
floor areas exist at the date of passage of this chapter.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(a)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
(b)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) above.
(c)
(3) The following special conditions for adult entertainment uses shall
apply:
(a) Objectives.
[1] Because adult entertainment uses tend to bring with them
secondary concerns that impact the health, safety and
general welfare concerns of Newtown Township, the
Township desires to restrict or limit the location where
such uses can locate.
[2] The Township does not intend to affect or suppress any
activities protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, but instead address these secondary
effects. Neither is it the intent nor effect of these chapter
provisions to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
[3] Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community presented in
hearings and in reports made available to the Board of
Supervisors and on findings incorporated in the cases of
City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50
(1976), and Northend Cinema, Inc. v. Seattle, 585 P.2d
1153 (Wash. 1978); and on studies in other communities,
including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona;
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minnesota; Manatee
§ 172-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-82
1:595
County, Florida; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas;
Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings found in the Report
of the Attorney General's Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989,
State of Minnesota), the Board of Supervisors finds the
following:
[a] Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that may
go uncontrolled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises.
[b] Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses
defined in this section as "adult theaters" and
"cabarets" engage in higher incidents of certain types
of sexually oriented behavior at these businesses than
employees of other establishments.
[c] Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semiprivate booths or
cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows, as
defined in this section as "adult bookstores," "adult
novelty shops," "adult video stores," "adult motionpicture
theaters" or "adult arcades."
[d] Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
[e] Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades
and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose
of engaging in sex within the premises of such
sexually oriented businesses.
[f] At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses,
including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea,
human immunodeficiency virus infections (AIDS),
genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non B amebiasis,
salmonella infections and shigella infections.
[g] Since 1981, and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of
AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983;
4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; and 353,448 through
December 31, 1992.
§ 172-82 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-82
1:596
[h] As of May 1, 1995, there have been 13, 559 reported
cases of AIDS in the State of Pennsylvania.
[i] Since 1981, and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing
positive for the HIV antibody test in Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
[j] The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has
risen, with 336,123 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200
through November of 1990.
[k] The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over
500,000 cases being reported in 1990.
[l] The Surgeon General of the United States, in his
report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American
public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted
through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components and
from an infected mother to her newborn.
[m] According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and
HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are
principally transmitted by sexual acts.
[n] Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and
the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain
those facilities.
[o] Numerous studies and reports have determined that
semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented
businesses where persons view adult-oriented films.
[p] The findings noted in Subsection K(3)(a)[3][a] through
[o] above raise substantial governmental concerns.
[4] The purpose of these conditional use provisions is to
minimize, where conditions permit, the secondary
concerns, which include difficulties for law enforcement,
municipal maintenance, trash, deleterious effects on
business and residential property values, increased crime,
particularly corruption of the morals of minors, and
prostitution, and encourage residents and businesses to
move elsewhere.
§ 172-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-82
1:597
(b) Yard and area regulations.
[1] In addition to the yard and area regulations applicable to
all uses permitted pursuant to the provisions of Article
XVIII, no adult entertainment use shall be located:
[a] Within 1,000 feet of the following:
[i] A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
[ii] A public or private educational facility, including,
but not limited to, child day-care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, private schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
schools, vocational schools, continuation schools,
special education schools, junior colleges and
universities. "School" includes the school
grounds, but does not include the facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.
[iii] A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the
alcoholic beverage control regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[iv] Any other adult entertainment use.
[b] Within 800 feet of a boundary of a residential district,
as defined in this chapter.
[c] Within 500 feet of the following:
[i] A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities,
including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/
bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar
public land within the Township which is under
the control, operation or management of the
Township park and recreation authorities or other
similar land within the Township which is under
the control, operation or management of private
parties and open and available for use by the
general public.
[ii] An entertainment business which is oriented
primarily towards children and family
entertainment.
§ 172-82 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-82
1:598
§ 172-83. Area regulations.
[d] Within 400 feet of the right-of-way line of U.S. Route 3
(West Chester Pike) or Pennsylvania Highway Route
252.
[2] For the purpose of Subsection K(3)(b), Yard and area
regulations, of this section, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as the part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
Subsection K(3)(b), Yard and area regulations. Presence of
a municipal, county or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying
the distance requirements of this section.
(c) Data. Sufficient additional data shall be submitted to enable
the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors to
determine that the requirements of this chapter and other
ordinances of the Township relevant to the proposed use have
been fulfilled, and that the owners and operators of proposed
adult entertainment facilities demonstrate a desire and ability
to comply with the ordinances of the Township and to prevent
their establishments from being used for any illegal activities.
L. Billboards may be erected in the Light Industrial District of the
Township as a principal use of the property only. [See also
§ 172-123A(8).]
A. Front yard, rear yard and side yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be
a minimum of 150 feet from any residential zoning district and 50 feet
from any property line or street right-of-way line.
B. Lot coverage. The building area shall not exceed 40% of the lot area,
and the total of building area plus paved area shall not exceed 65% of
the lot area.
C. Height regulations. No building shall exceed 45 feet in height.
D. Loading and unloading space. All buildings shall be provided with
adequate off-street loading and unloading spaces located on other than
the streets on which the lot abuts.
E. Parking spaces. Parking spaces shall comply with the requirements
established in this article and shall be sufficient to ensure that all
parking related to the activities of the business shall be contained upon
the lot.
F. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for any use shall be two acres.
§ 172-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-83
1:599
§ 172-84. Plan and permit requirements. [Amended 6-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-4]
G. Buffer area. Along any part of the property line that is common with a
lot in a residence district, there shall be a buffer area, a minimum of 50
feet wide, parallel with the property line. This buffer area shall be
fenced from the adjoining property.
A. Applications for any land development or subdivision plan in an I Light
Industrial District shall include but not be limited to the following, in
addition to any and all requirements set forth in Chapter 148,
Subdivision and Land Development:
(1) A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings, drives, parking lots, waste disposal facilities
and other construction features on the lot and all buildings, streets,
alleys, highways, streams and other significant topographical
features within 200 feet of the lot lines.
(2) All requirements for a land development and/or subdivision shall be
followed in accordance with Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land
Development. In the case of a land development, architectural
plans for any proposed building and/or addition shall be filed.
(3) In the case of a land development where there is to be owner
occupancy or a known tenant, a detailed description of the
industrial operations proposed, in sufficient detail to identify and
quantify the impact of the proposal on the ecology and
environment, including but not limited to traffic congestion, noise,
glare, air pollution, odors, water pollution, smoke, fire and safety
hazards, waste generation and disposal. Engineering and
architectural plans shall be included, showing the proposed
resolution of all environmental problems resulting from the
proposed use.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for the handling and disposal
of stormwater, sewage and industrial waste. Plans shall also
include a description of facilities to handle and properly dispose of
recyclable materials as required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and Township ordinance.
(5) The proposed number of shifts and days to be worked and the
maximum number of employees on each shift, if available at the
time of application.
(6) The applicant shall, among other things, comply with Article XXIII
of this chapter and Chapter 104, Natural Features and
Landscaping.
B. All applications for building permits for fit-out work and certificates of
occupancy shall be accompanied by a use permit application, which
shall contain a description of proposed industrial uses and operations
§ 172-83 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-84
1:600
§ 172-85. Appeals. [Added 6-24-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-4]
In the event that the Township Manager or his representative does not
render a decision within 10 working days of the receipt of a complete
description of the proposed use or that the Township Manager's decision
is that the use is not permitted by this chapter and/or does not meet
the standards set forth in § 172-84B, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal the decision directly to the Board of Supervisors by filing written
appeal with the Township. The Board of Supervisors shall hear and render
a decision on the appeal at the next scheduled meeting of the Board of
Supervisors, provided that the appeal is filed at least five business days
prior thereto. In the event that the appeal is not filed within five business
days of the next scheduled meeting, the Board of Supervisors may postpone
consideration of the appeal until the second scheduled meeting after the
filing of the appeal. The fees for such a hearing shall be established from
time to time by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.
and their impacts, with particular consideration given to adjoining
properties. The use permit application shall contain sufficient
information to enable the Township Manager to assess the applicant's
compliance with this chapter, Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land
Development, and the following standards:
(1) Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed
within a completely enclosed building so that no operation will
produce heat or glare beyond the property line of the lot on which
the operation is located.
(2) All uses shall be so operated so that all noise, odors and vibrations
associated with such uses are not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point beyond the lot on which those uses are located.
(3) All raw materials and products associated with any industrial or
related use shall be stored indoors.
(4) Off-street loading and unloading spaces on which the lot abuts are
adequate for the proposed use.
C. The Township Manager may obtain consultation from one or more
consultants in making a determination of the applicant's compliance
with the general performance standards of Subsection B. The costs of
such consultation shall be borne by the applicant, provided that such
costs are reasonable and the applicant provides written consent to the
Township prior to incurring such costs. In such circumstances, no
building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the
applicant's reimbursement to the Township for such consultation costs.
§ 172-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-85
1:601

ARTICLE XIX
SU-1 Special Use Districts
[Added 1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-1]
§ 172-86. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a zoning district which will act
as a buffer zone between residential land uses and other more intense
nonresidential land uses or to reflect historic or difficult geographic
features of particular tracts, such as soil type, marsh areas, slopes and
ravines, or a combination thereof.
§ 172-87. Applicability.
In SU-1 Special Use Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-88. Use regulations.
A. Uses as of right. Any use of a building or lot located in the SU-1 Special
Use District which is in lawful existence on the effective date of the
ordinance establishing such district (Ordinance No. 1983-1) and which,
in the absence of this provision, would not be in conformity with the
provisions of this article shall be permitted to continue as of right in, on
or at such building or lot.
B. Conditional use. A building may be erected, altered, occupied or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes,
provided that such structure, erection, alteration, occupation or use is
in conformity with a conditional use plan approved by the Board of
Supervisors:
(1) Scientific research laboratories, provided that there is no
commercial production and no storage of any commodity or
substance whatsoever at such laboratories, except for such storage
as is necessary for the conduct of scientific research, and provided
further that such laboratories do not emit odors, dust, fumes,
smoke, heat or gas or discharge any uncontrolled liquid or solid
wastes or cause vibrations, noise or glare which may be
detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or
general welfare or which may cause damage to or unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of public or private property.
(2) Offices.
(a) Offices for administrative, executive, governmental,
professional, sales and/or similar uses and/or for the provision
of medical and health care services on an outpatient basis only,
provided that no commercial storage, exchange, sales or
delivery of merchandise is conducted in or from such offices,
and provided that: [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No.
§ 172-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-88
1:603
1985-4; 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1; 8-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-06]
[1] Any building used or to be used for the purposes permitted
by Subsection B(1) and (2) hereof which contains 4,000 net
square feet or less of floor space shall be constructed
solely for the use of or shall be used or occupied solely by a
single business entity and/or affiliates of such single
business entity.
[2] Any building used or to be used for the purposes permitted
by Subsection B(1) and (2) hereof which contain more than
4,000 net square feet of floor space may be constructed for
the use and occupancy by and may be used or occupied by
more than one business entity.
[3] Any offices which are used for the provision of outpatient
medical and health care services shall not provide beds for
recipients of such services except in connection with sleep
study sessions.
(b) As used in Subsection B(2)(a)[1] and [2] hereof, the term
"business entity" means person, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, joint venture, governmental
agency, public or private foundation, education institution or
similar organization. The term "affiliate" means a parent,
subsidiary, division or affiliate of a corporation or any business
entity having a similar relationship to a business entity which
may use or occupy offices in an office building under this
section.
(3) Any use permitted in R-5 Residence Districts, provided that all
provisions of Article XII are met to the extent that they are more
restrictive than this article, in addition to the requirements of this
article, except that § 172-49E shall supersede the provision in
§ 172-91C as it relates to the minimum distance between buildings
used for purposes allowed in the R-5 Residence Districts.
(4) Any use of an existing building, landmark or site which has been
designated as historic by the federal government, the
commonwealth or which is listed on the Historic Sites Map
proposed by the Delaware County Planning Commission of
December 1979 as part of a proposed Comprehensive Plan for
Newtown, provided that such use is compatible with the historic
nature of such building, landmark or site and will contribute to the
preservation of such building, landmark or site.
(5) Golf courses, if over 2,500 yards in length for a nine-hole course or
if over 5,000 yards for an eighteen-hole course, provided that such
courses are not illuminated for nighttime use.
§ 172-88 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-88
1:604
§ 172-89. Conditional use approval.
(6) Accessory uses in the same building or on the same lot with and
customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by Subsection
B(1) through (5) hereof, provided that such accessory uses will not
be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or
general welfare or cause damage to or unreasonably interfere with
the use or enjoyment of public or private property, and provided
further that such accessory uses are approved in conjunction with
approval, pursuant to §§ 172-89 and 172-90, of the uses described
in Subsection B(1) through (5) hereof. Accessory uses permitted by
this Subsection B(6) shall include, without limitation of the
foregoing:
(a) A cafeteria located within a building constructed for and/or
used for the purposes described in Subsection B(1) and (2)
hereof, provided that such cafeteria is operated by or on behalf
of any employer or employers who use or occupy offices within
such building, and provided further that any such cafeteria is
operated for the exclusive use of employers or business visitors
of such employer or employers, and provided further that no
more than 10% of the net floor space of any such building is
used for cafeteria purposes.
C. Adult entertainment uses. The uses permitted by right and the uses
permitted as conditional uses shall not include adult entertainment
uses, as defined in this zoning chapter. [Added 1-6-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-1]
A. Planning Commission review.
(1) In reviewing an application for approval of any preliminary or final
plans for a proposed conditional use permitted by § 172-88, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following factors:
(a) Whether the proposed conditional use will have a detrimental
effect on the health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals or
general welfare of the public and, in particular, the residents in
the immediate vicinity of the proposed conditional use.
(b) Whether the proposed conditional use and all structures,
equipment or materials used therefor or therein are readily
accessible to police and fire protection.
(c) Whether the proposed conditional use will be of such
dimension, location and character as to be consistent with the
scheme of development prescribed by the Township
Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Whether the proposed conditional use will include traffic
accessways which are adequate to provide safe ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways without undue
§ 172-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-89
1:605
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow within
the Township.
(e) Whether the proposed conditional use makes adequate
provision for safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic
circulation within the boundaries of the site of the proposed
conditional use.
(f) Whether the site of the proposed conditional use will be
adequately drained without adversely affecting adjoining
properties, and whether all slopes and grade on the site will be
adequately protected against erosion.
(g) Whether the proposed conditional use will unduly interfere
with or adversely affect natural resources, such as streams,
lakes, swamps, springs, wetlands, woodlands, slopes and
grades, wildlife habitats and trees over eight inches in
diameter measured three feet above the base of the trunk,
which are located on the site of the proposed conditional use.
(h) Whether merchandise, goods, products, articles or equipment
will be stored or displayed outside of a building or on a lot for
which a conditional use is proposed, and whether such items
will be stored or displayed inside a building for which a
conditional use is proposed in a manner which renders such
items visible from beyond the property line of such use.
(i) Whether the proposed conditional use will diminish the value
of properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed
conditional use.
(j) Whether the proposed conditional use is physically suited to
the site of such proposed use in view of the topographical, soil,
hydrogeological and environmental characteristics of such
site.
(k) Whether the proposed conditional use will cause an
unreasonable and substantial interference with the use and
enjoyment of properties to or in the vicinity of the proposed
use.
(l) Whether the proposed conditional use is compatible with the
existing use of the immediate vicinity.
(m) Whether the proposed conditional use will result in an
unreasonable density of population or overcrowding of the
land.
(n) Whether the proposed conditional use will deprive adjacent
properties of adequate light and air.
§ 172-89 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-89
1:606
(o) Whether the proposed conditional use will substantially burden
existing sewerage facilities, schools, parks, utilities and other
public services.
(p) Whether the proposed conditional use complies with all
sections of this article, particularly as related to land
development and subdivision standards.
(2) On the basis of this review, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors as to whether the
application and plans should be approved, approved subject to
conditions or rejected. The Board of Supervisors shall consider but
shall not be bound by the recommendations of the Commission.
B. Factors for consideration by Board of Supervisors. In determining
whether to approve, approve subject to conditions or reject an
application for preliminary or final plans for a conditional use permitted
by § 172-88, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the following
factors:
(1) The recommendations of the Planning Commission.
(2) The factors set forth in Subsection A hereof.
(3) Whether the criteria for approval set forth in Subsection C hereof
have been satisfied.
C. Criteria for approval by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
shall approve an application and plans for a conditional use permitted
by § 172-88 only if it has determined that each of the following criteria
are or will be satisfied:
(1) The proposed conditional use will not have a detrimental effect on
the health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals or general welfare
of the public and, in particular, residents in the immediate
neighborhood.
(2) The proposed conditional use and all structures, equipment or
materials used therefor or therein shall be readily accessible to
police and fire protection.
(3) The proposed conditional use shall be of such dimension, location
and character as to be compatible with existing uses in the
neighborhood and the scheme of development set forth in §§ 172-3
and 172-4.
(4) The proposed conditional use shall not create an increase in traffic
of such character as to create a high probability of danger to the
health and safety of the community.
(5) The proposed conditional use shall not unduly interfere with or
damage natural resources, such as streams, lakes, swamps,
springs, wetlands, woodlands, slopes and grades, wildlife habitats
§ 172-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-89
1:607
§ 172-90. Compliance with land development legislation.
Applications for special use approval shall be subject to and comply with
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Newtown. In addition, location, dimensions and arrangements
of all areas devoted to plantings, lawns, trees and other green areas shall
also be shown on the plans.
§ 172-91. Area regulations.
and trees over eight inches in diameter measured three feet above
the base of the trunk, which are located on or near the site of the
proposed conditional use.
(6) The proposed conditional use shall not involve the storage or
display outside of a building or on a lot for which a conditional use
is proposed of any merchandise, goods, products, articles or
equipment, except for living plants and motor vehicles parked
outside such building or on such lot in conformity with the
requirements of Article XXIV.
(7) The proposed conditional use shall not involve the storage or
display inside a building of merchandise, goods, products, articles
or equipment if such storage or display is visible from outside the
building beyond the property lines of the site on which the
conditional use is proposed to be located.
(8) The proposed conditional use shall not cause a substantial decrease
in the value of properties in the vicinity of the proposed use.
(9) The proposed conditional use shall be physically suited to the land
on which it is proposed to be located in view of the topography,
hydrogeology, soil and other physical features of the land.
(10) The proposed conditional use shall not create an unreasonable and
substantial interference with the use and enjoyment of properties
in the vicinity of the proposed use.
A. Lot area. Every lot shall have a lot area (non-residential) of three acres or more, and such
lot shall be not less than 300 feet in width at the building line. The tract
of land on which each permitted use is conducted shall be held in single
ownership and shall be operated under unified contract or
management.
B. Building area. No more than 30% of the total square footage of each
tract for which a conditional use is proposed shall be occupied by
buildings, and not more than 60% of the total square footage of each
tract shall be occupied by a combination of buildings and parking areas.
Where a lot held in single and separate ownership at the time this
section is enacted is proposed to be subdivided into two lots, the
buildings area and impervious area requirements contained herein
shall apply to the tract as a whole and not to the individual lots
§ 172-89 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-91
1:608
hereinafter created, provided that: [Amended 8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
(1) No more than two office buildings shall be located on a tract which
contains 50 acres or less and is located adjacent to West Chester
Pike and west of Medical Drive;
(2) No more than a total of 400,000 square feet of office space
(exclusive of structured parking facilities) shall be located on a
tract which contains 50 acres or less and is located adjacent to
West Chester Pike and west of Medical Drive;
(3) Existing buildings may be demolished, reconstructed, expanded
and/or adaptively reused for any of the uses permitted in the SU-1
Zoning District, provided that the new building or buildings shall
not be permitted to exceed the total square footage of the
demolished building or buildings. Impervious surface shall not be
increased by more than 1%. Conditional use shall not be required
for the demolition, reconstruction, expansion and/or adaptive reuse
of existing buildings.
C. Setback. All buildings shall be set back no less than 200 feet from all
street rights-of-way against which the lot which is the site of the
proposed conditional use abuts and no less than 100 feet from all other
property lines or other buildings located on the lot, except that the
Board of Supervisors may, upon individual application, reduce the
setback to not less than 75 feet from all right-of-way lines against which
the lot abuts where it is shown by the applicant that such reduction in
setback is necessary due to the unusual slope, size or topography of the
lot, except as follows: [Amended 9-12-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-11;
9-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-9; 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
(1) All buildings located adjacent to West Chester Pike and west of
Medical Drive shall be set back a minimum distance of 200 feet
from existing or proposed curblines of West Chester Pike. Required
building setback areas from West Chester Pike shall be devoted to
walkways, street trees, off-street parking, green areas, stormwater
management, or a combination thereof. Limited driveway and road
access through such setbacks shall be permitted. All buildings shall
be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from curblines of all
other existing or proposed streets. Such setback areas shall be
devoted to walkways, street trees, green areas, stormwater
management facilities or a combination thereof. Limited driveway
and road access through such setbacks shall be permitted. No offstreet
parking shall be permitted within 100 feet of West Chester
Pike. No setbacks shall be required from interior lot lines abutting
other lots within the SU-1 District.
(2) All one- or two-story buildings located between Winding Way and
Medical Office Drive shall be set back a minimum distance of 35
feet from existing or proposed curblines of West Chester Pike. All
§ 172-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-91
1:609
§ 172-92. Height regulations. [Amended 9-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-9; 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
No building shall have more than three stories, exclusive of basement,
nor shall it exceed 45 feet in height, subject, however, to the following
provisions:
buildings greater than two stories located between Winding Way
and Medical Office Drive shall be set back a minimum distance
of 75 feet from existing or proposed curblines of West Chester
Pike. Required building setback areas from West Chester Pike shall
be devoted to walkways, street trees, off-street parking, green
areas, stormwater management, or a combination thereof. Limited
driveway and road access through such setbacks shall be
permitted. All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet from curb lines of all other existing or proposed streets. Such
setback areas shall be devoted to walkways, street trees, green
areas, stormwater management facilities or a combination thereof.
Limited driveway and road access through such setbacks shall be
permitted. No off-street parking shall be permitted within 100 feet
of West Chester Pike. No setbacks shall be required from interior
lot lines abutting other lots within the SU-1 District.
(3) Existing buildings which are demolished and reconstructed,
expanded and/or adaptively reused shall be set back a minimum
distance of 50 feet from adjacent properties, 300 feet from Goshen
Road, and 10 feet from curblines of all other existing or proposed
streets.
(4) Where, in conjunction with special use district development plan
approval, an applicant donates land to abutting property owners,
the applicant may, with the agreement of the Board of Supervisors,
include some or all of the donated land as part of the setback from
property lines other than street rights-of-way.
D. Landscaping. Each lot on which a permitted conditional use is
conducted shall be landscaped or otherwise screened by the use of
trees, plantings or other means, in a manner which will ensure that the
lot and conditional use conducted thereon will not detract from and
shall adequately safeguard the residential character of adjacent
districts.
A. The height of a principal building may be increased from 45 feet in
height to 50 feet in height, provided that the following conditions are
satisfied:
(1) The building shall have no more than three stories, exclusive of
basement;
§ 172-91 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-92
1:610
§ 172-93. Buffer requirements.
Along each side or rear property line of a lot which directly abuts a
residence district of the Township or similar district in an adjoining
municipality, a fence and a buffer planting strip of not less than 50 feet in
width shall be provided. On the buffer planting strip, there shall be placed
shrubbery, trees or other plantings sufficient to screen the lot and the
conditional use conducted thereon from abutting residential districts and to
ensure that the residential character of abutting districts is not adversely
affected by such lot or any conditional use conducted thereon. Along each
street line of the lot, a buffer strip of not less than 25 feet in width shall
be provided, which shall be landscaped in the manner provided above and
which may include sidewalks and accessways necessary or appropriate for
the conditional use conducted on the lot.
§ 172-94. Sewer and water service; utilities; solid waste.
§ 172-95. Amendments to development plan.
(2) Every additional foot of height above 45 feet, but not to exceed 50
feet, shall require an additional ten-foot setback from all street
rights-of-way; and
(3) The principal building shall be located at least 300 feet from any
residential zoning district boundary.
B. Buildings located adjacent to West Chester Pike and west of Winding
Way shall be permitted to be five stories or 70 feet in height.
A. A conditional use permitted under this article shall be served by public
sanitary sewers and water. If public sanitary sewers are not available,
such conditional use shall be serviced by an on-site sewage facility
constructed to and operated in accordance with the Township
standards.
B. All utility lines servicing a conditional use permitted under this article
shall be placed underground within the property lines of the lot on
which the special use is located. All utility equipment, other than utility
lines, located aboveground shall be screened by shrubbery, plantings or
other landscaping.
C. All trash, garbage, rubbish and debris of every kind generated by the
special use shall be stored within a completely enclosed building in a
fireproofed room and shall be collected and disposed of by private
collectors, at no cost to the Township, as often as is reasonably
necessary to preserve the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. If dumpster-type containers are used, such
containers shall be stored within a completely enclosed building.
A. Any SU Special Use District development plan which has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to §§ 172-89 and 172-90
§ 172-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-95
1:611
§ 172-96. Modifications of buildings and lots; change in use;
abandonment.
may be amended by the owner, developer or builder in accordance with
the following procedures:
(1) The person seeking an amendment to the plan ("applicant") shall
submit to the Township an application for an amendment of a
special use district plan, together with information describing the
proposed amendment. The Zoning Officer shall verify the accuracy
of all documents submitted by the applicant in conjunction with the
application.
(2) The application and supporting documents shall be submitted to
the Township. The Board of Supervisors shall determine whether
the proposed amendment is of sufficient scope to warrant further
site review under the procedures set forth in §§ 172-89 and 172-90.
If it is determined that further site review is necessary, the Board of
Supervisors shall decide whether to approve or deny the proposed
amendment on the basis of such site review. The zoning fees
established under Articles XXX and XXII shall apply in such cases.
B. If it is determined that the proposed amendment is not of sufficient
scope to warrant further site review, the Board of Supervisors shall
decide on the basis of the application and supporting documents
whether to approve or deny the proposed amendment. A zoning fee
equal to that required to be paid for Planning Commission reviews shall
be applied in such cases. In all cases, the Board of Supervisors shall
advise the Zoning Officer of its decision.
A. No physical modification or extension of or change in use of a building
or lot for which an SU Special Use District development plan has been
approved shall be permitted, unless and until such plan has been
amended to reflect such modification, extension or change pursuant to
§ 172-95.
B. Physical modification or extension. Any physical modification or
extension of a building used in a manner permitted as of right under
§ 172-88A may be made only after approval of such modification or
extension by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the procedures set
forth in § 172-95A and B, except that, in such cases, the person seeking
the modification or extension shall submit to the Zoning Officer an
application for modification or extension of a use as of right in an SU-1
or SU-2 Special Use District. No modification or extension shall be
approved unless it is determined that such modification or extension
satisfies the requirements of § 172-89.
C. Change in use. Any change in the use of a building or lot permitted as of
right pursuant to § 172-88A shall be subject to the requirements of this
article regarding conditional uses.
§ 172-95 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-96
1:612
§ 172-97. Nonconforming lots.
A building may be erected on any lot in the SU-1 Special Use District held
in single and separate ownership on the effective date of the ordinance
establishing this SU-1 Special Use District where such lot is not of the
required minimum area or frontage or is of such unusual dimensions that
the owner cannot reasonably provide the open spaces required by the
provisions of this article, provided that such erection is approved by the
Board of Supervisors after consideration of the factors set forth in § 172-89.
§ 172-97.1. Off-street parking. [Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
D. Abandonment of use. If a use of a building or lot permitted as of right
under § 172-88A is abandoned for more than one year, any subsequent
use of such building or lot shall be subject to the requirements of this
article regarding conditional uses.
A. There shall be 3.5 parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area for all office uses permitted in the SU-1 District. The parking
for all other permitted uses shall be in accordance with § 172-132 of
this Zoning chapter.
B. Off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet.
However, a minimum of 2% of the minimum number of parking spaces
on the tract shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 18 feet.
C. Required parking lot green area. Where parking areas, loading and
unloading facilities and accompanying access from a street or driveway
exceeds 3,000 square feet, a minimum of 10% of all paved areas shall
be devoted to green areas, or 5% may be provided if the parking is
substantially located to the rear of the buildings and it can be
demonstrated that views of the parking lot from the public right-of-way
are shielded by a combination of landscaping and/or berming. In such a
case, there shall not be a requirement for green areas between rows of
parking spaces. Green area requirements shall not be applicable in
structured parking or multilevel parking facilities.
§ 172-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-97.1
1:613

ARTICLE XX
SU-2 Special Use Districts
[Added 1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-1]
§ 172-98. Applicability.
In SU-2 Special Use Districts, the regulations contained in this article shall
apply.
§ 172-99. Use regulations.
A. Uses as of right. Any use of a building or lot located in the SU-2 Special
Use District which is in lawful existence on the effective date of the
ordinance establishing such district (Ordinance No. 1983-1) and which,
in the absence of this provision, would not be in conformity with the
provisions of this article shall be permitted to continue as of right in, on
or at such building or lot.
B. Conditional use. A building may be erected, altered, occupied or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes,
provided that such structure, erection, alteration, occupation or use is
in conformity with a conditional use plan approved by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to the procedures described in §§ 172-89 and
172-90:
(1) Any use permitted in SU-1 Special Use Districts.
(2) Nurseries and greenhouses.
(3) New car sales when conducted as part of a car manufacturer's
franchise system, provided that the provisions of § 172-117 are
met, and when located on a four-lane divided highway.
(4) Golf courses, golf driving ranges, playing fields, swimming clubs,
public parks and similar recreational facilities.
(5) Convalescent homes, nursing homes or similar uses, provided that
such homes comply with the current standards for an intermediate
skill care facility established under the law of Pennsylvania, and
provided further that such home consists of no more than 12,000
square feet of gross floor area per acre, and provided further that it
conforms with § 172-48.
(6) Service office building.
(a) Any building used or to be used for the purposes permitted by
this subsection which contains 8,000 net square feet or less of
floor space shall be constructed solely for the use of or shall be
used or occupied solely by a single business entity and/or
affiliates of such single business entity.
§ 172-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-99
1:615
§ 172-100. Applicability of other provisions; exceptions.
All provisions and conditions of Article XIX (SU-1 Special Use Districts) shall
likewise apply to uses permitted in Article XX (SU-2 Special Use Districts),
except for:
(b) Any building used or to be used for the purposes permitted by
this subsection which contains more than 8,000 net square feet
of floor space may be constructed for the use of or occupancy
by and may be used or occupied by more than one business
entity, provided that each such business entity shall lease and
use or occupy no less than 1,200 net square feet of floor space
in such building. [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-4]
(7) Public schools, private or parochial schools, school dormitories,
church, religious or philanthropic use.
(8) A restaurant, at which all food is prepared, served and sold
exclusively for consumption by patrons while seated inside the
building at counters or tables.
C. Adult entertainment uses. The uses permitted by right and the uses
permitted as conditional uses shall not include adult entertainment
uses, as defined in this zoning chapter. [Added 1-6-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-1]
A. Section 172-88.
B. Vehicle showrooms which are visible beyond the property lines of the
site and outdoor display of automobiles, which shall be permitted when
associated with a use under § 172-99B(3); § 172-89C(6) and (7) shall in
all other respects apply in an SU-2 District.
§ 172-99 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100
1:616
ARTICLE XXA
(Reserved)152
§ 172-100.1. through § 172-100.11. (Reserved)
152. Editor’s Note: Former Article XXA, Open Space Option, added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-6, as amended, was repealed 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05.
§ 172-100.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.1
1:617

ARTICLE XXB
Flood Hazard District
[Added 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-6; amended 2-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01; 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
§ 172-100.12. Findings.
§ 172-100.13. Intent.
A. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety,
and the general welfare of its citizenry.
B. Certain areas of Newtown Township are floodplain areas subject to
periodic flooding from watercourses or inadequate drainage, wet soils
or soils having a high-water table, which flooding results in loss of
property, danger to life, damage to structures, injury to people,
disruption of public and private activities and services, burdensome
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
C. Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplain areas causing increases in flood heights and velocities and
the occupancy of floodplain areas by uses vulnerable to floods.
D. Certain sections of Newtown Township are aquifer recharge areas
which form the source of the underground water supply and are
especially sensitive to pollution and contamination from inappropriate
surface uses.
E. Drainage areas, wet soils or soils having a high-water table and water
courses located in Newtown Township are part of integrated drainage
basins and as such, the construction or other alteration of land within
the Township that increases runoff also increases the flood hazard to
communities downstream.
A. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize flood losses.
B. The specific intent of this article is:
(1) To promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
(2) To regulate or prevent the erection of buildings and other
structures in areas unfit for development by reason of periodic
flooding, unsanitary drainage conditions and related hazards.
§ 172-100.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.13
1:619
§ 172-100.14. Establishment and identification of district.
(3) To protect public health and the environment by preventing
pollution of surface and subsurface water supplies and providing
surface area to absorb water for maintenance of the subsurface
water supply.
(4) To protect public safety by managing the use of natural floodplains
and valley flats which are subject to periodic flooding.
(5) To prevent the increase in flood volume and rate of flow which
results from covering floodplains with impervious surfaces and
from impeding natural drainage channels.
(6) To provide areas for the deposition of sediment.
(7) To prevent added downstream damage from increased flood
volume and rate of flow and to permit uses of the floodplain
compatible with the preservation of natural conditions and the
maintenance of the stream flow throughout the year.
(8) To minimize the financial burden imposed on individuals,
businesses, governmental units, and the public in general.
(9) To promote responsible floodproofing measures within the
Floodplain Management District.
(10) To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices
in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(11) To comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
C. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning Officer of the
Township of Newtown is hereby designated and may be referred to
herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Assistant Township
Manager, or other individual assigned in writing by the Floodplain
Administrator, shall be the Alternate Floodplain Administrator and shall
have all powers and responsibilities as the Floodplain Administrator
when serving in that capacity.
A. Overlay district.
(1) The Floodplain Management District (FMD), also referred to herein
as "Floodplain District", as defined and described by this article
shall be deemed an overlay district where applicable on any zoning
district now or hereafter delineated on the Township Zoning Map.
(2) Should the Floodplain Management District be declared
inapplicable to any parcel of land by reason of action by the Zoning
Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court of competent
jurisdiction, the zoning applicable to such parcel shall be deemed
§ 172-100.13 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.14
1:620
to be the underlying district in which the parcel is located, without
consideration of the Floodplain Management District.
(3) Should the zoning of any parcel or any part thereof over which the
Floodplain Management District is located be changed through any
legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, such
change shall have no effect on the Floodplain Management District
unless such change was made with respect to the Floodplain
Management District.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within Newtown Township
unless the proposed work has been reviewed for compliance with
the provisions of this article by the Zoning Officer and a permit
issued.
(5) A compliance review shall not be required for minor repairs to
existing buildings or structures.
B. Establishment of boundaries. The Floodplain Management District is
defined and established as those areas of the Township subject to
flooding as defined in the following enumerated subsections, with the
most extensive of those areas described in the following subsections
determining the outermost boundary of the Floodplain Management
District:
(1) All lands designated by the soil map symbols and mapping unit
names shown on maps contained in the Soil Survey Report of
Chester and Delaware Counties issued by the Soil Conservation
Service (i.e., the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS))
United States Department of Agriculture, dated May 1963 or later
revision, as follows:
Map Symbol Mapping Unit Name
We Wehadkee silt loam
Ch Chewacla silt loam
WoA, WoB, WoC Worsham silt loam
(2) All areas which have flooded within the last 100 years, as recorded
or indicated by written or other objective records, such as surveys
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(3) All areas which, by hydrological stream profile analysis conducted
by a registered professional engineer or geologist are calculated to
be inundated during a nominal one-hundred-year-frequency flood.
Such analysis shall be required prior to the issuance of any permits
if, after consultation with the Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineer, the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
the applicant's property, or a portion thereof, is in such close
proximity to a floodplain area as to be subject to inundation by a
§ 172-100.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.14
1:621
one-hundred-year-frequency flood. If the analysis demonstrates
that the property or a portion thereof will not be subject to
inundation, such permits as are required shall be considered for
approval, but shall not be issued unless and until the applicant has
complied with all other applicable provisions of this article and with
all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
(4) All areas of Newtown Township classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) as identified by the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
November 18, 2009, prepared for the Township and issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including all
digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study, or most
recent revision thereof.
(a) The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by Newtown
Township and declared to be part of this Code.
(b) These areas shall consist of the following specific areas:
[1] FW (Floodway area): the areas identified as "floodway" in
the AE Area by the FIS and FIRM. The term shall also
include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those
floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in
the FIS.
[2] FF (flood-fringe area): the remaining portions of the onehundred-
year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE
Area with or without identified or delineated floodplain by
the FIS and FIRM. The basis for the outermost boundary of
this area shall be the one-hundred-year-flood elevations as
shown in the flood profiles contained in the FIS.
[3] FA (general floodplain area): the areas identified as A Area
by the FIS and FIRM for which no one-hundred-year-flood
elevations have been provided. When available,
information from other federal, state and other acceptable
sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no
other information is available, the one-hundred-year
elevation shall be determined by using a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question. In lieu of the above, the
municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently
§ 172-100.14 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.14
1:622
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computation, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
(5) All areas containing hydric soils as determined by the following
hydric soil boundary short procedure:
(a) A landowner, upon executing an agreement with the Township
Board of Supervisors, may submit detailed soil profiles and a
report to the Township Engineer for purposes of determining
hydric soil classification and the boundary of the Floodplain
Management District.
(b) If the Township Engineer and the landowner agree that the
site-specific information supplied by the landowner indicates
an accurate classification of the soils, then the Township Board
of Supervisors will accept the extent of hydric soil as the
boundary of the Floodplain Management District if not in
conflict with the floodplain area and the community-identified
flood hazard areas.
(6) All areas of Newtown Township classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs).
(7) Community-identified flood hazard areas, which are those areas
where the Township has identified local flood hazard or ponding
areas based on historical data and records, or has delineated and
adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of
record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
(8) Areas not reflected above, but which may be subject to inundation.
These areas shall be identified by field survey and by hydrologic
and hydraulic calculation and shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township Engineer, who shall make the
determination as to the outermost boundary. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or geologists, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted
in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Township.
C. Boundary revision and disputes.
(1) Studies used to establish the boundaries of the Floodplain
Management District will be available in the Township Municipal
Building for reference.
(2) The boundaries of the Floodplain Management District may be
revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors from time to time
§ 172-100.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.14
1:623
§ 172-100.15. Use and activity within district.
upon recommendation by the Township Engineer based upon
detailed engineering studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person that documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than
six months after the date such information becomes available, the
Township will notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical
or scientific data.
(3) Whenever there is a difference between any map setting forth the
Floodplain Management District or a portion thereof and the data
contained in the studies, the data contained in the studies shall
determine the boundary of the Floodplain Management District.
(4) Should a dispute with respect to the boundaries of the Floodplain
Management District arise, an initial determination of the
boundaries shall be made by the Zoning Officer after review and
comment on the boundary dispute by the Township Engineer.
(5) Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer as to the
boundaries of the Floodplain Management District may appeal the
decision to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided by this chapter.
The burden of proof in such an appeal shall be on the appellant.
(6) Insofar as various natural conditions, including areas forming the
Floodplain Management District, may change, such changes may
be determined by detailed on-site survey techniques and hydrologic
and hydraulic studies.
(7) The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether a proposed use
is within the Floodplain Management District upon appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Officer.
(8) The Zoning Hearing Board may consider the findings of a detailed
on-site survey and hydrologic and hydraulic studies presented by
the landowner and/or applicant, and other evidence presented by
the landowner and/or applicant and other parties recognized by the
Zoning Hearing Board who may support or oppose the decision of
the Zoning Officer.
(9) All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain Management
District are subject to the review and approval of the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
(10) An applicant shall pay all fees for processing applications and shall
reimburse the Township for all professional fees and costs of
reviews and reports prepared in reviewing a dispute of the
Floodplain Management District boundary.
§ 172-100.14 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.15
1:624
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Floodplain
Management District provided disturbance to any existing woodlands
and degradation of water quality are minimized to the greatest extent
practicable, and subject to applicable elevation and floodproofing
regulations:
(1) Agriculture uses, excluding structures, such as farming, cultivation
and harvesting of crops according to recognized soil conservation
practices, which shall in no case cause alluvial deposits to build up
in watercourses or cause undue erosion to the floodplain
management.
(2) Pasture and grazing land, excluding structures.
(3) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard, excluding structures.
(4) Forestry, lumbering and reforestation, according to recognized soil
conservation practices, excluding storage and mill structures.
(5) Recreation uses, such as a park, day camp, picnic grounds, tent
camping, golf course, hiking and riding trails, hunting, fishing, and
swimming areas, excluding buildings.
(6) Game farm and fish hatchery, excluding buildings.
(7) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland or nature preserves and arboretum,
excluding structures.
B. Special exception uses. The following uses in the Floodplain
Management District may be approved by special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board upon application, review and comment by the
Township Planning Commission and the Township Engineer, and
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) As an area for front, side or rear yards and required lot area for any
district, provided that such yards are not to be used for on-site
sewage disposal systems or for non-wire fences or any other
structure; however, no more than half of any required yard setback
area on a lot may extend into the Floodplain Management District,
and no more than 1/4 of the required minimum lot area for any lot
may extend into the Floodplain Management District, provided that
no building or structure and no sanitary drainage field shall be
placed within the Floodplain Management District.
(a) Inclusion of Flood Management District land as part of lots in
order to meet minimum lot area or yard requirements is
contingent upon complying with the objectives and standards
set forth in the specific intent of this article and with any other
pertinent municipal regulation.
(b) If such compliance cannot be shown, the area within the
Floodplain Management District shall not be considered for
purposes of determining lot areas or yard requirements.
§ 172-100.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.15
1:625
(2) Roadways serving as corridor crossings, road and parking areas to
serve other permitted uses in the Floodplain Management District,
or roads where required by the regulations for any contiguous
district.
(3) Utility transmission lines.
(4) Storm and sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations.
(5) Sealed public water supply wells and water pipelines.
(6) Dams, bridges and culverts approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, any other
governmental agency having regulatory or advisory jurisdiction
over the watershed in question.
(7) Grading, provided that the effect is not to substantially alter the
effective cross-sectional profile of the stream basin, including the
floodplain, at the point of the proposed use, provided that a
detailed engineering study shall accompany any application for a
special exception on this ground and must be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, and any other
governmental agency having regulatory or advisory jurisdiction.
C. Prohibited uses. Any use or activity not specifically permitted herein or
authorized as a special exception shall be prohibited within the
Floodplain Management District.
(1) The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in the
Floodplain Management District and no variance shall be granted
because the uses and activities have been identified as being
dangerous to human life or posing a special hazard in a floodplain:
(a) Public and private hospital and medical facilities.
(b) Public and private nursing homes, and continuing care
retirement communities.
(c) Jails, penitentiaries, and detention centers.
(d) Mobile and manufactured home parks and subdivisions, and
substantial improvements to such parks and subdivisions.
(e) Any wastewater facility not specifically permitted by the
Newtown Township Wastewater Facilities Plan for operation in
a floodplain.
(f) The storage, manufacture, or use of any material, natural or
otherwise, especially including, but not limited to, the
following hazardous substances:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
§ 172-100.15 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.15
1:626
[3] Benzene.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfide.
[6] Celluloid.
[7] Chlorine.
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[13] Phosphorus.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulphur and sulphur products.
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated.
[19] Other uses as may be defined as "hazardous" by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development or the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(g) Junkyard or storage yard.
(h) Commercial or industrial lot for the exhibition of goods, such
as automobiles or other products for sale or distribution.
(i) Removal of site vegetation in any manner without a Townshipapproved
plan for erosion and sedimentation control.
(j) Any construction or development or construction that would
cause any increase in the one-hundred-year base flood
elevation within any floodway, as demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice.
(k) Any construction or development that would be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
§ 172-100.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.15
1:627
(2) The following uses are specifically prohibited in the Floodplain
Management District although a variance may be granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board for any of these uses in accordance with the
requirements and provisions of this chapter and Pennsylvania law;
and upon review and comment on the variance application by the
Township Planning Commission and the Township Engineer.
(a) Construction, enlargement or expansion of all freestanding
structures and buildings, with the exception of dams, bridges
and culverts as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(b) The alteration or relocation of the course of flow of any
watercourse, with the exception of stream channel
improvements approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
[1] A variance may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board to
alter or relocate a watercourse after review and comment
on the variance application by the Township Planning
Commission and the Township Engineer, and the approval
of the alteration or relocation by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and any other
governmental agency with applicable jurisdiction.
[2] All adjacent municipalities shall be notified prior to the
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Copies of such
notification shall be sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The flood-carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion shall be maintained.
(c) Private water supply wells.
(d) Placement of fill, including the deposit of topsoil and the
grading thereof; excavation of soil and rock; grading or
regrading of land; and the construction of retaining walls. A
variance application for such use shall be accompanied by a
plan indicating the fill or material proposed to be deposited
and how such fill or other materials will be protected against
erosion by the use of riprap, vegetation or bulkheads.
(e) Encroachment upon any watercourse, with the exception of
dams, bridges and culverts as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Zoning
Hearing Board through special exception approval.
(f) Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing
is necessary to prepare land for an approved use and where the
effects of these actions are mitigated by the establishment of
cover vegetation.
§ 172-100.15 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.15
1:628
(g) Application of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals in excess of prescribed industry standards.
(h) Stormwater management facilities.
D. Existing and nonconforming structures and uses.
(1) The provisions of this article do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of this article and the provisions of this chapter with
respect to nonconforming uses shall apply.
(2) Damaged existing structures. Structures located within the
Floodplain Management District may be rebuilt if destroyed by fire
or other catastrophe, provided that the reconstruction shall be in
compliance with the floodproofing or elevation requirements of this
article and, if located in the floodway, shall not result in an increase
in the base flood elevation. If fill is used to raise the finished surface
of the lowest floor two feet above the base flood elevation, the fill
shall be placed as specified by this article.
(3) Improvement and reconstruction of existing structures. The
following provisions shall apply whenever any expansion,
enlargement, or substantial improvement is made to an existing
structure located within the Floodplain Management District, or an
existing structure within the Floodplain Management District is
reconstructed:
(a) Any modification, alteration, or improvement, of any kind to an
existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions
of this article.
(b) No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement, or
reconstruction of an existing structure shall be allowed within
any floodway area that would cause any increase in the
elevation of the base flood elevation.
(c) No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement, or
reconstruction of an existing structure shall be allowed within
any AE Area without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and approved development, increase the BFE
more than one foot at any point.
(d) No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement, or
reconstruction of an existing structure shall be undertaken in
the direction of the nearest watercourse on the property.
(e) No expansion, enlargement, substantial improvement, or
reconstruction of an existing structure shall be permitted
§ 172-100.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.15
1:629
§ 172-100.16. Application for zoning permit, conditional use, or
variance.
unless two means of access are provided across the property
to the existing structure, and an evacuation plan indicating
alternate vehicular access and escape routes is prepared and
submitted to the Township.
(4) Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article must
comply with all requirements that do not preclude the structure's
continued designation as historic. Any variance from the
requirements of this article will be the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the historic structure.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
E. Horizontal floodplain buffer area. Uses and/or activity in the area
adjacent to the Floodplain Management District shall be in accordance
with the regulations and requirements of this article and the zoning
districts in which that area exists. However, no building or structure of
any nature, and no work such as permanent filling or excavation shall
be permitted within a horizontal floodplain buffer area, established at
two feet above the base flood elevation. The buffer may be part of any
lot to meet lot area and yard requirements. Said buffer shall be noted on
any plan as "horizontal floodplain buffer area."
A. Zoning permits.
(1) In the Floodplain Management District, a zoning permit shall be
required for any new or change of land use, including but not
limited to construction or alteration of buildings and structures for
which a building permit is required, subdivision and land
development, streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, excavating or drilling operations, and the storage
of materials and equipment.
(2) A zoning permit may be issued in the form of a building permit, use
and occupancy permit, zoning certification, or other final approval
as determined by the Zoning Officer.
B. Application for a zoning permit:
(1) Application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer, who shall make an initial determination with respect to the
application and whether a variance or special exception is
required.
§ 172-100.15 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.16
1:630
(2) If a variance or special exception is required, then the Zoning
Officer will provide the applicant with a determination of the
zoning relief required and advise the applicant that an application
for a variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board,
along with required studies or information and the findings of the
Zoning Officer.
(3) The Zoning Officer and Building Code Official shall review
applications and may consult with the Township Engineer to
determine if all other necessary governmental permits such as
those required by state and federal laws have been obtained.
C. Content of application for a zoning permit.
(1) Applications shall include five copies of all required information
plus any other pertinent information as may be required by the
Zoning Officer.
(2) Applications shall be made on forms supplied by the Township and
shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location including address.
(e) Listing of other permits or relief required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before flood damage occurred as applicable.
(3) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within the Floodplain Management District, applicants
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Zoning Officer to determine that:
(a) The proposed use is consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all
other applicable laws and regulations.
(b) Utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
§ 172-100.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.16
1:631
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices to minimize flood damage have been
used.
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(4) Applications shall include a location map, using a scale no smaller
than one inch being equal to 1,000 feet, identifying the location and
surrounding area of the proposed work or use.
(5) Applications shall include a plan of the entire site, clearly and
legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 50 feet or less,
showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date.
(b) Topographic contour lines based upon the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed
contours at intervals of one foot.
(c) For all watercourses, the centerline and bottom of stream and
top of bank elevations.
(d) The location of the finish floor elevation of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision
and development, and including all property and lot lines
including dimensions, and the size and the site expressed in
acres or square feet.
(e) The location and elevation of all existing streets, drives, and
other accessways, and the location of all existing streets,
drives, other accessways, and parking areas, with information
concerning widths, pavement types and construction, and
elevations.
(f) The location and elevation of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, buildings, structures and other public or private
facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other
natural and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the
proposed activity or development.
(g) The location and elevation of the Floodplain Management
District boundaries, information and spot elevations
concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities.
(h) The location and elevation of all proposed buildings,
structures, utilities, and any other improvements.
§ 172-100.16 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.16
1:632
(i) Any other information which the Township considers necessary
for adequate review of the application, including but not
limited to site cross sections.
(6) Applications shall include plans of all proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 50 feet or less showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under the
Uniform Construction Code.
(d) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate.
(e) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor.
(f) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood elevation.
(g) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(h) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths.
(i) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades.
(j) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(7) Applications shall include the following additional data and
documentation:
(a) When required by the Zoning Officer, information concerning
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with a base flood elevation; and
detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or geologist, to show that the cumulative effect of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
§ 172-100.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.16
1:633
and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
safeguards with respect to development which may endanger
human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any dangerous
materials or substances which are intended to be used,
produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances during a base
flood.
[3] A statement certified by a registered professional engineer
or geologist that contains a complete and accurate
description of the nature and extent of pollution that might
possibly occur from the development during the course of
a base flood elevation, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life.
[4] A statement certified by a registered professional engineer
or geologist that contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation elevations and flows.
[5] A statement certified by a registered professional engineer
that contains a complete and accurate description of the
kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or
debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on base flood elevation
elevations and flows.
[6] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation
control.
[7] An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in
which the site will be safely evacuated before or during the
course of a base flood.
§ 172-100.16 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.16
1:634
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(8) Applications shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee, payable
to the Township.
D. Additional permit requirements for construction. In addition to the
building permit application requirements normally required by the
Township, the Township Building Code Official shall require the
following specific information to be included as part of an application
for a building permit in the Floodplain Management District:
(1) For structures to be elevated:
(a) A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
(b) A determination of elevations of the existing grade, proposed
finished grade and lowest floors certified by a registered
professional engineer.
(c) Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure,
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining
walls, foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When
required by the Building Code Official, these plans shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect.
(d) Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to an
elevation at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation at
the building site.
(2) For structures to be floodproofed:
(a) Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared
by a registered professional engineer and showing the size of
the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to
be constructed.
(b) A determination of elevations of existing grades, proposed
finished grades, lowest floors and floodproofing limits, certified
by a registered professional engineer.
(c) A certificate prepared by a registered professional engineer
who prepared the plans that the structure in question, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is designated so
that:
§ 172-100.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.16
1:635
[1] Below an elevation two feet above the base flood elevation,
the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water.
[2] The structure will withstand the hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic, buoyant, impact and other forces resulting
from the flood depths, velocities, pressures and other
factors associated with the base flood elevation.
E. Special exception and variances. In addition to the information required
for a zoning permit application, an application for special exception or a
variance shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Detailed engineering studies indicating the effects on drainage and
streams on all affected or adjacent properties as well as the subject
property.
(2) An application for amending the boundaries of the Floodplain
Management District if the boundaries will be affected by the
proposed special exception or variance.
(3) A FEMA elevation certificate with a determination of elevations of
the existing grade, proposed finished grade, base flood elevation
and lowest floor (including basement) certified by a registered
professional engineer.
(4) Applications shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee, payable
to the Township.
F. Other agency review.
(1) Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications
and plans for any proposed construction or development in the
Floodplain Management District shall be submitted by the
applicant to the County Conservation District for review and
comment to the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a permit.
(a) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with proof of
submission to the County Conservation District.
(b) The comments and recommendations of the Conservation
District shall be considered by the Zoning Officer for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan of work or use.
(2) Review of application by others. The Zoning Officer may require an
applicant to submit a copy of all plans and applications for any
proposed construction or development in the Floodplain
Management District to be any other appropriate agencies and/or
individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.)
for review and comment.
§ 172-100.16 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.16
1:636
§ 172-100.17. Standards for special exception or variance.
(a) The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with proof of
submission to any other appropriate agencies and/or
individuals.
(b) The comments and recommendations of the reviewing agency
or individual shall be considered by the Zoning Officer for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan of work or use.
G. Changes.
(1) After the issuance of a permit by the Zoning Officer, no changes of
any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the
plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Zoning
Officer.
(2) Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be
submitted by the applicant to Zoning Officer for consideration.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may request the review and
recommendations of the Township Engineer, Township Planning
Commission, County Planning Commission, and/or the County
Conservation District at least 30 days prior to a hearing on an
application for special exception or variance with respect to a property
in the Floodplain Management District.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall exercise discretion in allowing only
those uses which are substantially in accord with the stated intent of
this chapter and article. An applicant shall demonstrate the following:
(1) The effect of the use shall not substantially alter the cross-section
profile of the watercourse and floodplain at the location of the
proposed use.
(2) Lands abutting the watercourse, both upstream and downstream,
shall not be unreasonably adversely affected by the proposed use.
(3) The general welfare or public interest of Newtown Township or
other municipalities in the same watershed shall not be adversely
affected.
(4) With respect to variance applications, the strict enforcement of this
article would create undue hardship by denying a reasonable use of
an existing lot which is situated either wholly or partially in the
Floodplain Management District.
C. In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider
a request for a special exception or variance from the provisions of this
article, the Board shall, to the extent permitted by law, consider the
following factors, where appropriate, to be established by the applicant,
§ 172-100.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.17
1:637
who shall have the burden of proving that the criteria and conditions
can be satisfied:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments. No variance or special
exception shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase
in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to avoid causing disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the
effect of such damage on the owner.
(5) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
(6) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and foreseeable
uses.
(7) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plans
and floodplain management program for the area.
(8) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(9) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
(10) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
article.
D. An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the Zoning Hearing Board
for an application within the designated floodway unless the effect of
such proposed activity on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the
issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance, and such construction below the base flood elevation
increases risk to life and property.
F. The Township shall maintain a record of all decisions and notifications,
including jurisdiction for their issuance and the Township shall report
such decisions to the appropriate agencies.
G. Elevation and floodproofing of structures.
§ 172-100.17 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.17
1:638
§ 172-100.18. Variance conditions.
(1) Any new structures permitted by special exception or variance
shall be constructed and placed on the land so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the watercourse flow and base flood
elevation. Such structures shall be elevated in accordance with the
provisions contained in this article and the Uniform Construction
Code.
(2) Any new structure permitted as a special exception or by variance
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions contained
in this article and the Uniform Construction Code.
(a) All new structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement.
(b) All new structures shall be constructed so as to prevent the
entrance of floodwaters into the water supply and waste
treatment systems as well as other utility and facility systems.
In addition, waste treatment systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate discharges from the systems into the
floodwaters.
(3) Any additions to existing structures permitted as a special
exception or by variance shall be elevated to the greatest extent
possible according to the provisions contained in this article and
the Uniform Construction Code. For nonresidential structures only,
if any portion of said addition is not elevated above the BFE, said
addition shall be floodproofed in accordance with the provisions
contained in this article and the Uniform Construction Code. All
residential additions must be so elevated.
(4) Any new structure permitted as a special exception or by variance
shall be provided with two means of access across the property to
the structure, one of which shall serve as an alternate vehicle
access outside of the Floodplain Management District.
(5) For any new structure permitted as a special exception or by
variance shall have filed with the Township and other appropriate
disaster preparedness authorities an evacuation plan indicating
alternate vehicular access to and escape routes from the structure.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated in
this article would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
builder, developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirement.
Relief issued shall conform to the following conditions:
(1) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
§ 172-100.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.18
1:639
(2) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
reasonable conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(3) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
(b) The variance may increase risks to life and property.
(4) In considering any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause for the variance,
including:
[1] That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this
chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located.
[2] That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
[3] That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the applicant.
[4] That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
§ 172-100.18 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.18
1:640
§ 172-100.19. Special use requirements.
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(5) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted shall be submitted as required by FEMA.
(6) Any new residential structure or substantial improvement of a
residential structure which cannot be elevated to two feet above
the base flood elevation shall be floodproofed as specified herein
and in accordance with the requirements established for the
W1-W2 classes by the Office of the Chief of Engineers, United
States Army, Publication No. EP 1165 2 314, June 1972, as
amended.
(7) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing residential structure, to an extent or amount of
less than 50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated or
floodproofed to the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the
maximum extent possible or floodproofed for the remaining height
to the base flood elevation for the modified, altered, reconstructed
or improved portion.
(8) Any new nonresidential structure or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure which cannot be elevated or floodproofed
to at least two feet above the base flood elevation shall be elevated
to the maximum extent possible or floodproofed for the remaining
height to at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
(9) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing nonresidential structure, to an extent or amount
of less than 50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated or
floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation
shall be elevated to the maximum extent possible and floodproofed
for the remaining height to the base flood elevation.
(10) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within the Floodplain Management District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
the Township Code and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse regardless of location until all adjacent
§ 172-100.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.19
1:641
municipalities which may be affected by such action have been
notified by the Township, and until all required permits or
approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse regardless of location unless it can be
shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse in any way.
(3) FEMA, the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any watercourse.
B. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within the Floodplain Management District, manufactured homes
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(2) Where permitted within the Floodplain Management District,
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(3) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer.
(4) All manufactured homes and any improvements thereto shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by
providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors in
accordance with the following:
(a) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners
of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and
one additional tie per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(b) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the
manufactured home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and
four additional ties per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(c) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds and resisting a minimum wind
velocity of 90 miles per hour.
§ 172-100.19 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.19
1:642
§ 172-100.20. Design and construction standards.
(5) All manufactured homes and any improvements thereto shall be
elevated in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on
pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will
be at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
(b) Adequate surface drainage shall be provided.
(c) Adequate access for a hauler shall be provided.
(d) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lot shall be large
enough to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in
stable soil not more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be
provided for pilings that will extend for six feet or more above
the ground level.
(6) An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and
escape routes shall be filed with the Township and other
appropriate disaster preparedness authorities for manufactured
home subdivisions.
(7) Placement of a manufactured home on a lot shall require a building
permit.
C. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
(1) Except for storage facilities for which a variance has been granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board, recreational vehicles in the
Floodplain Management District shall:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
A. Placement of buildings and structures.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the
flow and height of floodwater.
(2) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent floatation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(3) Within the Floodplain Management District, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
§ 172-100.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.20
1:643
(1) Residential structures.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least two feet above the base flood
elevation.
(b) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing residential structure to an extent or
amount of less than 50% of its market value shall be elevated
or floodproofed to the base flood elevation.
(c) Existing residential structures located in a designated
floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of
the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is
fully offset by accompanying stream improvements.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated or floodproofed to at least two feet above
the base flood elevation. The floodproofing measures shall
ensure that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and has structural
components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a
statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods
of construction are in conformance with the above referenced
standards.
(b) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing nonresidential structure to an extent or
amount of less than 50% of its market value shall be elevated
or floodproofed to the base flood elevation.
(c) Existing nonresidential structures located in a designated
floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of
the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is
fully offset by accompanying stream improvements.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
(b) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basement) that will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
§ 172-100.20 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.20
1:644
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"partially enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Accessory structures.
(a) Structures accessory to a principal building or use need not be
elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
[1] The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or
the storage or support of tools, material or equipment
related to the principal use or activity.
[2] Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
[3] The structure will have a low damage potential.
[4] The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the
least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
[5] Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet
above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
[6] With the exception of alternative energy generation or
conversion equipment, permanently affixed utility
equipment and appliances, including but not limited to
furnaces, heaters, washers and dryers, are permitted only
at elevations above the base flood elevation.
[7] Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
[8] The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation or movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwaters
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the
walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
§ 172-100.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.20
1:645
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
[b] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Fill. If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor two feet
above the base flood elevation, the fill shall be placed as follows:
(1) Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to
provide acceptable access for the intended use of the structure.
(2) Fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points of a residential structure.
(3) Fill shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line, at a
minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a nonresidential structure.
(4) Fill material shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
(5) Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability
and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(6) Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal,
unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted
to and approved by the Township Engineer.
(7) Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely
affect adjacent properties.
D. Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the
flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
E. Utility, electrical, and mechanical systems.
(1) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
§ 172-100.20 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.20
1:646
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) On-site sewer disposal systems are prohibited in a floodplain.
(2) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall be located above the base flood
elevation.
(3) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(4) All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent floatation.
F. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the base flood elevation.
G. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in time
of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be
stored below an elevation of one foot above base flood elevation.
H. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(3) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric airconditioning
and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations at
least three feet above the base flood elevation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the base flood elevation shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the base flood elevation shall be of a
marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 172-100.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.20
1:647
§ 172-100.21. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the base flood elevation shall be
designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and
will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the base flood
elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the base flood elevation
shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the base flood elevation shall have a
bonding strength that is unaffected by inundation (i.e., marine or
water-resistant quality).
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed
with a marine or water-resistant quality or similar product.
K. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in the Uniform Construction Code as adopted
in Pennsylvania shall apply to construction in the Floodplain
Management District, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/
or supplement the requirements of this article.
L. Post-construction documentation.
(1) Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a letter
of map revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any
new construction, development, or other activity resulting in
changes in the base flood elevation. A LOMR or conditional letter of
map revision (CLOMR) is required for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in an area without a designated
floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the
base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a watercourse, including but not
limited to installing culverts and bridges.
A. To ensure that flood damage controls are being employed in all new
construction and improvements within the Floodplain Management
District, the Zoning Officer as the Floodplain Administrator shall
provide an applicant information concerning the location of the district
boundaries relative to the proposed construction, improvements, or use
and the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood at the
proposed site. The source of the information concerning the district
§ 172-100.20 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.21
1:648
§ 172-100.22. Start of construction.
boundary shall be the Flood Insurance Study for the Township as
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Insurance Administration, and other sources as appropriate according
to those cited in this article regarding the Floodplain Management
District for the Township. The source for the information concerning
the base flood elevation shall be the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work or use to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this article and all other
applicable laws, regulations, codes and ordinances.
C. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Zoning Officer shall review an
application for a permit to determine if all other necessary government
permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
D. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any permit,
the Zoning Officer shall review the history of repairs to the subject
structure, so that any repetitive loss issues can be addressed before a
permit is issued.
E. During the construction period, the Zoning Officer or other authorized
official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is
progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable laws and regulations. The Zoning
Officer shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of
the work as are necessary.
F. The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to enter any building,
structure, premises or development in the Floodplain Management
District, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable
hour to enforce the provisions of this article.
G. In the event the Zoning Officer discovers that the work or use does not
comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Zoning Officer shall revoke the
applicable permits and report such fact to the Township Manager and
Board of Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
H. The Zoning Officer shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated
with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
A. Unless otherwise specified under the UCC, work on proposed
construction shall begin within 180 days after the date of permit
issuance and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of
permit issuance or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Zoning Officer.
§ 172-100.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.22
1:649
§ 172-100.23. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Zoning Officer to approve such a request and the original permit is
compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
C. Placards. In addition to a permit, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
placard that shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. The placard shall show the number of the
permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Zoning Officer.
A. Notices. Whenever the Zoning Officer or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Zoning Officer shall give
notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided.
(1) Notices shall be in writing.
(2) A notice shall include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) A notice shall allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30
days for the performance of any act required for compliance.
(4) A notice shall be served upon the property owner or his agent as
the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order
shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any
other authorized method.
(5) A notice shall contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements
or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to comply with
any notice, order of direction of the Zoning Officer or any other
authorized employee of the municipality shall be subject to the
applicable penalties specified by this chapter.
(2) In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement
of this article.
(3) The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time.
§ 172-100.22 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.23
1:650
§ 172-100.24. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§ 172-100.24.1. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
(4) Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance
with this article may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be
a public nuisance and abatable as such.
C. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Zoning
Officer concerning the administration of the provisions of this article
may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided by this chapter for
Zoning Hearing Board appeals.
A. This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in the Floodplain Management District; however, any other
ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent
that those provisions are more restrictive.
B. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the
more restrictive shall apply.
§ 172-100.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.24.1
1:651

ARTICLE XXC
Slope Conservation
§ 172-100.25. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide for the slope
conservation regulations as set forth in Chapter 134, Slope Conservation,
and, accordingly, every provision therein is incorporated as though fully set
forth herein.
§ 172-100.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.25
1:653

ARTICLE XXD
Cluster Development Community Overlay District
[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05153]
§ 172-100.26. Purpose; objectives.
A. It is the purpose of this article to encourage greater flexibility in the
design and development of residential housing, while also encouraging
the preservation of open space and creation of passive and active
recreational amenities, by permitting the cluster development of
residential housing as an alternative to conventional, single-family lot
development or other residential lot requirements. In addition to the
zoning objectives set forth in §§ 172-3 and 172-4, the specific objectives
of this article are the following:
(1) To encourage innovations in residential development so that the
demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type, design
and layout of dwellings;
(2) To encourage the conservation and preservation of open space,
vistas, scenic roads, stream valleys, agricultural land, trees,
natural topography and other natural resources and amenities;
(3) To provide increased flexibility in the land development regulations
of the Township in order to encourage development that recognizes
advances in the theory and practice of site planning, design, and
green technology;
(4) To conserve land and preserve open space by allowing for reduced
lot sizes;
(5) To encourage the use of ingenuity, imagination and sustainable
design to produce residential developments which are in keeping
with the objectives of the Township's Comprehensive Plan;
(6) To provide for cluster development communities in areas that are
consistent with the goals of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, in
particular Chapter Three, Land Use Plan, the Natural Resources
Protection Plan and the Community Facilities Plan, and compatible
with and protective of the existing character of the community,
especially its natural features;
(7) To decrease or minimize the amount of impervious surfaces in site
development;
(8) To implement stormwater infiltration measures integrated into the
site design that will return water to the soil in excess of NPDES
requirements for volume of infiltrated water where site and soil
153. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article XXD, Cluster Development
Community Option, added 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03.
§ 172-100.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.26
1:655
§ 172-100.27. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article I, other definitions in
Chapter 172 and common definitions, the following terms shall have the
meanings specified below when used in this article:
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY or CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT —
A form of residential development that concentrates buildings or lots on a
portion or portions of a tract of land to allow the remaining land to be used
for open space, recreation, and preservation of environmentally sensitive
land. The concentration of lots is facilitated by a reduction in lot size,
the permissible use of single-family detached, attached and semiattached
residential dwelling units and the reduction of lot yard setbacks.
COMMUNITY BUILDINGS — Structures accessory to cluster development
communities designed and used for the sole purpose of supporting the
conditions allow, based upon soils testing and where suitable
infiltration rates exist;
(9) To provide for on-site facilities and services which allow the
residents of a cluster development community to minimize the
necessity for automobile trips in their daily lives by encouraging
on-site movement by foot or bicycle;
(10) To provide facilities, residential design and site layouts that
encourage cohesiveness and interaction among residents of a
cluster development community;
(11) To provide for private and public recreation, both active and
passive, within the development tract; and
(12) To contribute to the establishment of a community-wide trail and
greenway system.
B. This article is also intended to implement § 604, Zoning Purposes, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code154 (MPC) insofar as this
article is designed to promote, protect and facilitate coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population; the
preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the
environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and
floodplains; and to provide for the use of land within the municipality
for residential housing of various dwelling types. This article is further
intended to implement § 605, Classifications, of the MPC155 insofar as
this article is designed to encourage innovation and the promotion of
flexibility, economy and ingenuity in development and for the purpose of
authorizing increases in the permissible density of population or
intensity of a particular use based upon expressed standards and
criteria as set forth in this article.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10604.
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605.
§ 172-100.26 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.27
1:656
cluster development community, solely for use by the residents and their
guests, or supporting services, such as management offices, recreational
halls, club facilities, exercise facilities, post offices, dining facilities or pool
houses.
CONSTRAINED LAND — Areas of land found in the Floodplain
Conservation District, defined wetlands, areas of very steep slopes or
associated with a stormwater management system.
GROSS CLUSTER TRACT AREA — The area of land contained within the
legally described property lines of the tract upon which an application for a
cluster development community development is submitted.
NET CLUSTER TRACT AREA — The gross cluster tract area, excluding:
OPEN SPACE — A parcel, parcels or designated area of land or an area
of water, or a combination of land and water, excluding stormwater basins,
within a cluster development community site that has been or will be
set aside and restricted from further development in perpetuity, whether
dedicated to the Township or not, except as permitted under this article,
and intended for the exclusive or nonexclusive use or enjoyment by
residents of the development subject to the regulations of this section. The
term "open space" means both private open space and public open space
and shall include the buffer area. Open space shall not include any private
yards, parking lots or street right-of-way. Access drives and parking may be
provided only in association with an approved recreational use.
PRIVATE OPEN SPACE — Open space that is held in private ownership for
public or private use of the residents of the cluster development.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Open space that is dedicated to the Township for
use by the public subject to the regulations of this section.
SEMIDETACHED BUILDING — A residential structure supporting two
single-family dwelling units with one family living on each side of a vertical
common wall.
§ 172-100.28. District established; eligibility and design criteria.
Seventy-five percent of any land lying within the Floodplain
Management District or located in wetlands;
A.
One hundred percent of areas of existing rights-of-way for streets,
public or private utilities and areas of existing easements, including
but not limited to storm drainage easements, sewage easements,
easements of access, conservation easements and agricultural
easements;
B.
Fifty percent of the land containing very steep slopes and 25% of the
land containing steep slopes; and
C.
D. One hundred percent of surface water areas.
A. The Cluster Development Community Overlay District is a zoning
overlay district on those parcels in the R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 zoning
§ 172-100.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.28
1:657
§ 172-100.29. Permitted uses; site and lot standards.
districts that have a gross cluster tract area of at least 25 acres,
which permits, upon conditional use approval, the tract of land to be
developed and used as a cluster development community in accordance
with the regulations of this article.
B. The regulations set forth in this article for an approved cluster
development community shall supersede the regulations set forth in
§§ 172-29 through 172-34 related to Residential Zoning Districts R-1,
R-1A, R-2 and R-3.
A. Subject to conditional use approval by the Board of Supervisors, cluster
development communities may include the following uses or any
combination of such uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings;
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings;
(3) Townhouses, provided that no more than five such units shall be
attached;
(4) The following structures accessory to dwelling units:
(a) Attached or detached residential garages;
(b) Attached decks and patios;
(c) Shed structures for single-family detached and single-family
semidetached dwellings, which shall be subject to the
limitations and requirements of Article XXI, § 172-103;
(d) Fences as permitted by, and subject to the conditions and
requirements of, § 172-104, except to the extent special
exception approval is granted for a front yard fence, such fence
shall not be a stockade type fence that blocks the view of the
house from the street by police or emergency services; and
(e) Any accessory structure not expressly set forth herein is
prohibited.
(5) The following uses and structures accessory to a cluster
development community:
(a) Community parking areas including parking lots and deck
parking garages;
(b) Community buildings;
(c) Community swimming pools, playing fields, ball fields, tennis
courts, putting greens and other similar active recreation use;
§ 172-100.28 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.29
1:658
(d) Community walking, biking and horse riding trails and picnic
areas for use of the residents of the community and their
guests;
(e) Community greenhouses, gardens, patios and terraces, nature
preserves, arboretums, and other similar passive recreational
areas for use of the residents of the community and their
guests;
(f) Maintenance and storage facilities for the cluster development
community;
(g) Gatehouses, guard houses, card entry gates and other similar
security-related structures and mechanical devices;
(h) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth in this
subsection and that are customarily incidental to and related to
a cluster development community, provided they are
recognized on an approved land development plan;
(i) Fences as permitted by, and subject to the conditions and
requirements of, § 172-104, except that fences may be
constructed and maintained along the entire perimeter of the
community provided that the fence is not a stockade type fence
and does not completely obstruct the viewshed from or into the
community; and
(j) Any accessory use or structure not set forth herein is
prohibited.
(6) Open space subject to §§ 172-100.30 and 172-100.31.
B. Regulations.
(1) Lot area and setback requirements.
(a) To allow maximum creativity and flexibility in the layout and
design of residential units in development, there shall be no
minimum lot area requirements applicable to individual
dwelling units, provided all structures are constructed to meet
all Township-adopted Fire Protection Codes, including Return
Time Code, Chapter 88 and Building Codes, Chapter 69.
However, each dwelling shall have the following setback
requirements, whether or not the area of land in the setback is
owned by the dwelling unit owner or the homeowners'
association:
[1] A front yard setback which shall not be less than 20 feet
from the front of the dwelling to the sidewalk, and if no
sidewalk, the right-of-way line;
[2] A side yard setback(s) which shall not be less than 10 feet
from the side of the dwelling to the lot line;
§ 172-100.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.29
1:659
[3] A rear yard setback which shall not be less than 20 feet
from the property line or 30 feet between primary dwelling
structures;
[4] Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from any property line.
(b) In addition to the above setback requirements, a dwelling or
other building shall not be within 10 feet of an easement.
(2) Height regulations.
(a) The height of primary dwelling units, community buildings and
deck parking shall be limited to the building heights set forth
in the underlying zoning district.
(b) The maximum height of structures accessory to dwelling units
and cluster development communities, other than community
buildings, deck parking, and fences shall be the heights set
forth in Article XXI, § 172-103.
(c) Fences shall not exceed six feet, except that to the extent
special exception approval is granted for front yard fences per
§ 172-104, said fences shall not exceed four feet.
(3) Perimeter buffer areas. The cluster development community tract
shall contain a perimeter buffer of 100 feet from all tract
boundaries ("buffer areas"). Buffer areas shall be landscaped by, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors, either retaining existing
vegetative cover or by planting a combination of trees, shrubbery
and ground cover, in consideration of the impact on scenic views
and the impacts of the development on adjacent residences.
Perimeter areas not adjacent to residential lots are allowed to
include internal access roads, sidewalks, pathways, gates, security
devices, guard houses, gatehouses, fences, lighting, utility
equipment and their facilities (excluding surface stormwater
management facilities), and gateway signs that serve the cluster
development community. Any gatehouses or guardhouses in the
buffer shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any right-of-way
line or tract boundary line.
(4) Open space. A minimum of 50% of the gross cluster tract area,
which shall not include more than 50% of constrained lands, shall
be preserved as open space, subject to the requirements of
§§ 172-100.30 and 172-100.31.
(5) Dwelling density. The number of permitted dwelling units in a
cluster development community shall be the equivalent of the base
number of units rounded up to the nearest whole unit. The base
number of units shall be calculated by dividing the net cluster tract
area by the minimum lot area permitted per dwelling unit in the
underlying zoning district. In lieu of this calculation, the developer
§ 172-100.29 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.29
1:660
may submit a conventional land development plan based on the lot
area requirements of the underlying zoning district, and complying
with all other zoning and SALDO requirements of the Township,
and the base number shall equal the number of residential units
that would have been permitted pursuant to that plan. An
additional 10% of the base number of units, rounded up to the
nearest unit, are permitted for each of the following; however, the
total additional units above base number shall not exceed 20%:
(a) If dedication of open space for public use is accepted by the
Township, solely in its discretion, as set forth in
§ 172-100.30D(2);
(b) Dedication of trails or trail easements for public use is
accepted by the Township solely in its discretion;
(c) If the amount of open space provided in the gross tract area
exceeds 55% of the gross tract area; and
(d) If the cluster development community is greater than 150 feet
from a public sanitary sewer system, provision of public sewer
services to the cluster development community.
(6) Impervious coverage shall be limited to 40% of the net cluster tract
area. Stormwater management facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the proposed impervious coverage as set forth on
the land development plan, plus an additional 20% to accommodate
in-fill, in accordance with the limitations of the underlying zoning
districts.
(7) Minimum separation distance between structures shall be
consistent with the Township's Building Code and Fire Prevention
Code, or as set forth in this article, whichever is greater.
(8) The site plan shall establish, where applicable, an upland buffer of
vegetation of at least 50 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and
surface water, including creeks, steams, springs, lakes and ponds.
(9) The site plan shall accommodate and preserve features of historic,
cultural or archaeological value and any features identified on the
Township Historic Resources Map as may be adopted. Preserved
historical dwellings shall not count toward the maximum number of
dwelling units permitted.
(10) Sidewalks shall be included to promote a walkable neighborhood
environment. Sidewalks shall be installed along the perimeter
roadway(s) of the cluster development community and along
roadways that are adjacent to any residence, structures accessory
to residences and structures accessory to cluster development
communities and open space within the community. Sidewalks
along open space shall be on the open space side of the roadway.
§ 172-100.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.29
1:661
(11) All cluster development communities shall be serviced by public
water. All cluster development communities shall be serviced by
public sewer unless waived by the Township Board of Supervisors,
subject to all DEP and Act 537 requirements. If public sewer
becomes available within 150 feet of the cluster development
community as measured from the tract boundary at any time after
development commences, the cluster development community, or
the individual dwelling units therein, shall be required to connect
to the public sewer system in accordance with all Township Code
provisions regarding sewer connections and related expenses and
fees.
C. Design Standards Manual. All subdivision and land development
applications for a cluster development community shall include a
Design Standards Manual containing a conceptual plan for the cluster
development community; architectural guidelines governing issues of
building massing, building type adjacencies, architectural character or
theme and building placements within the cluster development
community; and design standards for the improvements (as defined in
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, § 148-9, of the Code
of the Township of Newtown), including but not limited to design
standards for street and roadway improvements, sidewalks and
lighting. The Design Standards Manual shall be subject to the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the Board
of Supervisors. In the case of a conflict between the provisions of the
Design Standards Manual and other provisions of the Code of the
Township of Newtown, the provisions of the Design Standards Manual,
as approved by the Board of Supervisors, shall govern. Provisions of the
Design Standards Manual shall include the following design and
architectural requirements:
(1) Stormwater management should be integrated to complement the
natural character of the site such that the visual distinction
between stormwater areas and adjacent natural land forms be
limited. Where natural features exist, such as sloughs, drainages or
hills, open spaces should be preserved and used to frame and
define residential areas.
(2) A landscaping plan, including street trees, consistent with
Township Code Chapter 104 which shall consist of landscaping that
will not destroy or deteriorate the integrity of the street or sidewalk
structure.
(3) A variety of home models and/or elevations will be required.
(4) All units shall front on a public or private street to assure
emergency access and be identified with a street address approved
by the Police Chief and the Township Fire Marshal.
(5) The primary front entrance of a residence shall be oriented towards
the public street or private street if the lot does not abut a public
§ 172-100.29 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.29
1:662
§ 172-100.30. Cluster development open space standards and
criteria.
street. The street-facing facade should incorporate elements such
as a front porch, primary living space windows, building
articulation elements such as cornices, brackets, overhangs,
shutters and window boxes, and front yard landscaping to create
an attractive street appearance and enhance the surrounding
neighborhood.
(6) Entrances and windows, not garages, shall be the dominant
element of front facades facing streets. Garage facades shall be set
back at least 10 feet from the facade of the principal dwelling.
Alternatively, side-loading garages or detached garages or garages
accessed by back alleys may be utilized.
(7) Residential projects shall avoid large box-like forms with
continuous unrelieved surfaces. Buildings should include design
variety and articulation. Design doorways, columns, overhangs,
and other architectural elements to be substantial in depth in order
to create shadow and architectural relief. Examples of these
elements include: decorative trim, pitched/variegated roof forms,
roof overhangs at least 18 inches deep, variety of materials,
railings, building base, bay windows, chimneys, front porches and
balconies. The entire home should have a coherent architectural
composition with transitions from front, sides and rear elevations
being graceful, not abrupt.
(8) The choice of colors and materials should convey an image of
quality, permanence and durability and enhance the architectural
concepts within each residential development.
(9) Green space shall be positioned in visually prominent locations
through the integration of terminal vistas, community green areas
or garden courtyards, greenlets and greens (alleviate monotony).
Additionally, buildings and structures shall be adequately grouped
such that existing scenic views or vistas are preserved as an
unobstructed, single block of common open space, especially from
public streets.
A. Open space shall be preserved and designed to preserve and enhance
existing natural physical characteristics of the site and to place
common open space within convenient access and view of dwelling
units, while preserving and enhancing natural features.
B. Open space shall not include any area of a proposed dwelling lot.
C. Lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, very steep
slopes, woodlands, other related natural features and subsurface
stormwater facilities (e.g., no stormwater basins) may be incorporated
into the required minimum open space. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
§ 172-100.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.30
1:663
of the total proposed open space, at least 50% shall not be constrained
lands.
D. Areas set aside for open space shall contain no structure other than
structures directly related to outdoor recreational use. However, in no
case shall the impervious coverage of such structures in the open space
areas exceed 5% of the minimum required open space area.
(1) Areas set aside for private open space may contain buildings and
structures related to the recreational uses of the private open
space, access roads, sidewalks, pathways, parking areas, including
access improvements from interior and adjacent streets to
accommodate pedestrian, bicycle, maintenance and vehicle traffic,
and utility easements and related structures and facilities
(including but not limited to sanitary sewage facilities) serving the
cluster development community and/or adjacent properties. A note
shall be placed on the recorded plan stating the restrictions
contained in this section, and easements and/or deed restrictions
memorializing such restrictions shall be recorded simultaneously
with or as a part of the deed of dedication for the public open
space.
(2) The Township acceptance of dedication of open space for public
open space shall be in the sole discretion of the Township Board of
Supervisors. The Township Board of Supervisors may consider any
factors it deems appropriate in exercising this discretion, but may
consider among other things, the size, shape, location, accessibility
and physical characteristics of the open space and the amount of
use and enjoyment said open space may provide to Township
residents. Public open space shall be used for recreation only.
Access roads, sidewalks, pathways, parking areas, including access
improvements from adjacent streets to accommodate pedestrian,
bicycle, maintenance and vehicle traffic, utility easements and
related structures and facilities (including but not limited to
sanitary sewage facilities) and open-air pavilions shall be
permitted, provided that utility easements and related structures
and facilities (including but not limited to sanitary sewage
facilities) and stormwater management facilities serving the
cluster development community shall not be located within the
public open space. The Township shall not dispose of public open
space by sale or otherwise. A note shall be placed on the recorded
plan stating the restrictions contained in this section, and
easements and/or deed restrictions memorializing such restrictions
shall be recorded simultaneously with or as a part of the deed of
dedication for the public open space.
E. The open space shall be contiguous and not be separated by existing
roads. Open space shall:
(1) Be designed as a continuous system of open space and be
interconnected with existing or proposed open space areas on
§ 172-100.30 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.30
1:664
§ 172-100.31. Ownership and maintenance of open space.
abutting parcels, provided that the physical characteristics of the
site enable such incorporation without sacrificing innovative
design.
(2) Be comprised of areas not less than 75 feet in width and not less
than one acre of contiguous area, except when the open space is
part of a trail system or pathway network or plan for such network,
in which case the areas may be reduced in size, subject to the
approval of the Township.
(3) Be provided with sufficient permanent parking when necessary and
with safe and convenient access by adjoining street frontage and be
capable of accommodating pedestrian, bicycle and maintenance
and vehicle traffic, and containing appropriate access
improvements.
(4) Be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural cover
and wooded areas and/or by adding enhancement plantings in
accordance with an approved landscaping plan for enhancing open
space areas through plantings which are consistent with the
purposes of this section and which minimize maintenance costs.
(5) Be subject to such agreement with the Township and such deed
restrictions duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in
Delaware County as may be required by the Township for the
purpose of preserving the open space for such use.
(6) Include a transition area surrounding the perimeter of the entire
tract. This transition area shall be at least equal to the area
required for front yards in the underlying zoning district and shall
not contain any structures or parking areas. Only necessary ingress
and egress and perimeter fencing and/or berms shall be allowed in
the transition area. The transition area shall not be included in any
of the minimum lot area(s).
F. The open space required by this section is a separate and distinct
requirement from the recreational land requirements set forth in
§ 148-41 to allow the exercise of the cluster development option. Public
open space and/or trails accepted by the Board of Supervisors or
private open space may be considered recreational lands only to the
extent that the open space, or portions of the open space, comply with
the requirements of Chapter 148.
A. All applications for the cluster development community option shall
describe the plan for ownership and maintenance of open space.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall require the applicant to provide for and
establish a homeowners' association, or other similar organization or
group of dwelling unit or lot owners holding undivided interest in
private open space, for the maintenance of the private open space,
§ 172-100.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.31
1:665
§ 172-100.32. Application review; effect of other provisions;
modifications.
All applications for the proposed cluster development community
development shall be subject to review and conditional use approval by the
Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township through the subdivision and
land development procedures set forth in Chapter 148, Subdivision and
Land Development. Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter
172, Zoning, Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, and all other
land use regulations adopted by the Township, including Chapter 91, Flood
Damage Prevention,158 Chapter 104, Natural Features and Landscaping,
organized under or similar to that required by the Uniform Planned
Community Act,156 and such homeowners' association or other similar
organization shall be prohibited from disposing of the private open
space by sale or otherwise (except to a similar homeowners' association
or organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
open space, such as a private conservation organization). The
governing documents of such homeowners' association or similar
organization shall be submitted to the Township for review and
approval from the standpoint of its capacity to raise revenue, meet
obligations and properly maintain facilities prior to the receipt of final
land development approval for a cluster development community. The
organization shall also be required to enter into an open space
maintenance agreement, substantially in the form provided at Chapter
AA176 Appendix 2,157 with the Township which may be recorded in the
Recorder of Deeds.
C. In the event that the private open space is, in the reasonable judgment
of the Township, permitted to deteriorate or not be maintained in
reasonable condition in accordance with the approved plan, the
Township may take whatever actions are available by law to require
compliance with the approved plan. A note shall be placed on the
recorded plan stating this right held by the Township.
D. In addition to any other remedies afforded by law, the Township shall
have the right, which shall be made part of the land development
agreement with the applicant, upon reasonable notice to interested
parties, to enter upon the private open space and maintain the same for
a period not to exceed one year. The purpose of such action by the
Township shall be to preserve the value of the private open space within
the development and to prevent the private open space from becoming
a public nuisance. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall
be assessed against the dwelling units and/or lots within the
development which have a right of enjoyment of the private open space
and shall become a lien upon said units and/or lots upon filing thereof
as required by law.
156. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
157. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 172-100.31 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.32
1:666
Chapter 134, Slope Conservation, and Chapter 138, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control, shall be required, except where such provisions are
modified by this article. In the case of a conflict between the provisions of
this article and other provisions of the Code of the Township of Newtown,
the provisions of this article shall govern. Where literal compliance with the
criteria and standards specified in those land use regulations adopted by
the Township over which the Board of Supervisors is vested with jurisdiction
is clearly impractical, the Board may modify or adjust the standards and
criteria to permit reasonable utilization of the tract on which the cluster
development community is proposed in the interest of securing substantial
compliance with the objectives of this article. Any exclusions for singlefamily
residential developments in Chapter 104 shall not be applicable
when applied to this article.
158. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 91, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-12, as amended, was repealed 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5. See now Art. XXB, Flood
Hazard District, of this chapter.
§ 172-100.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.32
1:667

ARTICLE XXE
Planned Residential Development
[Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
§ 172-100.33. Title; findings.
A. Title: "A zoning ordinance supplementing the Newtown Township
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance in
order to implement the purposes and intent of planned residential
development as defined and authorized by Article VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."
B. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as “The
Township of Newtown Planned Residential Development Ordinance of
2009, as revised to 2016." [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01;
1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
C. Statement of legislative findings. The Board of Supervisors of Newtown
Township, Delaware County, hereby elects to adopt the provisions of
and exercise the powers granted by Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.159 In support thereof, the Board of
Supervisors makes the following findings:
(1) The Board of Supervisors finds that the Newtown Township
Comprehensive Plan provides broad goals, community
development objectives, and policies for the future development of
the Township which are consistent with the intent of Article VII of
the Municipalities Planning Code. The Comprehensive Plan
specifically sets forth goals and policies of local concern related to
reinforcing and enhancing the Newtown Square crossroads area as
the community's commercial and social sector; directing new
consumer-oriented service businesses primarily to the Newtown
Square crossroads area of the community; enhancing the Newtown
Square crossroads area of the community so as to create a highly
attractive mixed-use district that has a unique identity in the
region, with improved circulation, parking, and landscaping,
increased prospects for one-stop patronage of several kinds of
facilities, and expanded opportunities for pedestrian circulation;
directing new commercial and higher-intensity residential uses to
the Newtown Square crossroads; expansion of the network of
community trails in accordance with a trail system plan; protecting
and enhancing environmentally sensitive and culturally significant
areas of Newtown Township; establishing a firm identity for
Newtown Township in the minds of its residents and its visitors and
places for the community to assemble; and putting in place a
variety of approaches, mechanisms, and tools appropriate for
dealing with the challenges posed by growth.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-100.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.33
1:669
(2) The Board of Supervisors finds that it is in the best interest of the
Township to take full advantage of modern design, construction,
technology and planning methods and thus seeks to permit planned
residential development under certain conditions meeting certain
design standards of the Township. The objectives to be
accomplished by this article (the "PRD objectives") in furtherance
of the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan shall include
but are not limited to the following:
(a) To address the unique planning and development issues
affecting the Township of Newtown by encouraging innovative
and flexible long-range development plans that will contribute
to the quality of life in the community through a variety of wellplanned
land uses and amenities.
(b) To provide an optional approach to community development,
with provisions to permit more efficient use of land and public
services on other than a lot-by-lot basis.
(c) To provide increased flexibility in the laws governing the
development of those areas in the Township which are now
substantially open land and encourage such development in
directions that will recognize the changes in design and
technology in the building industry, new demands in the
housing market and the continuing evolution of community
form.
(d) To insure that the uniform regulations in place in the
Township's various zoning districts do not operate to
discourage efficient and imaginative development of said
substantially open areas.
(e) To encourage the efficient allocation and maintenance of open
space ancillary to new residential, commercial and other
nonresidential areas.
(f) To encourage the efficient development and use of public
facilities required in connection with new development within
the Township.
(g) To create opportunities for the redevelopment of areas affected
by prior industrial activity.
(h) To provide greater opportunities for pedestrian and bicycle
mobility as an alternative to travel by automobile.
(i) To encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential
development and renewal so that the growing demand for
housing and other development may be met by greater variety
in type, density, design and layout of dwellings and other
buildings and structures and by the conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses.
§ 172-100.33 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.33
1:670
§ 172-100.34. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this article, the definitions contained in this
chapter shall apply. For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases
and words are defined as follows:
DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE — A schedule approved with the tentative
PRD plan showing proposed time frames within which the applicant shall
submit final plans for each development section. The development schedule
may be modified subject to the provisions of § 172-100.36M of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SECTIONS — Areas delineated in a PRD tentative plan
for which separate applications for final plan approval may be filed.
Development sections shall have no minimum or maximum acreage and may
include one or more permitted uses.
EXISTING BUILDINGS — Buildings located on a tract subject to PRD
development which were in existence on the date this article was enacted.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of the building or buildings on
any parcel, exclusive of parking garages, divided by the total tract area of
the parcel to which the computation relates.
MAN-MADE STEEP SLOPES — Those slopes created by human actions,
such as, but not limited to, the movement of dirt to construct a road,
building, parking lot, berm, etc., and which have not occurred naturally
on a property. Proof of whether a slope is man-made may be provided
through comparisons of historic aerial photographs, soil borings, USGS
maps, development plans, inspection of the site by the Township Engineer,
or through the review of other maps and documentation found acceptable
by the Township Engineer.
MIXED-USE AREAS — An area within a PRD containing a variety of
complementary and integrated uses, such as, but not limited to, residential,
office, retail, entertainment and recreation uses in a compact form.
OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water (including
but not limited to stormwater management facilities), or a combination
of land and water (including but not limited to stormwater management
facilities), within a PRD that has been or will be designated, dedicated,
reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development, except as
permitted under this article, and is either dedicated to the Township or set
aside and intended for the exclusive or nonexclusive use or enjoyment by
residents of the development. The term "open space" means both private
open space and public open space and shall include the buffer areas.
PLACES OF INDOOR AMUSEMENT, RECREATION OR ASSEMBLY — Any
amusement or recreation establishment that is wholly enclosed in a
building, which provides games, rides, or similar entertainment facilities
and devices. A casino or other gaming facility shall not be permitted.
(j) To assure that the flexibility of regulations herein is carried out
pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair administrative
standards and procedures.
§ 172-100.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.34
1:671
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed pursuant to this article as a
single entity for a number of dwelling units or a combination of residential
and nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, use, density, intensity, lot
coverage or required open space to the regulations established in any one
district created, from time to time, under the provisions of this chapter.
TOTAL TRACT AREA — The total horizontal area of land contained within
the property lines of all parcels of land within the subject area, excluding
areas within existing public or private street rights-of-way.
TRACT — An area of land comprised of a single parcel or multiple parcels
which are either in single ownership or, in the case of multiple ownership,
subject to an agreement of all owners that development will be governed by
and will be completed in accordance with a unified land development plan.
A tract may contain parcels that are separated by public or private street
rights-of-way.
UNOCCUPIED ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS — Those unoccupied
portions of a building which are located above the occupied floors of a
building and which contribute to the architectural character of the building,
such as gabled roofs, chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks,
cupolas, cornices, pediments, domes, dormers, or other unoccupied
architectural elements.
§ 172-100.35. Development standards.
A. Eligibility criteria. The Planned Residential Development (PRD) District
is defined and established to include and be an overlay upon parcels
situated within the mapped overlay district as set forth in the PRD
Overlay District Map160 and meeting the following additional criteria:
(1) The tract shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer and water
systems.
(2) The total tract area subject to PRD development shall contain at
least 200 acres. The total tract area may add or include existing
developed land provided the land complies with the applicable PRD
District regulations and is located within PRD-zoned land.
[Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(3) The tract shall be in single ownership, or, in the case of multiple
ownership, evidence shall be presented that the parties involved
have agreed that the PRD development will be completed in
accordance with a unified land development plan.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses as of right:
160. Editor's Note: The PRD Overlay District Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 172-100.34 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:672
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Townhouses.
(d) Multifamily dwellings, including residences in mixed-use
commercial/residential buildings.
(e) Retail store(s).
(f) Personal service establishments, tailor, barbershop, beauty
shop, shoe repair, spa, dressmaking shop, and other personal
service shop or store.
(g) Bank or other similar financial institution, including a drive-in
banking facility or automated teller facility.
(h) Business, administrative, executive, governmental,
professional, sales and/or similar offices.
(i) Places of indoor amusement, recreation or assembly.
(j) Movie theaters.
(k) Restaurant or café, including establishments dispensing or
serving food for consumption on the premises outdoors. Drivein
food stands shall not be permitted.
(l) Grocery or convenience store.
(m) Hotel or inn.
(n) Educational institution.
(o) Conference center.
(p) Public and private garages and parking lots.
(q) Civic uses, such as a police station, municipal office, fire
station, post office, EMS service, and transit facility.
(r) Playgrounds, parks, tot-lots or open spaces.
(s) Health club, fitness center, indoor squash, tennis, or
racquetball facilities or other similar uses.
(t) Nursery schools and day-care centers.
(u) Accessory use on the same lot with and customary and
incidental to any of the foregoing, similar to a clubhouse or
recreation building, swimming pool, tennis courts, fountains,
fire pits, patios, terraces; parking lots and private garages; and
recreational uses. Individual outside storage sheds in mixed-
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:673
use areas are prohibited. [Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(v) Housing for the elderly. [Added 1-11-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(2) Mix requirements. [Amended 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
(a) Residential uses. Within mixed-use areas, at least 10%, but no
more than 70%, of the new gross floor area shall be devoted to
residential uses. Existing buildings and uses shall not be part
of this calculation.
(b) Retail uses. Within mixed-use areas, at least 15%, but no more
than 50%, shall be devoted to retail, restaurant, markets, or
cinema uses. Existing buildings and uses shall not be part of
this calculation.
(3) Building footprint limitations. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01; 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(a) With the exception of single-use office buildings located
adjacent to West Chester Pike, and existing or redeveloped
buildings, no building within the PRD Development shall have
a building footprint in excess of 40,000 square feet, except that
one building shall be permitted to have a building footprint of
up to 75,000 square feet and two buildings shall be permitted
to have building footprints of up to 55,000 square feet.
(b) No new retail building shall have a single retail tenant
occupying in excess of 40,000 square feet of floor area, except
that one building shall be permitted to have a single retail
tenant occupying up to 75,000 square feet of floor area and two
buildings shall be permitted to have single retail tenants
occupying up to 55,000 square feet of floor area.
(c) No more than two office buildings and no more than 400,000
square feet of office space shall be located west of the Loop
Road and within 1,000 feet of West Chester Pike. Structured
parking facilities shall be permitted in addition to the two
office buildings and shall not count towards office building
square footage. There is no maximum floor area or building
footprint requirement for the foregoing office buildings.
(d) In the event an office headquarter user is proposed as the lead
user or occupant for the second office building located west of
the Loop Road and within 1,000 feet of West Chester Pike, the
Board of Supervisors, in their sole discretion to better serve
the Township's interests, may allow the total allowable square
footage of office space to increase by 110,000 square feet. An
office headquarter user is in a building serving as the
managerial and administrative center of an organization,
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:674
corporation, or business. [Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-03]
C. Area and dimensional regulations.
(1) Traditional lot area and yard setbacks shall not be required.
Building setbacks shall instead be provided from adjacent uses,
streets and parking areas as follows:
(a) All buildings located between Clyde Road and Winding Way
shall be set back a minimum distance of 35 feet from existing
or proposed curblines of Route 3, whichever is greater.
(b) All one- or two-story buildings located west of Winding Way
shall be set back a minimum distance of 35 feet from existing
or proposed curblines of Route 3.
(c) All buildings greater than two stories located west of Winding
Way shall be set back a minimum distance of 75 feet from
existing or proposed curblines of Route 3, whichever is greater.
(d) Required building setback areas from Route 3 shall be devoted
to walkways, street trees, green areas, or a combination
thereof. Limited driveway and road access through such
setbacks shall be permitted.
(e) All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet
from curblines of all other existing or proposed streets. Such
setback areas shall be devoted to walkways, street trees, green
areas, or a combination thereof. Limited driveway and road
access through such setbacks shall be permitted. No off-street
parking shall be permitted within such setback areas.
[Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(f) All buildings located adjacent to Clyde Lane and/or Winding
Way shall be set back a minimum distance of 25 feet from the
existing or proposed curblines, whichever is greater.
Structures associated with a bridge over Winding Way that are
unoccupied shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet
from the existing or proposed curblines, whichever is greater.
(g) All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 200 feet
from the current right-of-way of both Route 252 north of
Winding Way and along Goshen Road. In no case shall a
building be set back less than 100 feet from any property
outside of the tract zoned R1 or R2. Driveways and parking are
permitted in the foregoing setback. [Amended 6-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-01]
(2) Not more than 30% of the total tract area shall be occupied by
buildings, including parking structures, and not more than 60% of
the total tract area shall be covered with imperious materials. The
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:675
overall floor area ratio of a PRD development shall not exceed
0.3058. [Amended 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
(3) At least 25% of the total tract area shall be designated and used for
open space purposes.
(4) Driveways and private streets shall have a minimum of ten-foot- to
twelve-foot-wide travel lanes. Parallel parking lanes, where
provided, shall be a minimum of seven feet to eight feet wide.
(5) Parking and loading. Because of the multi-use, integrated nature of
a planned residential development, the following shall govern the
parking and loading within a planned residential development:
(a) For single-family detached dwellings, townhouses and twin
homes, there shall be at least two parking spaces per dwelling.
(b) For multifamily residential units, there shall be at least 1.5
parking spaces per unit, which may be comprised of on-street,
off-street, and garage spaces, but must include a minimum of
0.25 garage space per unit. [Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01; 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
(c) For hotels, there shall be a minimum of one parking space for
each hotel room.
(d) For retail stores, banks, restaurants, and other commercial
buildings, there shall be 4.5 parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(e) For offices, there shall be 3.5 parking spaces for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(f) Off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18
feet. However, the applicant shall provide suitable oversized
vehicle parking areas in mixed-use and/or office area locations
which are provided in groups within parking lots in which the
parking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 18 feet. A
minimum of 2% of the total parking provided shall be oversized
vehicle parking.
(g) Where efficiencies may be derived from shared parking, and
more open spaces provided, a reduction in the number of
parking spaces shall be permitted when there will be a sharing
of parking spaces by uses with different periods of peak
parking demand, or where the applicant can provide
justification for reduced parking based upon Urban Land
Institute (ULI) standards for shared parking as set forth in its
publication Shared Parking, Second Edition. This analysis shall
include a submission of calculations indicating that parking
demands will be met during peak demands for parking.
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:676
(h) The Board may authorize the applicant to hold up to 20% of the
total number of parking spaces required in reserve without
actually paving such spaces upon a showing that the additional
number of parking spaces is not currently needed. The Board’s
determination of whether reserve parking should be permitted
shall be made at the time of tentative plan approval. In the
event that reserve parking is permitted, the stormwater
management system shall be designed to handle the total
required parking spaces, including the parking spaces held in
reserve. Applicant shall be required to construct the parking
spaces held in reserve upon determination by the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(i) On-street parking shall be permitted along private access
drives and streets and shall count as part of the overall parking
requirement, except that on-street parking along collector
roads, while permitted, shall not count as part of the overall
parking requirement.
(j) Off-street loading and unloading space with proper access
from a street or alley shall be provided where a building
primarily used for trade or business for the uses contained in
§ 172-100.35B(1) is located. Loading and unloading spaces
may be accessed from parking areas.
(k) Required parking lot green area. Where parking areas, loading
and unloading facilities and accompanying access from a street
or driveway exceeds 3,000 square feet, a minimum of 10% of
all paved areas shall be devoted to green areas, or 5% may be
provided if the parking is substantially located to the rear of
the buildings and it can be demonstrated that views of the
parking lot from the public right-of-way are shielded by a
combination of landscaping and/or berming. In such a case,
there shall not be a requirement for green areas between rows
of parking spaces. Green area requirements shall not be
applicable in structured parking or multilevel parking
facilities.
(l) For civic uses, such as libraries, museums, fire stations or
other similar places, one parking space for every 800 square
feet of floor area, except that the parking calculation shall not
apply to garage areas used for storing fire-fighting vehicles.
Garage space used for the storage of vehicles shall require one
parking space for each vehicle. If sleeping quarters are
provided for fire personnel, an additional one space per room
shall be provided. [Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(6) Buildings used for residential purposes within mixed-use areas that
are within 300 feet of a nonresidential use shall be governed by the
following additional dimensional requirements:
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:677
(a) Setback to curbline of an arterial or collector street: fifteenfoot
minimum. Setback to other streets, accessways or
parking: ten-foot minimum. [Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01; 10-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
(b) Building-to-building separation distance: twenty-five-foot
minimum. [Amended 1-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(c) Building height: no more than five stories or 65 feet, provided
that unoccupied architectural elements of the building shall
not be included in calculating the height. With the exception of
clock towers, the height of the unoccupied architectural
elements shall not exceed 27 feet above the main roofline.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements of Subsection
C(6)(a), (b), and (c), townhouse, two-family residential and
twin dwellings located east of the Loop Road and north of
Winding Way Extension shall be governed by the following
dimensional requirements: [Added 10-28-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
[1] Minimum unit width: 22 feet for townhouses and 20 feet
for two-family residential and twin dwellings.
[2] Front building setback to curbline of a street, common
driveway or edge of paving:
[a] Ten feet minimum setback if no vehicular access is
taken from the street, common driveway or edge of
paving; or
[b] Twenty-two feet minimum setback if vehicular access
is provided from the street, common driveway, or edge
of paving.
[3] Rear building setback to a curbline of a street, common
driveway or edge of paving: 18 feet.
[4] Building-to-building separation distance: 20 feet side to
side; 35 feet side to front; and 50 feet front to front and
rear to rear.
[5] There shall be no more than five single-family townhouse
dwellings in a row or five two-family dwellings in a row.
[6] Building height: no more than 3 1/2 stories and no part of a
building shall exceed 45 feet.
(7) Mixed uses in buildings devoted to a mix of residential and
nonresidential uses or hotels shall be governed by the following
additional dimensional requirements: [Amended 1-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:678
(a) Setback to curbline: ten-foot minimum.
(b) Building-to-building separation distance: ten-foot minimum.
(c) Building height: no more than five stories or 65 feet, provided
that unoccupied architectural elements of the building shall
not be included in calculating the height. With the exception of
clock towers, the height of the unoccupied architectural
elements shall not exceed 27 feet above the main roofline.
(8) New nonresidential buildings other than office buildings located
west of the Loop Road shall be governed by the following additional
dimensional requirements: [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-01]
(a) Setback to curbline: fifteen-foot minimum.
(b) Building-to-building separation distance: twenty-foot
minimum.
(c) Building height: no more than four stories or 60 feet, provided
that unoccupied architectural elements of the building shall
not be included in calculating the height. With the exception of
clock towers, the height of the unoccupied architectural
elements shall not exceed 27 feet above the main roofline.
(d) No buildings within 75 feet of West Chester Pike shall be
greater than four stories or 60 feet in height, provided that
unoccupied architectural elements of the building shall not be
included in calculating the height. With the exception of clock
towers, the height of the unoccupied architectural elements
shall not exceed 27 feet above the main roofline.
(9) Office buildings located west of the Loop Road(Medical Drive) and
within 1,000 feet of West Chester Pike shall be governed by the
following additional dimensional requirements: [Amended
6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(a) The required minimum building setback from West Chester
Pike shall be 200 feet from the existing curbline. All buildings
shall be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from the
curblines of all other existing or proposed streets. No off-street
parking shall be permitted within 100 feet of West Chester
Pike. No setbacks shall be required from interior lines abutting
other lots within the PRD.
(b) The required minimum building setback from adjacent
properties shall be 100 feet, except that the Board of
Supervisors may, upon individual application, reduce the
setback to not less than 75 feet from all right-of-way lines
against which the lot abuts where it is shown by the applicant
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:679
that such reduction in setback is necessary due to the unusual
slope, size or topography of the lot.
(c) Maximum building height shall not exceed five stories above or
partially above grade, nor shall it exceed 85 feet from ground
after finished grading. Height shall be measured from any
point of the building to the closest perpendicular point on the
ground surrounding the building after finished grading.
[Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(10) Residential buildings located outside of mixed-use areas shall be
governed by the following additional dimensional requirements:
(a) Single-family detached residential dwellings shall be governed
by the following dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
[2] Maximum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
[3] Minimum lot width at building line: 55 feet.
[4] Minimum lot width at street line: 45 feet.
[5] Maximum depth of front yard: 20 feet.
[6] Minimum depth of rear yard: 25 feet, unless serviced by an
alley, in which case the setback can be reduced to 15 feet.
[7] Side yards: zero-foot minimum, provided that at least 50%
of one sidewall shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from
the property line. The balance of the sidewall shall be
located so that the aggregate of the two side yards shall be
at least 15 feet.
[8] Building height: no more than three stories.
(b) Townhouse, two-family residential and twin dwellings shall be
governed by the following dimensional requirements:
[1] Minimum unit width: 24 feet, except that a two-family
dwelling shall be a minimum of 20 feet. [Amended
6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
[2] Setback to curbline: ten-foot minimum or 25 feet where
there are garages in the front of the unit and the driveway
provides for parking in front of the garage.
[3] Building-to-building separation distance: 15 feet side to
side; 50 feet front to front and rear to rear.
[4] Building height: No more than 3 1/2 stories. The height of
a two-family dwelling building shall not exceed 3 1/2
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:680
stories or 45 feet, whichever is greater. [Amended
6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
[5] There shall be no more than five single-family townhouse
dwellings in a row, or 10 two-family dwellings in a
building. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
[6] There shall be at least one garage parking space and one
off-street parking space for each single-family dwelling,
townhouse and two-family dwelling and 0.25 off-street
guest parking space provided.
[7] Sidewalks shall be located on at least one side of all
residential streets within residential areas located outside
of mixed-use areas, which shall be four feet in width and
have a four-foot green area between the sidewalk and
curb. [Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(c) Building design standards for single-family detached
dwellings, two-family dwellings, twins and townhouses.
[1] In order to insure that the single-family detached
dwellings possess a village character, single-family
dwellings shall be located a maximum of 20 feet from the
curbline unless unusual features, such as the shape of the
lot or natural features, make such location infeasible.
[2] One side lot line for each single-family detached dwelling
may be permitted to be reduced down to zero feet,
provided that at least 50% of one sidewall shall be located
a minimum of 20 feet from the property line. The balance
of the sidewall shall be located so that the aggregate of the
two side yards shall be at least 15 feet.
[3] One hundred percent of the single-family detached
dwellings and 33% of the two-family dwellings,
townhouses, and twins shall have side- or rear-loaded
garages.
[4] At least one community open space green shall be
provided within areas devoted solely to residential use.
This green shall be located so that it is accessible to the
residents of that residential area. The green shall be at
least 10,000 square feet in size and contain at least one
civic element, such as a piece of artwork, a sitting area, a
gazebo, or the like.
[5] Single-family detached dwellings shall have sloping roofs
that do not exceed the average height of the supporting
walls, with a minimum of 5/12 and a maximum of 18/12
slope. Fifty percent of the units will have a principal roof
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:681
with a minimum pitch of at least eight vertical to every 12
horizontal inches.
[6] Two-family dwellings, twins, and townhouses shall be
governed by Subsection C(10)(c)[5] above, except that flat
roofs are permitted, provided parapets conceal the roof
and all rooftop equipment. The average height of such
parapets shall not exceed 15% of the height of the
supporting wall and feature three-dimensional cornice
treatments.
[7] The principal building shall be located a minimum of 20
feet from the rear property line, unless serviced by an
alley, in which case the setback can be reduced to 15 feet.
The minimum setback for accessory structures shall be
governed by § 172-103 of this chapter.
[8] One-story accessory structures shall have a maximum
height of 20 feet.
(11) Redevelopment of existing buildings within a PRD development
shall be governed by the following requirements:
(a) Existing buildings may be adaptively reused for any of the uses
permitted in the SU-1 Zoning District, provided that
impervious surface shall not be increased by more than 1%.
(b) Existing building square footage may be demolished and
rebuilt, provided that all replacement of existing building
square footage shall be constructed within the curtilage of the
building demolished or to be rebuilt and shall also comply with
the use, area, bulk and dimensional requirements of the SU-1
Zoning District, except with regard to the following:
[Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
[1] Impervious coverage shall be based upon the tract as a
whole.
[2] The new building or buildings shall not be permitted to
exceed the total square footage of the demolished building
or buildings.
[3] The required minimum building setback from Goshen
Road shall be 300 feet.
[4] The required minimum building setback from adjacent
properties shall be 50 feet.
[5] Maximum building height: no more than five stories or 70
feet, except that unoccupied architectural elements of the
building shall not be included in calculating the height.
Other than clock towers, the height of such unoccupied
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:682
architectural elements shall not exceed 27 feet above the
main roofline.
[6] There shall be 3.5 parking spaces for every 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
[7] Off-street surface parking spaces and parking spaces in
any new parking structure shall measure a minimum of
nine feet by 18 feet.
(12) Accessory use buildings within a PRD development shall be
governed by the following requirements: [Added 1-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
(a) No accessory use or building shall be located within the
building setback required for the principal use.
(b) A clubhouse or recreation building that is 30 feet or less in
height shall have a minimum setback to another building of 10
feet. A clubhouse or recreation building that is more than 30
feet in height shall have a minimum setback to another
building of 25 feet. A clubhouse or recreation building shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
(c) Compliance with the design guidelines shall not apply as it
relates to the architectural character and elevations and
building materials of the rebuilt or redeveloped building
square footage. [Added 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
D. General development regulations governing PRD development.
(1) Development of a PRD development shall be in accordance with an
overall plan for the development/redevelopment of the entire tract
subject to the PRD.
(2) No new nonresidential uses may be constructed within 1,500 feet
of Goshen Road. This does not apply to redevelopment of existing
nonresidential buildings on the site.
(3) Only those uses permitted in the SU-1 District and civic uses may
be located on the portion of the tract located west of the Loop Road
and within 1,000 feet of West Chester Pike. [Amended 6-25-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(4) The street system shall be designed so as to relate harmoniously
with land uses and adjacent streets. Streets throughout the
community shall be arranged as a generally interconnecting
network and should terminate at other streets. The construction of
all public streets shall be in accordance with the construction
specifications and regulations established in Chapter 148,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Newtown, except as provided otherwise in the design guidelines.
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:683
(5) The architectural design of all nonresidential buildings within the
PRD development shall be substantially consistent with approved
design guidelines, subject to such revisions as are hereafter agreed
to by the parties. This section does not apply to redevelopment of
existing nonresidential building square footage on the site.
[Amended 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
(6) Sidewalks that are located through the retail and mixed-use areas
of the tract shall be wide enough to accommodate walking and
outdoor dining where appropriate.
(7) Street furniture shall be provided which shall include such items as
benches, waste containers, planters, bicycle racks, water fountains
and bollards. Such items shall be provided at appropriate locations
throughout the mixed-use areas of the tract. Street furniture must
be compatible with the architecture of the surrounding buildings
and character of the area and other elements of the streetscape.
(8) Exterior lighting shall be provided in accordance with the design
guidelines and shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors, and details of the buildings. The mounting height
of parking lot lighting shall not exceed 28 feet, as measured to the
top of the fixture from grade. All exterior lighting adjacent to Route
3 or Route 252 shall not exceed 20 feet, as measured to the top of
the fixture from grade, except as otherwise required to satisfy
PennDOT or PECO requirements.
(9) All trash containers shall be screened in six-foot-high, three-sided
masonry or wood enclosures, to be compatible with the
architecture of the buildings, and shall be located in the rear of the
buildings. Trash collection shall occur only between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
(10) Outdoor retail sale of garden goods or related products shall not be
permitted in the parking areas, except that temporary seasonal or
special events shall be permitted for a period of up to 30 days, up to
three times per year. If permits are required for outdoor events
within the parking areas, the applicant shall be required to obtain
the required permits.
(11) Required green areas within the tract may include paving for site
amenities, such as plaza areas, pedestrian trails and walkways,
which shall not count against the impervious requirements of the
tract. In addition, seasonal or special events, including but not
limited to concerts, arts and crafts fairs, flea markets, festivals,
sports tournaments and charity events, shall be permitted to be
conducted within the green areas of the tract and shall be subject
to the temporary amusement permitting provisions of § 152-29 of
the Code of the Township of Newtown.
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:684
(12) All ground-level mechanical units, refuse, recycling and similar
facilities must be screened from view using materials consistent
with the building style or landscaped when located at or near the
ground.
(13) A pedestrian pathway system shall be provided through the tract,
which shall include a combination of sidewalks, pathways and
trails, to provide reasonable access from nonresidential areas and
residential areas to the central open spaces and to provide
pedestrian circulation through the tract. Pedestrian pathways will
be coordinated with a Township system of pathways, where
possible. Trails shall be approximately 10 feet in width. Trails may
be constructed of pervious or impervious materials, as appropriate
for their location. The trail may be designed to serve walkers,
runners, or bicyclists. Trails shall not be used by motorized
vehicles, except as authorized by the owner and/or the Township
for maintenance, management or emergency purposes. Trails shall
connect to sidewalks when appropriate to create an interconnected
pedestrian system.
(14) The open space areas required to be preserved shall be owned and
maintained by the landowner unless the landowner elects to offer
all or a portion of said open space for dedication to the Township. If
the Township accepts dedication of such open space, said open
space areas shall continue to be included in all area and bulk
calculations for the remainder of the tract.
(15) Bus shelters with benches without advertising shall be provided
along Route 3 and Route 252 if there are SEPTA bus stops in
existence or planned as a result of the development or
redevelopment of the tract. Bus shelters may be provided within
the tract as determined by the landowner.
(16) All buildings to be constructed on the tract shall have sprinkler fireprotection
systems, pursuant to applicable codes and regulations.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a building other
than a parking structure, the Township Code Enforcement Officer
shall confirm with the Township Fire Marshal that the roof of the
proposed building can be accessed by the Township's fire
equipment. In the case of parking structures, the Township Fire
Marshal shall confirm that the Newtown Square Fire Company has
in its possession a fire-fighting apparatus specifically designed for
parking garages.
(17) Fire hydrants shall be installed at locations not more than 600 feet
apart. All fire lanes shall be appropriately painted, and proper
signage shall be installed.
(18) All HVAC and compressor-type equipment shall be enclosed or
screened, but may be placed on rooftops where they will not be
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.35
1:685
required to be enclosed or screened; provided, however, that they
must not be visible from public roads or surrounding properties.
(19) Provided that conveyance and treatment facilities are available,
sewage generated by the future development of the PRD
development shall be conveyed to facilities owned and operated by
the Newtown Township Sewer Authority. If existing buildings are
served by the Radnor Haverford Marple Sewer Authority, they may
continue to be served by the Radnor Haverford Marple Sewer
Authority.
(20) It is recognized that certain requirements of the Township's
governing ordinances are intended to guide traditional suburban
development and are inappropriate for and would interfere with
the development of the tract in accordance with this article.
Therefore, in connection with the development of the tract in
accordance with this article, the following requirements of the
Township's other governing ordinances shall be modified as
follows:
(a) Because of the size of a tract subject to PRD, § 104-11, Existing
conditions and preservation inventory plan, of Chapter 104,
Natural Features and Landscaping, is modified to the extent
that it requires identification of all existing trees. Large stands
of trees shall be identified in schematic fashion as part of the
final landscape plan submission.
(b) The minimum planting requirements of § 104-14 of Chapter
104, Natural Features and Landscaping, shall be replaced by
the development guidelines, as approved by the Board of
Supervisors in connection with the approved tentative plan.
(c) Construction of improvements or disturbance of areas of manmade
steep slopes shall be permitted to the extent necessary to
permit the development of the tract in accordance with the
PRD, without the need for conditional use approval pursuant to
Chapter 134, Slope Conservation.
(d) To the extent that minimal disturbance of natural steep slopes
is required to permit the installation of sewer facilities and
other utilities, the requirements of Chapter 134, Slope
Conservation, shall not be applied. "Minimal disturbance" is
defined as grading that is necessary within the context of
implementing the sector plans of the tract and that, as far as
practical, limits surface runoff, erosion or sedimentation or
unstable soil conditions.
(e) The block design requirements regarding length, width and
shape of blocks, and as set forth in § 148-25, shall be replaced
by the design guidelines as set forth in
§ 172-100.36B(4)(c)[12][a] of this article.
§ 172-100.35 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.35
1:686
§ 172-100.36. Application submission and review procedures.
(f) The lots and lot size requirements of § 148-26 are inconsistent
with PRD development and shall not be applied.
(g) The street design requirements set forth in § 148-27 are
inconsistent with PRD development and shall not be applied.
However, all streets shall be designed to promote the public
safety and be designed to accommodate their planned
function.
(h) The applicant shall be permitted to substitute alternative
street construction specifications to those set forth in § 148-29
for the streets which are to remain private, provided that such
alternate specifications are acceptable to the Township
Engineer. The Township Engineer's decision shall be final.
(i) The private street design requirements set forth in § 148-30
are inconsistent with PRD development and shall not be
applied to the private streets proposed within the
development.
(j) The driveway design requirements set forth in § 148-31 are
inconsistent with PRD development and shall not be applied.
(k) The alley and service streets design prohibitions set forth in
§ 148-32 are inconsistent with PRD development and shall not
be applied.
(l) The parking area requirements of § 148-33 are replaced by the
specific use and dimensional criteria for the PRD and
development conditions governing the PRD.
(m) The curbing requirements of § 148-35 may be replaced by the
design guidelines.
(n) The passive open space areas and common gathering areas
required within the PRD satisfy all of the recreational land
requirements of § 148-41.
(o) To the extent not modified herein, the requirements of Chapter
148, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Newtown shall apply to a PRD development,
unless modified in accordance with the procedures for PRD
approval set forth in § 172-100.36 of this article.
A. Administration. The Board of Supervisors of Newtown Township shall
administer this article pursuant to Article VII of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code161 (MPC) and shall be the entity with
responsibility for the approval of all plans filed pursuant to this section.
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-100.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:687
B. Application for tentative approval.
(1) Submission of information to the Township. Copies of the tentative
plan and all supporting data shall be officially submitted to the
Township by the applicant or the applicant's representative
authorized in writing to submit the plan.
(2) Number of copies:
(a) One copy of the application for review of the tentative PRD
plan, on a form promulgated by the Township for this purpose
or, if no form exists, by an application letter submitted by the
landowner or on behalf of the landowner.
(b) Four copies of the tentative PRD plan which shall fully comply
with this article. Whenever a PRD is located partially in or
adjacent to another municipality, one additional plan print shall
be required per adjacent municipality.
(3) Filing fee. The Township Secretary shall collect a filing fee for each
application for tentative approval of a PRD. Fees shall be charged
in order to cover the costs of examining plans and other incidental
expenses. The applicant shall pay the fee and establish the
necessary escrow at the time of application for tentative approval
in accordance with the Fee Schedule of Newtown Township.162
(4) Tentative plan requirements.
(a) The intent of the tentative plan submission requirements is to
provide the schematic design and planning information
specifically required by Section 707(4) of Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,163 without
mandating detailed site engineering, architecture or landscape
architecture which shall be required in the final plan
submission.
(b) The tentative plan shall be prepared by a professional
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or architect registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, who shall place his/her
seal and signature on all applicable plans, maps and drawings.
Plans shall be drawn to a scale that is adequate for proper
review, but in no case larger than one inch equals 50 feet and
no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall not exceed
30 inches by 42 inches in overall size. Site plans may consist of
multiple sheets if a key map showing the relationship of each
sheet to the overall site plan is placed on all of the multiple
sheets.
(c) The tentative plan shall include:
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. A176, Fee Schedule.
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10707(4).
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:688
[1] The project name or identifying title.
[2] The name and address of the landowner of the tract, the
applicant, and the firm(s) that prepared the plans.
[3] The nature of the landowner's interest in the land
proposed to be developed.
[4] The file or project number assigned by the firm that
prepared the plan, the plan date, and the dates of all plan
revisions, with an indication of the revision made.
[5] A key map for the purpose of locating the site to be
developed, at a minimum scale of 800 feet to the inch,
showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and
to all streets, municipal boundaries and streams existing
within 500 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
developed.
[6] The entire tract boundary with bearings, distances and
identification of all existing corner markers, North arrow
and graphic scale.
[7] An existing features plan, including:
[a] Topographical and physical features of the tract, such
as streams and wooded areas, and the tract size,
expressed in acres and square feet. Topography shall
be provided at two-foot contour intervals.
[b] The delineation of all soil types as indicated by the
most recently available United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey of
Delaware County.164
[c] Locations of all historically significant sites or
structures on the tract or on any abutting property.
[d] Floodplains, steep slopes, and wooded areas.
[e] The delineation of wetlands.
[f] All existing buildings, roads or other structures and
the approximate location of all existing pipelines,
major power transmission lines, sewage and water
treatment plants, buildings, tree masses, rock
outcrops, lakes, ponds, streams and other
watercourses.
[8] A proposed overall development plan, including:
164. Editor's Note: The Soil Conservation Service is now the Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS).
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:689
[a] A designation and location of the intended uses of all
portions of the proposed development.
[b] A statement of the maximum number of residential
units permitted (including accessory residential units)
and the proposed number of units.
[c] A statement of the maximum nonresidential square
footage permitted and the proposed nonresidential
square footage.
[d] A statement of the density of land use to be allocated
to parts of the site to be developed.
[e] A statement of the amount of required open space and
the amount of proposed open space (in acres and as a
percentage of the total tract area).
[f] The location, paving and right-of-way widths of all
existing streets and proposed streets and public ways.
The location of proposed local streets within an
individual development section shall be considered to
be for conceptual purposes only and may be modified
between the time of tentative plan approval and final
plan submission.
[g] The approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures. It is specifically recognized that
the locations and configurations of buildings shown on
the overall development plan may change between
tentative plan approval and final plan approval.
[h] The general location of parking areas within the PRD
and an explanation of the provisions made for parking
of vehicles within the PRD.
[i] Any additional required modifications to the Township
land use regulations otherwise applicable to the PRD.
[9] A development section plan which shall depict for each
development section the general delineation, location and
size of each development section within the PRD and the
approximate number of residential units and/or amount of
nonresidential square footage proposed within each
development section.
[10] A master utility plan or plans, including:
[a] General location of trunk lines showing how water
service will be provided to each development section.
No location or profiles of water facilities shall be
required.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:690
[b] General location of trunk lines showing how
wastewater service will be provided to each
development section. No location or profiles of sewer
facilities shall be required.
[c] The location of existing gas and electric service and a
general indication of how such services shall be
provided to each development section.
[d] The general location of surface and subsurface
drainage (e.g., swales, stormwater collection systems,
stormwater management basins) and a general
indication of how such services shall be provided to
each development section.
[11] An open space plan which shall depict the general location
and use of the proposed open space as it can be
determined at the time of the tentative plan submission.
Open space areas in the tentative plan shall identify:
[a] The general location of the proposed open space;
[b] The general use of the proposed open space, whether
such open space will be public open space or
restricted private open space, and its designation as
active open space, passive open space, resource
protection open space or a mixture of open space
types;
[c] The form of organization proposed to own and
maintain such open space;
[d] The general location of any trails, bike paths or other
pedestrian systems that may interlink or provide
access to open space areas as known at the time of the
tentative plan submission;
[e] The general location of any other improvements to the
open space known at the time of the tentative plan
submission.
[12] The tentative plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplemental data, as applicable:
[a] A draft of a manual of written and graphic design
guidelines for buildings, streets, landscaping and
pedestrian circulation within the proposed PRD (the
"design guidelines"), which shall function as a
coordinated and coherent set of drawings and
narratives and shall include, but not be limited to,
architectural and landscaping standards, street and
circulation systems, signage, building materials,
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:691
banners and signage, pedestrian walkways, sidewalks
and crosswalks, parking, screening and lighting,
pavilions, gazebos and plazas, street furniture and
amenities, and open space operation and
maintenance. The design guidelines shall apply to all
use and development within the PRD development.
The design guidelines shall be adopted by the
homeowners' association or associations of the PRD
for enforcement and shall not be adopted by
ordinance.
[b] A traffic impact study by a qualified traffic engineer.
The study shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, an analysis of expected traffic generation to, from
and upon surrounding roads, particularly showing
a.m. and p.m. peak hours to existing traffic flow during
a normal business day, in comparison with that which
is anticipated after the proposed PRD development is
fully completed, and, if applicable, upon the
completion of each stage. Existing traffic flows shall
be based on actual counts; if these are not available,
then an alternative source shall be fully cited and
deemed acceptable by the Township. The study shall
include recommendations for lane changes,
signalization, impact on other intersections within the
Township and other matters, as applicable.
[c] Information demonstrating the feasibility of proposals
for water supply to meet expected demand. If a new
water system is proposed for the PRD, the applicant
shall submit a description of the ability to achieve a
safe and efficient water supply system supported by
geologic, hydrologic or other relevant data necessary
to demonstrate the feasibility of the water supply. In
the event that water service is proposed to be
provided by an existing water company, authority or
other entity, a written statement from the water
company of intent to provide public water service to
the PRD.
[d] Information demonstrating the feasibility of proposals
for the disposition of sanitary wastewater, including a
description of the ability to achieve a safe and efficient
system for sewage disposal. The description shall
indicate all proposed measures and methods for
conveying, treating, and disposing of wastewater
sewage, the approximate sizes of all major collection
mains, the direction and approximate quantities of
anticipated flow, as well as all connections which will
be required to tie into existing sanitary sewers, if
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:692
applicable and as known at the time of filing of the
application for tentative plan approval. In the event
that wastewater service is proposed to come from an
existing public sewer source, a written statement from
the owner/operator of the sewer source of intent to
provide public sewer service to the PRD.
[e] Information demonstrating the feasibility of proposals
to comply with the peak rate reduction requirements
of Chapter 143, Stormwater Management, of the Code
of the Township of Newtown. Soil permeability testing
or other information required to demonstrate ultimate
compliance with applicable stormwater requirements
of Chapter 143, Stormwater Management, shall not be
required at the tentative plan stage.
[f] Information demonstrating the feasibility of proposals
for the management of stormwater. Soil permeability
testing or other information required to demonstrate
ultimate compliance with applicable stormwater
infiltration requirements shall not be required at the
tentative plan stage.
[g] To the extent known at the time of the application for
tentative plan approval, the substance of covenants,
grants of easements or other restrictions proposed to
be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and
structures, including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities.
[h] To the extent known at the time of the application for
tentative plan approval, identification of the required
modifications in the Township land use regulations
otherwise applicable to the site.
[i] Development schedule. In the case of a tentative plan
which calls for development of various development
sections over a period of years, a development
schedule showing the proposed times within which
applications for final approval of each development
section of the PRD are intended to be filed. Said
development schedule shall be updated annually by
the anniversary of tentative plan approval.
[j] To the extent known at the time of the application for
tentative plan approval, a report that evaluates the
feasibility of proposals for energy conservation and
the effective utilization of renewable energy sources.
[k] A written statement by the applicant setting forth the
reasons why, in the applicant's opinion, a PRD would
be in the public interest and would be consistent with
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:693
the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Township.
C. Review of tentative plan.
(1) Review by the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall
review the tentative plan to determine its conformance with this
article. The Engineer may recommend changes, alterations or
modifications as he may deem necessary in order to bring the plan
into conformity with the requirements of this article. The report of
the Engineer shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the
Township Planning Commission prior to the regularly scheduled or
special meeting at which the tentative plan is to be considered by
the Planning Commission. The scheduled date for the meeting at
which the tentative plan is to be discussed shall provide for a
reasonable interval of time, as agreed upon by the Township, the
Township Engineer and the applicant, for review of the plan.
(2) Review by the Delaware County Planning Commission. Within 10
days after the submission of a tentative plan, the Township shall
submit one copy of the tentative plan and one copy of all supporting
materials to the Delaware County Planning Commission for review.
(3) Review by the Township Planning Commission. When a tentative
plan has been submitted, such plan shall be reviewed by the
Township Planning Commission. The scheduled date for the
meeting at which the tentative plan is to be discussed shall provide
for a reasonable interval of time, as agreed upon by the Township,
the Township Engineer and the applicant, for review of the plan.
During review of the tentative plan, the Township Planning
Commission shall consider the written reports of the Township
Engineer, the Delaware County Planning Commission or other
Township consultants, if any. The Township Planning Commission
may recommend changes, alterations or modifications deemed
necessary in order to bring the plan into conformity with the
requirements of this article. The report of the Township Planning
Commission shall be in writing and shall be submitted no less than
five days before the public hearing at which the tentative plan is to
be heard by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Public hearing.
(1) Within 60 days after the Township receives an application for
tentative approval of a PRD, a public hearing shall be held by the
Board of Supervisors, which shall be advertised, conducted and
made a record in the manner prescribed in Section 708 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.165 The Board of Supervisors may
continue the hearing from time to time and, where applicable, may
refer the matter back to the Township Planning Commission for a
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10708.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:694
report; provided, however, that, in any event, the public hearing or
hearings shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the
first public hearing.
(2) At the hearing, the applicant shall present evidence as to the
proposed PRD's:
(a) General character and substance;
(b) Objectives and purposes to be served;
(c) Scale, scope and impact of the proposed development on the
Township;
(d) Why the proposed PRD is in the public interest; and
(e) General sequence of development.
(3) A stenographic record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by
the Board of Supervisors. The appearance fee for a stenographer
and the cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the applicant.
The cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person ordering
such additional copy or copies.
E. The findings.
(1) The Board of Supervisors, within 60 days following the conclusion
of the public hearings, shall, by official written communication to
the landowner, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the tentative plan as submitted;
(b) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the tentative plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny tentative approval of the tentative plan.
[1] The official written communication shall be mailed to the
applicant. Failure to issue said official written
communication shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative
approval of the tentative plan as submitted. In the event,
however, that tentative approval is granted subject to
conditions, the applicant may, within 30 days after
receiving a copy of the official written communication of
the Board of Supervisors, notify the Board of Supervisors
of his refusal to accept one or more of said conditions, in
which case the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to
have denied tentative approval of the tentative plan. In the
event that the landowner does not notify the Board of
Supervisors within said period, tentative approval of the
tentative plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as
granted.
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:695
[2] The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of
tentative approval or any conditions imposed upon the
grant of tentative approval to the Court of Common Pleas
of Delaware County.
(2) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings
of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the
reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial.
The written communication shall set forth, with particularity, in
what respects the tentative plan would or would not be in the
public interest, including but not limited to findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
(a) The extent to which the tentative plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be
in the public interest;
(b) The extent to which the tentative plan is or is not consistent
with the Township Comprehensive Plan or with the objectives
of this section;
(c) The purpose, location and amount of the open space, the
proposals for ownership, administration, maintenance and
conservation of open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of
the amount and purpose of the open space as related to the
proposed density and type of residential development;
(d) The physical design of the tentative plan and the manner in
which the design does or does not make adequate provisions
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic, and further the amenities of light and air and
recreation;
(e) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed PRD to
the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established;
(f) In the case of a tentative plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and or the
residents of the PRD in the integrity of the tentative plan;
(g) The extent to which the intent of the tentative plan is made
clear for the benefit of future Township officials and future
residents of the PRD in the protective covenants which shall be
imposed for the preservation of the integrity of the tentative
plan over the years and through various stages of development
where such are contemplated.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:696
(3) In the event a tentative plan is granted tentative approval, with or
without conditions, the Board of Supervisors may set forth in the
official written communication the approved development
schedule. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so
established between the grant of tentative approval and application
for final plan approval shall not be less than three months, and, in
the case of developments over a period of years, the time between
applications for final approval of each part of the plan shall not be
less than 12 months.
(4) In the event a tentative plan is granted tentative approval with
conditions which require that modifications be made to the overall
development plan, within 45 days of the grant of tentative approval,
the applicant shall submit to the Township a revised overall
development plan which modifies the layout of the PRD as required
by the conditions of tentative approval.
F. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(1) Where tentative approval has been granted, it shall be deemed an
amendment to the Zoning Map, effective upon final approval, and
shall be noted on the Zoning Map.166
(2) Tentative plan approval shall not qualify a PRD plan for recording,
nor authorize construction or the issuance of any zoning and/or
building permits. A tentative plan which has been given tentative
approval as submitted or which has been given tentative approval
with conditions which have been accepted by the landowner
(provided the landowner has not defaulted or violated any of the
conditions of the tentative approval) shall not be modified or
revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the Township pending
application for final approval without the consent of the landowner,
provided an application or applications for final approval are filed,
or, in the case of development over a period of years, provided
applications are filed, within the periods of time specified in the
official written communication granting tentative approval.
(3) In the event the PRD plan is granted tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon the tentative plan and shall so notify the Board of
Supervisors, in writing; the tentative approval shall be deemed to
be revoked, and all the portion of the area included in the tentative
plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to
those ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may be
amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the
Zoning Map and in the records of the Township Secretary.
G. Application for final plan approval.
166. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:697
(1) An application for final plan approval may be for all the land
included in the PRD or for one or more specific development
sections as delineated on the approved tentative plan. Said
application shall be made to the Township within the time or times
specified by the official written communication granting tentative
approval or any extensions thereof granted by the Board of
Supervisors. If the application for final plan approval is in
accordance with the approved tentative plan and any specified
conditions, a public hearing need not be required.
(2) Number of copies. The provisions of § 172-100.36B(2) shall be
followed.
(3) Filing fee. The provisions of § 172-100.36B(3) shall be followed.
(4) Final plan application requirements. Each copy of the application
for final plan approval shall consist of the following:
(a) Name of the applicant and record owner and the source(s) of
title to the area included in the application for final plan
approval as shown by the records of the Delaware County
Recorder of Deeds.
(b) The boundary lines of the area being developed pursuant to the
final plan, with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and
bearings to one second. These boundaries shall be determined
by accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and
close with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000
feet, provided that the boundary adjoining additional unplatted
land (for example, between separately submitted final plan
sections) is not required to be based upon field survey and may
be calculated. The location and elevation of all existing and
proposed boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be
indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the
property being developed. In addition, a professional land
surveyor shall certify, to the accuracy of the survey, the drawn
plan and the placement of the monuments.
(c) The name (or number), right-of-way width and cartway width
of all existing public streets and the name and location of all
other roads within the area included in the application for final
plan approval.
(d) The following data shall be shown for the cartway edges and
right-of-way lines for all existing, recorded (except those to be
vacated) and/or proposed streets within or abutting the area
included in the application for final plan approval: the length of
all straight lines and the radius, length and central angle of all
arcs. Measurements shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot
or in degrees, minutes and seconds, as appropriate.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:698
(e) The following data shall be shown for all lot lines and all
internal angles within lot lines: the length, width and direction
of all straight lines and the radius, length and central angle of
all arcs. Measurements shall be to the nearest hundredth of a
foot or in degrees, minutes and seconds, as appropriate.
(f) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots, with
reference to restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed for the lots contained in the development
and if covenants are recorded, including the book and page
number.
(g) The permitted building envelope and the location of proposed
buildings. It is acceptable for prototypical buildings to be
depicted if exact buildings are not known at the time of final
plan submission.
(h) The location (and elevation, if established) of all existing and
proposed required street and boundary monuments.
(i) All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by
public services and any limitations on such easements or
rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately
identified on the plan, and easements shall either be shown or
specifically described on the plan.
(j) Plan for water supply and distribution, fire hydrants, locations,
size and invert elevations of all sanitary and/or storm sewers
and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts. (This data may
be submitted as a separate plan.)
(k) A clear sight triangle and a safe stopping sight distance
triangle shall be clearly shown for all street-to-street
intersections. This shall not be required for intersections
involving residential driveways or alleys and service streets.
(l) A certification of ownership, acknowledgement of plan and
offer of dedication shall be lettered on the plan and shall be
duly acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property
and notarized.
(m) A plan for the final location of surface and subsurface drainage
of the tract shall be shown. The application for final plan
approval shall include stormwater runoff calculations for the
entire property being developed and shall show the proposed
method of accommodating the anticipated runoff. Such
calculations and documentation shall demonstrate compliance
with Chapter 143, Stormwater Management.
(n) A certificate for approval of the plan by the Board of
Supervisors and a notation of review by the Township Planning
Commission shall be lettered on the plan.
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:699
(o) The total number of lots, dwelling units, approximate square
feet of nonresidential uses, total acres of open space and
number of parking spaces provided. A running total of these
same items from all previously approved final plans should also
be included.
(p) A lot typical for each type of dwelling unit and nonresidential
structure to be developed pursuant to the final plan, giving
approximate dimensions of the structures, distances between
the structures, distances to street rights-of-way and parking
areas.
(q) Accurate dimensions of open space areas, specifically
indicating those areas to be developed for active or passive
recreation. Where open space areas are to be developed, a
general description of the type and nature of the open space
improvements and the approximate location of the structures
in the open space areas.
(r) A landscape plan showing existing and proposed grades for the
area, location and construction details of proposed retaining
walls and other structures in common areas, and a proposed
planting schedule indicating the locations, species and sizes of
plantings. Existing vegetation shall be shown by depicting the
general edge of woodland areas and individual trees of twelveinch
diameter at breast height or greater within 20 feet of any
proposed disturbance.
(s) Location and dimensions of easements for utilities and any
limitations on such easements.
(t) Certification with seal by a professional land surveyor
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the effect
that the survey and plans are correct to the accuracy required
by this article. If the final plans propose subdivision resulting
in the creation of any new property lines, they shall be sealed
by a professional land surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(u) A blank space measuring three inches square shall be left
along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that the Delaware
County Planning Commission may acknowledge receipt of the
final plan when it is presented.
(v) A blank space measuring three inches square shall be left
along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that the Delaware
County Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge receipt of the
final plan when it is presented.
(5) The final plan shall be accompanied by:
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:700
(a) Profile sheets for all proposed streets within the area to be
developed pursuant to the final plan. Such profiles shall show
at least the following information, properly labeled:
[1] Existing (natural) profiles along the center line of each
street. Profiles shall also be shown along each right-of-way
when requested by the Township Engineer.
[2] Profiles along the center line of each proposed street shall
be shown. Such profiles shall show existing and proposed
grades at one of the following sets of scales:
[a] One inch equals 10 feet horizontal, and one inch
equals one foot vertical.
[b] One inch equals 20 feet horizontal, and one inch
equals two feet vertical.
[c] One inch equals 40 feet horizontal, and one inch
equals four feet vertical.
[d] One inch equals 50 feet horizontal, and one inch
equals five feet vertical.
[e] One inch equals 100 feet horizontal and one inch
equals 10 feet vertical.
[3] Proposed finished grade of the center line and a grid with
specific existing and proposed elevations every 25 feet and
appropriate curb radius details to ensure adequate
information for construction.
[4] The length of all vertical curves and the function of such
curves.
[5] Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and
manholes, storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes and
culverts and existing or proposed water mains and fire
hydrants.
(b) An updated overall development plan which depicts:
[1] All phases and sections of the PRD that have been built, in
the manner that they were built;
[2] An outline of the area to which the phased final plan
section pertains;
[3] The remaining portions of the PRD that have not yet been
built, depicting the improvements shown on the approved
tentative plan;
[4] All street, alley, sidewalk, trail, open space, recreation,
utility, lot line, and other plan changes and linkages that
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:701
may be necessary to integrate the final plan phase to
adjoining development; and
[5] Overall calculations of development density and intensity,
open space, and other tract-wide parameters established
by the tentative approval.
(c) A comprehensive signage package demonstrating compliance
with the signage criteria contained in the design guidelines
approved as part of tentative plan approval.
(d) Any additional required modifications to the Township land use
regulations otherwise applicable to the PRD.
(e) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of
sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously
imposed which may affect the title to the area included in the
application for final plan approval.
(f) A completed stormwater drainage system showing culverts,
ditches, curbs and gutters is required. All inlets, manholes and
pipes for storm drainage shall be shown. This shall be
accompanied by computations prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer that the stormwater drainage
system will be adequate for the development pursuant to the
final plan.
(g) The applicant shall comply with all other conditions of the
written notice and communication concerning the approval of
the tentative plan.
(h) Prior to the time of final plan approval, restrictions of all types
which will run with the land and become covenants in the
deeds of lots shown on the final plan shall be submitted.
(i) Such certificates of approval by authorities as have been
required in this article, including certificates approving the
water supply system and the sanitary sewer system, shall be
submitted.
(j) Prior to recording of the final plan, an estimate of the cost of
construction of all public improvements required by this article
for the area to be developed pursuant to the final plan
("construction cost estimate"). The estimate shall be prepared
by the applicant's consulting engineer or other qualified
professional to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such costs.
H. Review of final plan.
(1) Review by the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall
review the final plan to determine its conformance with this article.
The Engineer may recommend changes, alterations or
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:702
modifications as he may deem necessary in order to bring the
plan into conformity with the requirements of this article and the
conditions of tentative plan approval.
(2) In the event an application for final plan approval has been filed as
required by this article and the official written communication
granting tentative plan approval, the Board of Supervisors, within
45 days after the date of the next regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors following the date the application is filed, shall grant
final plan approval. The Township Planning Commission shall have
the right to review the final plan at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. A public hearing on an application for final plan approval
shall not be required, provided the submission for final approval is
determined to be consistent with this article and the official written
communication granting tentative plan approval.
(3) In the event the final plan as submitted contains variations from the
approved tentative plan, the Board of Supervisors may refuse to
grant final plan approval and, within 45 days from the date of the
regular meeting of the governing body next following the date the
application for final plan approval is filed, shall so advise the
applicant, in writing, of its refusal, setting forth in the notice the
reasons why one or more of the variations are not in the public
interest.
(a) In the event an application for final plan approval is denied
approval, the applicant may either:
[1] Refile his application for final plan approval without the
variations objected to; or
[2] File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it
hold a public hearing on his application for final plan
approval.
(b) If the applicant wishes to take either action, he may do so at
any time within which he is entitled to apply for final plan
approval or within 30 additional days if the time for applying
for final plan approval shall have already passed at the time
when the applicant was advised that the final plan was not in
substantial compliance. In the event the applicant shall fail to
take either of these alternate actions within the required time,
he shall be deemed to have abandoned the final plan.
(4) Any public hearing on an application for final plan approval granted
by the Board of Supervisors shall be held pursuant to public notice
within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the
applicant, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed herein for public hearings on applications for tentative
approval.
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:703
(a) The Board of Supervisors, within 30 days following the
conclusion of the public hearings, shall, by official written
communication, either:
[1] Grant final plan approval; or
[2] Deny final plan approval.
(b) The grant or denial of final plan approval shall, in cases arising
under this section, be in the form and contain the findings
required for an application for tentative approval set forth
herein.
I. Recording of final plan.
(1) A final plan which has been granted final approval shall be certified
without delay by the Board of Supervisors as being approved;
provided, however, that no final plan shall be certified unless
security to secure the completion of improvements in accordance
with this article has been posted.
(2) Within 90 days after certification by the Board of Supervisors of
final plan approval, the plan shall be filed of record by the
landowner in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware
County on a plan size acceptable to the Recorder of Deeds.
(3) Upon the recording of the final plan, the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such final
plan shall cease to apply thereto.
(4) In the event that a development plan, or section thereof, is given
final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such
plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved and shall
so notify the approving body, in writing, or, in the event the
landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned
residential development in accordance with Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code167 after final approval has been
granted, no development or further development shall take place
on the property included in the development plan until after the
said property is reclassified, by enactment of an amendment to this
chapter, to its prior zoning classification.
J. Performance guarantee. Performance guarantees shall be posted in
accordance with Section 509 of the Municipalities Planning Code.168
K. Release of performance guarantee. Release of performance guarantees
shall be in accordance with Section 510 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.169
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:704
L. Dedication and maintenance guarantee.
(1) All streets, parks or other improvements shown on the final plan,
recorded or otherwise, shall be deemed to be private until such
time as the same have been offered for dedication to the Township
and accepted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. It is the
intent of this article that all streets, rear lanes and other public
ways be offered for public dedication to and accepted by the
Township in accordance with this article, unless the applicant notes
on the plan that such improvements shall remain private.
(2) Before accepting dedication of any improvements, the Board of
Supervisors shall completely release the applicant of the
performance guarantee and require the applicant to file a
maintenance guarantee in an amount of 15% of the cost of
constructing the improvements to be dedicated to the Township.
Such maintenance guarantee shall not have a term greater than 18
months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
(3) Dedication shall be effected by a deed in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor, which deed shall include a reference to a plan of
the streets and/or other parcels dedicated.
(4) The applicant shall furnish the Township with as-built plans. There
shall be one paper and two Mylar prints of the as-built plans,
showing completed required improvements, including drainage,
profiles and utilities. The applicant shall also provide an electronic
copy of the as-built plans in a form specified by the Township at the
time of dedication.
M. Development schedule.
(1) The applicant shall present an updated development schedule to
the Board of Supervisors at its first regularly scheduled meeting of
every calendar year following the year the tentative plan was
approved until the development is completed and accepted. If the
updated development schedule is unchanged from the most
recently approved development schedule, then the submitted
development schedule shall be automatically deemed approved. If
the updated development schedule shows changes from the most
recently approved development schedule, the applicant shall
demonstrate good cause for the change in a written statement and
other prepared materials, and the Board of Supervisors shall take
into consideration prevailing economic and market conditions,
anticipated and actual needs for residential and nonresidential
space within the municipality and the availability and capacity of
public facilities to accommodate the proposed development.
(2) If the applicant has demonstrated good cause for the requested
change in the development schedule, the Board of Supervisors
shall approve said request, and the revised development schedule
§ 172-100.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-100.36
1:705
shall supersede and replace the originally approved development
schedule.
(3) Failure of the applicant to submit an updated development
schedule shall not be deemed an abandonment of the PRD, but the
Board of Supervisors may institute enforcement remedies as
contained in Section 712.2 of the MPC.170
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10712.2.
§ 172-100.36 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-100.36
1:706
ARTICLE XXI
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 172-101. No-impact home-based businesses.
A. In R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Zoning Districts, all singlefamily
detached dwelling units, except apartments, may be used for noimpact
home-based businesses when approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception. (Such uses are not permitted in
apartments.) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an
apartment dweller from having a home office for their personal use.
B. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate home occupations
within residential districts in such a manner that will ensure such uses
are utilized as accessory and incidental to the primary residential use of
the property and that all home-based businesses be "no-impact" in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.171
Further, it is the intent of this chapter to ensure that home occupations
will not be inconsistent with nor disruptive of the normal residential use
of the premises, nor detrimental to neighboring properties or
incompatible with the characteristics of residential zones. These
provisions are not to supersede any deed restriction or covenant or
bylaw of any common interest ownership.
C. In addition to the general standards enumerated for special exceptions
in this chapter, the following specific requirements governing no-impact
home-based businesses shall be considered:
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential neighborhood.
(2) The business shall employ no employees at the residence other
than family members residing in the dwelling, and the number of
residents employed in the no-impact home-based business shall not
exceed two, including the owner/operator.
(3) The operation of any wholesale or retail business is prohibited,
unless it is conducted entirely by mail and does not involve the sale,
shipment or delivery of merchandise to or from the premises.
(4) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stocking of
inventory of a substantial nature.
(5) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking of vehicles or equipment and the use of
signs or lights. (For purposes of defining "equipment," see
§§ 165-17 and 165-18.)
(6) Home occupations shall be conducted exclusively within the
dwelling unit, except for storage which shall be permitted within an
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-101
1:707
§ 172-101.1. Day-care centers; home-based day care.
Day-care centers are a permitted use by special exception in all
nonresidential districts. Home day care is a permitted use by special
exception in a residential district. However, a day-care center may be
located in a school, church or similar facility as an accessory use by special
exception. All day-care providers, whether in a day-care center or homebased
day care, must, in addition to the regular special exception criteria,
satisfy the following requirements:
attached or detached accessory building permitted by this chapter
(§ 172-103).
(7) No alterations shall be made to change the exterior residential
appearance of the dwelling unit, garage or shed.
(8) The proposed use shall not utilize in excess of 400 square feet or
25% of the floor area, including storage, whichever is less.
(9) The no-impact home-based business shall not involve the use of
commercial vehicles.
(10) Delivery of goods, merchandise, or equipment incidental to the
operation of the home occupation shall be by passenger motor
vehicle, light commercial vehicle (one-ton capacity or less) or by
parcel or mail service vehicles typically employed in residential
deliveries and be made no more frequently than once a week.
Deliveries by semi-tractor-trailer trucks are prohibited.
(11) No-impact home-based businesses shall not be conducted between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and customers are not
permitted at the premises at any time.
(12) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood, and no homebased
business may involve or create a dangerous condition.
(13) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(14) The business may not involve any illegal activities.
(15) All home-based businesses must register with the Township.
D. The Zoning Officer or his designee shall have the right at any
reasonable time to enter and inspect the premises for safety and
compliance purposes.
A. The applicant is required to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and/or
§ 172-101 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-101.1
1:708
§ 172-101.2. Historic buildings.
No historic building as defined herein may be demolished or neglected
to the extent that inevitable demolition is apparent, as determined by the
Building Official or Zoning Officer, subject to the following conditions:
the Department of Education, if any apply to the size and scope of the
program offered (Title 55, Chapter 3270172).
B. The day-care center or home-based day care is a safe environment and
meets all requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
local fire codes and safety provisions, including, but not limited to,
ingress and egress. The operator must obtain an inspection and
recommendation by the Fire Marshal and provide a comment letter
from the Fire Marshal. The applicant must satisfy the Zoning Hearing
Board that they have adequate training in first aid in accordance with
the size and scope of the program being offered and an emergency
evacuation plan. Under no circumstances shall a home-based day care
be operated on a dead-end street.
C. The hours of operation in a residential district may not be earlier than
7:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m.
D. The applicant has the ability to provide indoor and outdoor activities.
Indoor activities, whether educational or recreational, must be
organized and set forth to the Zoning Hearing Board as part of a plan of
operations. Outdoor activities must be conducted in a fenced-in yard,
the said fence to be at least four feet in height to insure the safety and
security of the participants. Said fenced-in area is to have a self-locking
mechanism on any gate into the fenced area. Outside activities may
only be conducted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
E. The applicant must demonstrate, as part of their program, what meal or
other food, snack and beverage provisions are to be made for the
participants.
F. The applicant must also demonstrate that they have adequate and safe
dropoff and pickup areas.
G. All day-care operators and employees are required to have a criminal
history check made by the Newtown Township Police Department.
H. All day-care operators shall register with the Township and submit to an
annual inspection by the Fire Marshal and Health Officer subsequent to
registration.
A. A demolition permit is required for all such structures to be demolished.
B. Where inevitable demolition is apparent, as determined by the Building
Official or Zoning Officer, a remediation plan may be required by the
172. Editor's Note: See 55 Pa. Code § 3270.1 et seq.
§ 172-101.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-101.2
1:709
§ 172-102. Vision obstruction. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at all street intersections in
accordance with the standards of § 148-27G of Chapter 148, Subdivision
and Land Development. Within such triangles, no vision-obstructing object
shall be permitted which obscures vision above the height of 30 inches and
below 10 feet, measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the edge of the
pavement of the street being entered to the center line of the approaching
traffic lane. In the case of a four-lane street being intersected, it shall
be measured on the left from the intersecting street to the outside lane
and on the right to the median lane. The Township reserves the right to
require more stringent standards where special conditions exist, such as,
but not limited to, topographical features, such as slope or curve, and traffic
conditions and the use of the site. See also § 172-104 for the application of
this provision to wall and fence restrictions.
§ 172-103. Accessory buildings. [Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord. No.
1978-5]
Township, or the owner shall be in violation of this chapter and an
enforcement action may be taken as the inevitable demolition hereby
determined would have been undertaken without a permit.
C. A permit or remediation action may only be granted by action of the
Board of Supervisors at a public hearing duly advertised, at which time
the Board shall consider the following issues in reaching its
determination:
(1) The effect of demolition on the historical significance of the subject
and architectural integrity of neighboring contributing historic
resources.
(2) Economic feasibility of adaptively reusing the resource proposed
for demolition.
(3) Alternatives to demolition of the resource.
(4) Special incentives to encourage the owner to maintain the
structure, such as including historic resources as part of the open
space contribution, including it as part of a homeowners'
association or other incentive as determined by the Board.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) A garage, garden shed, barn, greenhouse or other accessory
building may be erected within the rear yard of an R-1, R1-A, R-2 or
R-3 Zoning District in accordance with the following regulations,
which are promulgated to regulate density within zoning districts
in relation to lot size and to insure that the residential character of
the district is not adversely affected by accessory buildings.
§ 172-101.2 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-103
1:710
(2) An accessory building is permitted to be erected and accessory
uses therein are permitted to exist when the building and uses are
such as are customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses in
the relevant zoning district, so long as the accessory building and
use is not seriously detrimental to the residential neighborhood
within which it is located. The term "accessory use" does not
include a business use but includes a professional use as defined by
this chapter. A building or use which satisfies the definition of
"accessory building" or "accessory use" may not be a principal use
on a lot. Where an owner or applicant owns or controls adjoining
parcels and wishes to place an accessory building on the separate
parcel, this may only be done by consolidating the said parcels so
that the accessory use or building is in fact accessory to the
principal use on the consolidated lot and not a principal use on a
separate tax folio.
B. Garages/carports.
(1) In an R-1 District, a private garage of one story may be constructed
for housing no more than four passenger motor vehicles and shall
not exceed 1,000 square feet and 17 feet in height, and the use of
the garage shall be limited to parking and storage customarily
incidental to a residential use. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, a homeowner may construct a garage roof sloped to
conform to the slope of the main dwelling by special exception.
(2) In an R1-A and R-2 District, a private garage of one story may be
constructed for housing no more than three passenger motor
vehicles and shall not exceed 750 square feet and 15 feet in height,
and the use of the garage shall be limited to parking and storage
customarily incidental to a residential use. Notwithstanding any
provision of this chapter, a homeowner may construct a garage roof
sloped to conform to the slope of the main dwelling by special
exception.
(3) In an R-3 District, a private garage of one story may be constructed
for housing no more than two passenger motor vehicles and shall
not exceed 500 square feet and 14 feet in height, and the use of the
garage shall be limited to parking and storage customarily
incidental to a residential use. Notwithstanding any provision of
this chapter, a homeowner may construct a garage roof sloped to
conform to the slope of the main dwelling by special exception.
(4) Carports or temporary structures of any kind or material, when so
determined by the Zoning Officer, may not be constructed or placed
on a premises for storage.
C. Sheds.
(1) One shed or similar accessory building may be erected, in addition
to a private garage and/or carport, in any residential district in
accordance with the following criteria:
§ 172-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-103
1:711
(a) In an R-1 District, a shed shall not exceed 180 square feet and
be more than 10 feet in height.
(b) In an R1-A and R-2 District, a shed shall not exceed 150 square
feet and be more than 10 feet in height.
(c) In an R-3 District, a shed shall not exceed 100 square feet or be
more than eight feet in height.
D. Barns/greenhouses/gazebos.
(1) A barn or similar structure may be constructed in any district
where agricultural uses or the housing of livestock is permitted.
The size of said structure shall not exceed 200 square feet per acre
of land devoted to such use unless approved by the Zoning Board as
a special exception. The height of said structure shall not exceed 20
feet unless approved by the Zoning Board as a special exception.
(2) Greenhouses may be constructed in any residential district, but the
size of said structure may not exceed the allocation of space for a
shed in the same district. This structure shall be in place of and not
in addition to a shed structure. Nothing in this regulation should be
construed to deny a property owner the right to construct a
greenhouse as an integral part of a residential dwelling or garage
or shed structure. Where such a structure is constructed as an
addition to and is an integral part of a residence, the allocation of
space shall not be deducted from the total assigned to accessory
buildings in that district so long as the addition is within the
buildable area of the lot.
(3) Gazebos may be constructed in any residential district, but the
allocation of space for all accessory buildings within that
residential district may not be exceeded by the construction of such
a structure.
E. Other accessory buildings. The regulation of hot tubs, children's
playhouses, trash enclosures, swing sets, and small animal shelters are
not covered by this section, except that all such structures shall be no
closer than 10 feet from the rear or side yard property line, and no such
structure shall be located in the front yard in any residential district,
including both front yards on a corner lot, unless approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception. If such is granted, these
structures must be provided with a landscape buffer to shield the
structures from the street line. The buffer may not be closer than 10
feet to the cartway. The requirements of § 172-102 as to sight line
triangles must be met if implicated by the placement of these
structures.
F. General requirements.
(1) A zoning permit is required for the erection or placement of any
structure listed in this section.
§ 172-103 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-103
1:712
(2) Accessory buildings may not be located in the front yard of a
residence. This restriction shall include either front yard of a
corner lot. In the event that a variance is granted, however, a buffer
must be placed to shield the structure from the road. (See
Subsection E above.)
(3) All accessory structures shall be located within the buildable area
of the lot. However, such structures may be located within the
setback lines if all of the following criteria are met:
(a) If the building is entirely separated from the main building.
(b) If the building is located at least 10 feet further back from the
front street line than the rearmost portion of the main building.
(c) If the building is set at least five feet from the rear or side
property lines.
(4) All accessory buildings must be placed no closer than 10 feet to any
other structure unless a special exception is granted by the Zoning
Board.
(5) Accessory structures must be erected or placed on a pad, piers or a
foundation in accordance with the Building Code173 or other
applicable regulation. In the absence of a specific regulation,
accessory buildings (other than garages and barns and
greenhouses) must be placed on level ground and be supported by
a concrete slab four inches thick or four-by-four treated beams, no
more than two feet on center, placed perpendicular to the floor
joists of the structure. Other more substantial structures must have
proper foundations as determined by the Building Official.
(6) The total square footage of all accessory buildings may not exceed
the total set forth in this section for accessory buildings as
allocated to the particular zoning district.
(a) In an R-1 District: 1,180 square feet.
(b) In an R1-A and R-2 District: 900 square feet.
(c) In an R-3 District: 600 square feet.
(7) Where an existing lot is currently nonconforming as to accessory
buildings, all legally erected and legally used accessory buildings
may remain. However, upon replacement, the new structure(s)
must conform to the standards set forth in this section.
(8) No garage, carport, shed or similar structure shall contain a second
story unless authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The structure must be constructed so as to support
the specific use contemplated on the second floor, except that the
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-103
1:713
area above the parking deck of any garage may be finished to the
extent necessary to allow for customary residential storage only.
Commercial uses are not permitted.
(9) Swimming pools are not governed by this subsection. See
§ 172-118.
(10) Gated communities, churches, clubs, school facilities, estates,
farms and similar entities in any district may be permitted
additional accessory buildings that are customarily incidental to
such facilities, such as guard houses, pool houses, snack bars and
other accessory structures, if approved by the Zoning Board as a
special exception. See § 172-103G.
(11) In addition to the criteria for special exceptions set forth in this
chapter, the Zoning Board shall consider the following factors:
(a) The total number of accessory buildings on the premises and
the duplication of uses and buildings.
(b) The total amount of impervious surface and/or the loss of green
space in proportion to the total space, as regulated by the
specific relevant zoning districts or the criteria set forth in
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) Alternative methods or buildings available to the applicant for
the proposed use.
(d) Special traffic conditions, such as stacking of vehicles at entry
points or queuing of persons in lines affecting residential uses
nearby.
(e) Any special public nuisance factors created by the proposed
structure, including but not limited to noise, light, glare,
exhaust fumes, trash and debris affecting residential uses
nearby.
G. Special provisions for properties in excess of three acres.
(1) Purpose and intent. The accessory uses contemplated herein
recognize the special and traditional needs and uses on such
parcels. It has been determined that density factors mitigate in
favor of additional allocations of space, and therefore, the
additional uses and structure size are not detrimental to a
residential neighborhood.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
LARGE ESTATE — Residential properties located in any district
consisting of 10 or more acres.
MINI ESTATE — Residential properties located in the R-1 District
consisting of three or more acres but less than five acres.
§ 172-103 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-103
1:714
SMALL ESTATE — Residential properties located in any district
consisting of five or more acres.
(3) In addition to the usual accessory uses, the following uses are
permitted in estates:
(a) Mini estates and small estates. A pool house may be erected in
addition to other permitted buildings, but no residential use is
permitted in such a building. A kitchen is also prohibited, but a
wet bar, refrigerator and minor appliances may be installed. In
addition, an in-law suite or servants quarters may be located
above a garage or in a separate suite in the residence. Rental
of such space is prohibited, and the location of any such use in
a separate building apart from the main structure is subject to
the grant of a special exception.
(b) Large estates. In addition to the above uses, such a property
may contain a barn or similar structure. The allocation of
square footage shall be 200 square feet per acre, with a height
limitation of 20 feet.
(c) Such other accessory buildings as the Zoning Board finds are
appropriate, including but not limited to gatehouses, and
similar uses by a grant of special exception only.
(4) Accessory building allocation of square footage for estates is based
on multiples of the permitted allocation in the R-1 District resulting
in 135 square feet per acre or portion thereof, e.g., a three-acre site
equals 405 square feet; a four-acre site equals 540 square feet; a
five-acre site equals 675 square feet, to a maximum of 1,350 square
feet for a large estate, exclusive of garage space.
(5) A garage for a residential property in an estate is the same as the
R-1 District, however, additional garage stalls or buildings may be
erected under the following conditions:
(a) No garage may be less than 250 square feet per vehicle.
(b) The additional bays or buildings are subject to the overall
allocation of space for accessory buildings in accordance with
the space allocation and impervious surface requirements
defined in this chapter.
(c) Such buildings must be constructed so as to be compatible
with the existing garage and/or dwelling unit.
Example:
R-1 = 1,180 square feet of garage and other accessory
buildings + 135 square feet per acre
§ 172-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-103
1:715
§ 172-104. Fences, walls and hedges.
R-1 3 acres = 1,585 square feet
4 acres = 1,720 square feet
5 acres = 1,855 square feet
10 acres = 2,530 square feet
11 acres = 2,530 square feet
H. Construction; maintenance.
(1) No garage, carport, shed or other accessory building may be
constructed unless it is in compliance with the current Building
Code174 in effect in the Township at the time of the grant of a
building or zoning permit.
(2) No such structure shall be of metal unless grounded for lightning
protection as determined by the Building Official.
(3) All accessory buildings in residential districts shall be constructed
with similar materials and be similar in appearance to the building
to which they are accessory. All accessory buildings made of wood
must be painted or stained, and all accessory buildings made of
metal must be painted. Structures may not be constructed of
uncoated cement blocks. This provision is intended for safety
reasons and to insure such structures are not detrimental to the
residential neighborhood.
(4) All structures exceeding 100 square feet and exceeding eight feet
in height must have an adequate stormwater management plan
approved by the Building Official prior to installation. Such a plan
has no special requirements other than the means necessary to
insure all stormwater remains on the premises.
(5) If such a structure is located in a front yard or either front yard of a
corner lot because of the grant of a variance by the Zoning Hearing
Board, it must be shielded from the street line by a landscape
buffer approved by the Building Official or the Township Landscape
Official.
I. Once accessory structures are created, subdivisions of these lots are
prohibited, unless all buildings remain on a surviving lot.
A. No fence, wall, hedge or similar object or structure shall be located
closer to the street than the frontmost portion of the dwelling unit.
Existing fences, walls and hedges must conform to the requirements of
§ 148-31G, including but not limited to the requirement that no object
greater than 2 1/2 feet in height may be located within 12 feet of the
cartway at or near a driveway or intersection to insure a sight triangle
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-103 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-104
1:716
§ 172-105. Building height restrictions.
No part of any building shall exceed 45 feet in height unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, provided that this regulation shall not apply to
chimneys, spires, towers or similar projections not used for human
habitation.
§ 172-106. Restricted uses. [Amended 2-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-2]
Applicable in all districts and uses, no building may be erected, altered or
used and no lot or premises may be used for any use, trade, processing
or business which is noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke,
gas, radiation, vibration, electrical disturbances, illumination or noise or
of 100 feet in either direction. Greater distances may be required if
the circumstances, such as curvature of the road, elevation or other
features, interfere with the sight distances or safety concerns imputed
therein.
B. When an existing fence, wall, hedge or similar object or structure is
removed, the more stringent requirements of this section shall apply,
and no such object or structure may be located closer to the cartway
than the frontmost portion of the premises.
C. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the normal landscaping of
a premises, unless the safety issues implicated in the sight triangle at
the driveway are involved.
D. All swimming pools must be fully enclosed by a fence or wall no less
than four feet in height above grade. The fence must be constructed to
prevent entry to the pool area, except by a gate which must be latched
or secured to prevent children from gaining entry and/or accidental
entry by others. (See also § 172-118.)
E. Safety and privacy screens along highways or busy streets may allow
for the construction of a fence, wall, hedge or similar object or
structure in the front, side or rear yard, if approved by the Zoning
Board by special exception, so long as the safety issues implicated in
the sight triangle are abated as set forth in § 172-102. The Building
Official may evaluate existing conditions and approve appropriate
existing structures (such as post and rail fences) or plantings (such as
hedges) subject to safety considerations.
F. The finished side of any fence must show to the street or neighboring
properties. All fences must be constructed off the property line so that
no portion of the fence encroaches on a neighboring property owner.
G. Fences for horses may be set at the property line, but no closer than the
right-of-way line where it exists on the lot, so long as the fence has a
50% greater opening.
§ 172-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-106
1:717
which constitutes a nuisance or a public hazard, whether by fire, explosion
or otherwise.
§ 172-107. Existing setbacks.
The setback of a building from street lines in any zoning district shall be as
hereinbefore provided in the regulations governing the side of a front yard,
provided that:
A. Fire and explosive hazards and radioactivity. All activities involving and
all storage of flammable and explosive material at any point shall be
provided with adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and
explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment
and devices as detailed and specified by the Department of Labor and
Industry and the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Any activity which involves radioactivity shall be
registered with the Township.
B. Smoke, ash, dust, fume, vapor, gases and other forms of air pollution.
There shall be no emissions at any point from any chimney or otherwise
which may cause any damage to health, to animals or vegetation or to
other property or which will cause excessive soiling at any point. Visible
emissions from any chimney or otherwise shall meet the current
limitations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
C. Liquid and solid wastes. There shall be no discharge at any point into
any private or public sewerage system or stream or into the ground of
any materials in such a way or of such a nature or temperature as can
contaminate or otherwise cause the release of hazardous materials
except in accordance with the standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Township of
Newtown.
D. Noise and vibration. Noise from a facility at the property line adjoining
residential uses shall not exceed 40 decibels when measured at night.
There shall be no vibrations which adversely affect other properties.
E. Odor. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable on adjacent streets
or adjacent lots.
F. Operation. All operations, other than agricultural, involving processing
or production of any materials or goods shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed building.
G. Light sources may not produce in excess of 0.2 footcandle when
measured at the property line.
H. Hours during which construction activities or activities creating noise
or glare may not commence: prior to 7:00 a.m., and must cease by 7:00
p.m.
§ 172-106 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-107
1:718
§ 172-108. Public utility corporations.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon
petition of such corporation, the Public Utility Commission shall, after a
public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building
in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public.
§ 172-109. Side yards for corner lots. [Amended 1-23-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-1]
Where a side yard is required, a corner lot having a side yard shall have a
minimum width of at least as great as the narrower side yard specified for
lots containing two side yards; however, in no case shall a side yard on a
corner lot be less than 25 feet in width.
§ 172-110. Irregular lot frontages. [Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord. No.
1978-5; 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
Where a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac turnaround, in conformance with Chapter
148, Subdivision and Land Development, the Board of Supervisors of the
Township may, at the time of approving the subdivision, specify that the
lot frontages on such lots be measured at the building setback line as
established at the minimum front yard required by the underlying zoning
district, providing that a minimum lot width of 50 feet is provided at the
street line. In such cases, a notation shall be made on the subdivision
drawing indicating how the frontages of the cul-de-sac circle lots were
measured. All other lots shall have their lot frontages measured at the street
line.
§ 172-111. Conversion of one-family dwellings.
Because the ordinances of Newtown Township provide for adequate twofamily
and multifamily dwellings, single-family dwellings may not be
converted into two-family or multifamily dwellings unless they are
permitted uses in the subject district, and then only by special exception.
A. Wherever in any zoning district the present setback of existing
buildings is greater than the minimum provided, the required setback
of a building hereafter erected shall be the same as or greater than the
present setback of existing buildings in the same block on the same side
of the street, except when a special exception is authorized.
B. Wherever the present setback of existing buildings in commercial
districts is less than 20 feet, the required setback of a building
hereafter erected on an unimproved lot may be the same as the present
setback of existing buildings within the same block and on the same
side of the street when authorized as a special exception.
§ 172-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-112
1:719
§ 172-112. Existing corner lots.
In the residential zoning districts (R-1, R-2 and R-3), for lots held in single
and separate ownership prior to the effective date of this chapter, February
4, 1938, the following less restrictive provisions apply to corner lots only
when the owner does not own adjoining property:
A B C D
District
Buildings
Affected
Lot Width
(feet)
Permitted Minimum Depth
of Front Yard
(feet)
(measured on the longest
side)
R-1 All 175 50
R-2 All 125 40
R-3 All 80 30
§ 172-113. Floor area requirements.
§ 172-114. Basement use regulations.
No cellar, basement, lower story or any portion of a building of which 1/
2 or more of the height from the floor to the ceiling is below the level
of the ground adjoining shall be used for sleeping purposes, except that,
in multifamily dwellings, one janitor's apartment may be constructed in
the basement. The location, size and arrangement of windows in such
apartment shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer or his or
her designee, unless the Building Code176 in effect has a more restrictive
requirement which shall govern.
A. No detached dwelling shall hereafter be erected or altered and no
permit shall hereafter be issued for the erection or alteration of a
detached dwelling having less than 1,200 square feet of habitable floor
space, which shall be exclusive of any floor space contained in the cellar
or garage attached thereto. The habitable floor space shall be that
space which is included in the area within the walls of any dwelling
which can be used principally and primarily for living quarters of one or
more human beings.
B. No room used for living or sleeping purposes shall contain less than 80
square feet of floor area, nor shall the ceiling height at the center of
such room be less than seven feet, six inches above the floor, nor shall
the knee wall height be less than four feet, unless the Building Code175
in effect has a more restrictive requirement which shall govern.
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-112 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-115
1:720
§ 172-115. Temporary structures.
The use for dwelling purposes of temporary structures, tents, trailers or
other movable or temporary types of buildings is prohibited.
§ 172-116. Minimum lot area for locations with no public water or
public sewer service.
Any lot in any district on which is built a dwelling which is not an accessory
building and for which there is not public water supply or public sewer shall
have an area of not less than 12,000 square feet. Further, all relevant state
regulations governing the placement of on-site septic in relation to on-site
water supply are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 172-117. Motor vehicle use regulations. [Amended 2-9-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981-1]
The following are specific physical requirements governing the granting
of approval relating to motor vehicles. When more than one of these uses
are proposed, the standards shall be mutually inclusive, provided that the
requirements for each use is met.
A. Gasoline service stations. Gasoline service stations shall be subject to
the following:
(1) A minimum lot frontage of 140 feet along one street, a lot depth of
150 feet and a minimum lot size of 35,000 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) All buildings shall be set back from all street rights-of-way by 40
feet; service islands shall be set back 50 feet from all street rightsof-
way to allow for the width of a car on the street sideline.
(3) All curb cuts for access driveways shall be not less than 25 feet nor
more than 40 feet in width.
(4) Except for access driveway openings, where the curb shall be
depressed, a raised curb shall be provided along all street
frontages.
(5) All accessways and paved areas shall be constructed to Township
road standards.
(6) All permanently installed hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubricating,
greasing, washing and repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed
within the building.
(7) All waste, used parts and used tires shall be stored within a fenced
area or building. Waste material and small used parts shall be
stored in closed containers.
(8) "No smoking" signs shall be posted in the service areas of the
buildings and around gasoline pumps.
§ 172-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-117
1:721
(9) Noise from repairs and other operations shall not exceed 40
decibels when measured at the property line at any time.
(10) Any environmentally safe method of disposal of waste oils and
other pollutants shall be provided.
(11) Sale of goods not related to motor vehicles is prohibited, unless
expressly authorized by the Township as a conditional use, except
for food, cigarettes and drinks when served from not more than
three vending machines.
(12) Except for accessways, the first 10 feet in depth along all street
frontages shall be green area. Not less than 10% of the total lot
shall be green area, complying with Article XXV.
(13) Fire-protection equipment shall be present at all times. Included
shall be ten-pound BC extinguisher units, located as follows:
(a) A minimum of one in each indoor service area.
(b) At a maximum distance of 40 feet from all points within an
indoor service area or an outdoor service island.
(c) A minimum of two in the facility.
(14) No repairs may be performed outside of a building.
B. Car wash establishments. Car wash establishments shall be subject to
the following:
(1) All provisions of Subsection A(2) through (6) and (9) through (12).
(2) A minimum lot frontage of 150 feet along one street, a lot depth of
250 feet and a minimum lot size of 37,500 square feet. Frontage
may be reduced to 100 feet, provided that the layout plan has been
approved by the Township Supervisors.
(3) Connecting to public water and public sanitary sewers.
(4) A one-way traffic pattern on the property.
(5) An ancillary accessway so that vehicles do not have to go through
the washing facilities to reach the street exits.
C. Motor vehicle repair facilities. Motor vehicle repair facilities shall be
subject to the following:
(1) All provisions of Subsection A(3) through (13).
(2) A minimum lot frontage of 80 feet along one street, a lot depth of
150 feet and a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet, with a front
yard setback of 50 feet.
(3) There shall be no storage or parking of vehicles awaiting servicing
or repairs on public streets.
§ 172-117 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-117
1:722
§ 172-118. Swimming pools.
All swimming pools shall be located within the setback lines specified by the
zoning district in which they are to be located, except that, in the case of
private swimming pools located in R-1, R-1A, R-2 or R-3 Zoning Districts, a
swimming pool may be located not less than 10 feet from the rear and side
property line on which the pool is to be located.
§ 172-119. Recycling facilities. [Added 5-28-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-3]
All commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily (four units or more)
uses shall include adequate facilities to handle, store and properly remove
recyclable materials as required by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and Township ordinance.
(4) Major repairs of vehicles involved in accidents, body repair,
painting and correction of structural members shall be conducted
only in conjunction with a car sales agency or in a I Light Industrial
District unless authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board by special
exception.
D. Car sales facilities. Car sales facilities shall be subject to the following:
(1) All provisions of Subsection A(2) through (7) and (11) through (13).
(2) A minimum lot frontage of 175 feet along one street, a lot depth of
200 feet and a minimum lot size of three acres.
(3) A system of lighting, fencing and alarms designed to minimize theft
and vandalism shall be provided.
(4) Where vehicles involved in accidents are to be repaired, the
provisions of Subsection C hereof shall apply, except that storage of
all such vehicles shall be inside of a building or fenced area.
A. All swimming pools must be fully enclosed by a fence or wall as set forth
in § 172-104.
B. The pool and its enclosures may not interfere with the sight triangle
necessary to insure safe exiting from any street, alley or driveway. (See
§ 172-104 or 148-31G for guidance.)
§ 172-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-119
1:723

ARTICLE XXII
Signs
[Amended 4-9-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-1]
§ 172-120. Compliance required.
Any sign hereafter erected or maintained in the Township shall conform
with the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Township
Building Code177 and all other applicable ordinances or regulations of the
Township.
§ 172-121. Single-family residence districts.
In R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Residence Districts, the following types of signs
and no other shall be permitted:
A. Official traffic signs, signs of government agencies and any other signs
required by law.
B. Signs indicating the name and profession of the occupant of a dwelling,
provided that:
(1) The area on one side of any such sign shall not exceed 200 square
inches.
(2) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for each dwelling
unit.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting, concealed or
indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(4) The profession is actually practiced on the premises.
(5) A no-impact home-based business shall not have a sign.
C. Identification signs, including directory signs and changeable copy
signs for farms, estates, schools, churches, hospitals and buildings and
uses other than dwellings, provided that the same are located on the
premises of such institutions, and provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than one such sign shall be placed on any property.
D. Integral signs not to exceed two square feet per building.
E. Real estate signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises on which
such signs are located, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-121
1:725
(2) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for any premises or
lot held in single and separate ownership.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(4) All such signs shall be removed on the day of settlement.
F. Signs advertising the development of a premises upon which they are
erected, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than one such sign shall be erected on the premises or
lot.
(3) No such signs shall be illuminated.
(4) All such signs shall be removed upon settlement of all lots on the
premises in all the phases of the development.
(5) No such signs shall be located off the premises of the development.
G. Trespassing, entrance, exit and parking signs or signs indicating the
private nature of a driveway or property, provided that the area of one
side of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet. All such signs
must comply with Pennsylvania state statutes for directional or traffic
signage and signs for trespass. Signs not in accordance with the
relevant statute must be removed.
H. Construction signs, provided that:
(1) Such signs shall be erected only on the property where such work
is being performed.
(2) The area of one side of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square
feet.
(3) Such signs shall be displayed visibly where a building is being
erected or altered and shall be removed promptly upon completion
of the work.
I. Public utility signs required in connection with the identification,
operation or protection of a public utility, provided that the area of one
side of any such sign shall not exceed nine square feet.
J. Up to two off-site directional signs indicating the location of real estate
advertised for sale may be permitted when all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) They are located near a street intersection.
(2) They are located on private property beyond the street right-of-way
and have the affirmative permission of the owner of that property.
Only one sign shall be located on such a property.
§ 172-121 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-121
1:726
§ 172-122. Other residence districts.
§ 172-123. Commercial, industrial and special use districts.
[Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
In C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts, I Light Industrial Districts and SU-1
and SU-2 Special Use Districts, the following types of signs and no other
shall be permitted:
(3) Each sign should not exceed six square feet.
(4) Each natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association or other organization or entity which erects such signs
shall be annually registered with the Township and shall pay a
registration fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors. Registration shall be withheld or suspended for up
to 90 days by the Township where the registrant has violated this
section.
A. In R-4, R-4A, and R-5 Residence Districts, A-O Apartment Office
Districts, and A Apartment Districts, the following types of signs and no
other shall be permitted:
(1) Any signs permitted in a residence district as provided in
§ 172-121, except § 172-121J.
(2) Signs, including directory and changeable copy relating to any
profession, permitted use or accessory use, conducted in
apartment buildings on the same lot and indicating only the name,
profession or use, provided that:
(a) The area of one side of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet, except that, in the case of a sign announcing two
or more professions or uses conducted on a single lot, the size
of each such sign may be increased one square foot for each
additional profession or use, not to exceed a maximum of six
square feet.
(b) Not more than one such sign shall be erected per lot.
(3) Permanent directional signs, not exceeding two square feet in area,
nor with a total height extending more than two feet above grade,
shall be permitted for the informational needs of the users of the
property.
B. The form of ownership of a given premises shall not alter the number of
permitted signs under this article.
A. Any sign except those under §§ 172-121J and 172-124, provided that the
total sign area of all signs placed on any one premises shall not exceed
any of the following requirements:
§ 172-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-123
1:727
(1) Two square feet per linear foot of frontage of all buildings, up to a
maximum of 25 linear feet. ("Frontage," for the purpose of signage,
shall be the side of the building on which the main entrance to the
premises is located.)
(2) The maximum area of all signs of a single premises in this district
shall not exceed 50 square feet, notwithstanding any other
provision of the regulations pertaining to signs in this zoning
district. In addition to the measurement of signage set forth in
§ 172-2, Definitions, the total square footage is determined from all
items meeting the definition of a sign visible from the exterior of
the building and intended for such visual purposes, not to include
normal window displays of goods and services.
(3) All occupants in a building with no direct public entrance from a
parking lot or street shall collectively be permitted one sign which
shall identify all such occupants, said sign not to exceed three
square feet, which shall be placed on the front of the building only.
(4) All occupants in a building with direct access from a parking lot or
street shall be permitted separate signage not to exceed 25 square
feet. Where an individual building exceeds 5,000 square feet, any
lessee with an interest exceeding 2,500 square feet is entitled to an
additional sign.
(5) With the exception of directional signage, all signage is to be
placed in or on the front of the building.
(6) Where no building exists, sign area may not exceed one square foot
per linear foot of property frontage measured at the building
setback line or 50 square feet, whichever is less. Such signage may
not be for off-premises advertising use.
(7) Permanent directional signs, not exceeding two square feet in area,
nor with a total height extending more than two feet above grade,
shall be permitted for the informational needs of the users of the
property.
(8) Billboard (off-premises advertising sign). Billboards may be erected
in the Light Industrial District of the Township as a principal use on
the property only. Such signs may be no greater than 300 square
feet in size and must be square or rectangular in shape. Such signs
may be no closer than 3,000 feet apart on both sides of the traveled
way. Such signs must be no less than 15 feet to the underside of the
sign and no higher than 35 feet to the top of the signs. No such sign
shall be closer than 3,000 feet from any structure with an historical
designation or any school or public park. A billboard is a principal
use and not an accessory use.
B. In the case of a "shopping center," defined for the purpose of this
subsection as a group of three or more stores, with direct access to a
parking area or street, all contained on a single premises with a total
§ 172-123 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-123
1:728
building frontage of not less than 150 linear feet or on separate
adjoining premises with a common street frontage which is served by
common street entrances and parking facilities used in common, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Not more than one ground sign advertising and identifying each
shopping center shall be erected for each street upon which the
shopping center has frontage, provided that:
(a) No such ground sign shall be less than nine feet nor more than
20 feet in height above the grade. The lowest point of any sign
must be at least 8 1/2 feet above grade at the location of the
sign.
(b) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 75 square feet.
(c) The location and orientation of such sign shall be designated
on a required land development plan.
(2) Each occupant that has direct public entrance to a parking lot in a
shopping center or street shall be permitted signs as follows:
(a) The signs shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises.
(b) The size of any such sign shall not exceed the area specified in
§ 172-123A.
(3) All occupants with no direct public entrance to a parking lot or
street shall be permitted one sign, which sign shall identify all such
occupants collectively, provided that:
(a) Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises and shall be located
in the immediate vicinity of the public entrance to the shopping
center.
(b) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Loading entrances, employee entrances and other accessory
entrances may be marked with one wall sign not exceeding 200
square inches. This area shall not be included in the total area for
permissible signs.
C. Except for those uses included under Subsections A(6) and B(3) hereof,
banners shall be permitted, provided that all of the following provisions
are complied with:
(1) Each banner shall be secured at all corners and/or in such manner
as it does not freely wave.
(2) The cumulative area of all banners shall not exceed 25 square feet.
(3) No banner shall overhang any parking lot, sidewalk or cartway.
§ 172-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-123
1:729
§ 172-124. Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall be prohibited:
(4) A separate permit shall be secured from the Township for each
occasion that banners are displayed. The permit fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution. Banner permits for a
premises may be issued no more than four times within a calendar
year. The number of days for which the banners will be erected
shall be stated in the permit application. The sum of days of all
permits issued for any premises during a calendar year shall not
exceed 92.
(a) No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has violated
Subsection C hereof within the preceding 12 months.
A. No sign, other than an official traffic sign or similar sign, shall be
erected within any street right-of-way unless specifically authorized by
other ordinances or regulations of the Township.
B. No sign shall extend beyond any property or right-of-way line, except
for official signs.
C. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision on any street, nor shall it interfere with, obstruct the view of or
be confused with any traffic signal, sign or device.
D. No sign shall exceed more than 20 feet in height above the ground.
E. No wall or projecting sign shall extend more than 15 inches beyond the
wall on which it is attached. Any such projection shall be not less than
nine feet above grade level.
F. No roof sign shall be permitted, except on the roof of a one-story
building.
G. The following types of signs are prohibited: [Amended 12-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-4]
(1) Signs on curbs or sidewalks; signs painted on exterior walls; signs
painted on, attached to or suspended from any outdoor bench or
chair.
(2) Sign posters, signs or other advertising materials affixed by
tacking, pasting or otherwise upon utility poles, trees, buildings
(except transit shelters) or fences. However, signs prohibiting
hunting, fishing or trespassing shall be permitted.
(3) Signs which project or hang over any sidewalk, except marquee
signs and signs under overhanging roofs, provided that no portion
is less than 8 1/2 feet above grade.
§ 172-123 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-124
1:730
§ 172-125. General restrictions.
(4) Banners, except as provided elsewhere in this article, spinners,
unshielded light strips, valances or the like.
(5) Animated signs; signs that revolve, swing or have movable parts or
have or appear to have flashing lights and reflectors; or signs which
are mobile (mounted on or which can be attached to motor
vehicles); and trailer signs.
(6) Billboard signs, except as provided elsewhere in this article.
A. All lighting shall be arranged, designed and shielded or directed so as
to protect the adjoining properties and streets from glare. Reflectors
and lights permitted in conjunction with signs shall be equipped with
restraining hoods or shields to concentrate the illumination upon the
area of the sign.
B. Any sign which violates this article shall be removed within 10 days
after written notification from the Zoning Officer to the property owner.
Upon failure to comply with such notice, the Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized, in addition to any other legal remedy, to cause removal of
such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner
of the property on which the sign is located, and the Zoning Officer may
proceed as authorized by law to collect any such expense, plus interest
and penalties, on behalf of the Township. [Amended 12-27-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-4]
C. Where an occupant in a building with approved signs under § 172-123,
other than § 172-123A(6) or B(2), relocates to another location and
secures appropriate sign permits for the new location, the occupant
may obtain a separate sign permit for 30 days, placed at his old
location, announcing the location of the new location, provided that it is
a sign of 20 square feet or less complying in all other respects with this
article. Where the new location is within the Township and a sign
permit is required for the new location, the permit for the old location
may be incorporated with the permit for the new location so that only a
single permit is required.
D. Mandatory signs installed pursuant to government regulations shall not
be included in the calculations of allowable sign area under § 172-123A
and B unless the sign exceeds the minimum size required to meet the
regulations.
E. Markings on equipment such as vending machines or gasoline pumps
shall not be included in the calculation of allowable sign area under
§ 172-123A and B. However, markings attached thereto which are not
an essential part of the equipment shall be included.
F. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, freestanding or ground
signs of nonprofit charitable or civic organizations may be placed in a
public right-of-way or on public lands when approved by the
§ 172-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-125
1:731
§ 172-126. Permit required; application; fee.
§ 172-127. Nonconforming signs.
Every sign existing on the date of enactment of this section which does not
comply with this article, nor is included under Subsection C hereof, shall be
removed or altered in order to comply with this article. Unless otherwise
specified, such removal or alteration shall be completed by June 1, 1989.
governmental agency having control of the property or right-of-way
and after registration with and approval by the Zoning Officer of the
Township.
A. Except for signs of the type described in §§ 172-121A, B, D, E, G, H and
I and 172-122A(3), no sign may be erected, structurally altered,
relocated or enlarged until a permit for the same has been granted by
the Zoning Officer to the owner or tenant of the property on which the
sign is proposed to be erected, and the permit number shall be
recorded by the Zoning Officer in an appropriate register.
B. Application.
(1) Application for sign permits shall be on an authorized Township
form and shall contain:
(a) A detailed scale drawing showing the sign and its size and
intended location.
(b) A description of its type, construction, manner and method of
installation, illumination, if any, and materials to be used.
Where a sign is to be attached to or mounted on a building, the
size and area of the wall to be used shall be stated in the
application.
(2) Accompanying each application shall be a permit fee.
A. Signs, other than those set forth in § 172-124 and Subsection C hereof,
which do not comply with the requirements of this article but which
were in existence on the date of enactment of this section shall be
removed or altered in order to comply with this article by June 1, 1989.
B. If, on June 1, 1989, only one sign on a premises exceeds the permitted
area requirements of this article but complies in all other respects, it
may be continued after June 1, 1989, by a special exception, provided
that all other signs on the premises are removed and all of the other
general standards pertaining to a special exception are met according
to the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. All signs which do not comply with this article but which were
authorized by special exception prior to the date of this section shall
continue as special exceptions.
§ 172-125 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-127
1:732
ARTICLE XXIII
Outdoor Lighting
[Amended 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-10; 7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-3]
§ 172-128. Compliance required.
Outdoor lighting hereafter erected or maintained in the Township shall
conform with the provisions of this article and the provisions of the
Township Building Code178 and all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the Township.
§ 172-129. Exterior lighting standards. [Amended 9-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-05]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CUTS — The manufacturer's catalog sheets, including photographs or
pictures showing the design of the fixture and the performance data for
the luminaires. The cuts also show lighting fixture supports, poles and
the light standards which are proposed with applicable notes.
FOOTCANDLE (FC) — A quantitative unit for measuring illumination
equivalent to the illumination produced by a plumber's candle
(standard source), measured at a distance of one foot; one lumen per
square foot.
ILLUMINATION — The density of luminous flux on a surface.
ISOLUX DIAGRAM — A line plotted on any appropriate set of
coordinates which shows all the points of a surface where the
illumination is the same as an isolux (isofootcandle) line. When a series
of such lines for various illumination levels is plotted on the same set of
coordinates, an isolux diagram is formed.
LUMINAIRES — A complete lighting unit, lighting unit assembly
(including reflectors, glassware, socket, etc.) and accessories for
mounting.
REFLECTOR — A surface or element of a luminaire designed to direct
light in a desired direction.
B. Plan requirements.
(1) Final lighting plan. The location and type of all proposed exterior
lighting fixtures for parking areas shall be indicated on the final
lighting plan, along with the expected hours of operation. On all
pedestrian and vehicular use areas indicated on the lighting plan,
an isolux diagram shall be drawn to sufficiently indicate the
illumination levels furnished by each luminaire and the pattern of
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-129
1:733
coverage on these areas. Reproduction of the cuts shall be
transferred to the lighting plan for each type and configuration of
proposed exterior lighting.
(2) Final landscape plan. The location and type of all proposed exterior
lighting fixtures shall be indicated on the final landscape plan to
ensure that there is no conflict between the location of light
standards and the location of trees and that trees will not adversely
affect lighting patterns. Lighting fixture locations shall be indicated
on the plan by symbol.
C. Design standards. Lighting for safety purposes to illuminate parking
and/or pedestrian areas shall conform to the following:
(1) Lighting shall be designed so that the illumination does not appear
beyond the property line on which the lighting originates at levels
above 0.2 footcandle.
(2) Parking areas shall be lighted using support poles or lighting
standards. The fixtures shall be located within or adjacent to
parking areas, in raised traffic islands, parking bay separators or
adjacent landscape areas. Parking areas shall not be lighted by
means of floodlighting attached to buildings. Poles or standards
shall be located so as not to be damaged by automobiles being
parked (front overhang: minimum 39 inches; rear overhang:
minimum 60 inches).
(3) The maximum height of outdoor lighting standards and fixtures
shall not exceed 20 feet in height, measured from the ground level
to the top of the fixture.
(4) All light fixtures shall be of the shielded type and provided with
deflector light cutoff shields.
(5) Site lighting shall not be lighted by means of floodlights attached to
buildings, except for single-family dwelling units.
D. Other lighting.
(1) Design standards for athletic fields and other similar lighting not
included in Subsection C above shall be permitted by special
exception. The height and design of the lighting array shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis considering the following
issues:
(a) Spill light.
(b) Glare.
(c) Sky glow.
(d) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 172-129 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-129
1:734
§ 172-130. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to be applied retroactively to
existing lighting. When more than 50% of the lighting fixtures on a property
are replaced, the new lighting fixtures shall conform to this section.
GLARE — A subjective effect from the highest amount of light
from the brightest source of light which must be mashed by
reflects or other devices to be reduced.
SKY GLOW — The bright aura in the night sky which requires
reflections be controlled.
SPILL LIGHT — The footcandles measured beyond the area
you are trying to illuminate. In no event shall footcandles
exceed 0.2 at the property line.
(2) The applicant shall formulate their design based on requirements
of the Illumination Engineering Society, the NCAA and the
requirements of the various sports groups or similar criteria for
lighting in excess of 20 inches in height.
(3) All lighting must be directed onto the field in question to the
maximum extent possible. The height shall be determined by this
factor in conjunction with Subsection D(1) and (2) above.
E. Applicability. The submission requirements under this section shall be
part of the submission of any subdivision and land development
applications, where applicable. Any application for subdivision or land
development, which includes the installation of outdoor lighting, shall
not be considered complete unless accompanied by the appropriate
submittals as outlined in this section.
§ 172-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-130
1:735

ARTICLE XXIV
Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities
[Amended 10-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-9]
§ 172-131. General requirements.
Any building or other structure erected, enlarged or used and any lot
used or occupied for any of the purposes set forth in this chapter shall
be provided with minimum off-street parking spaces as set forth in this
article, together with adequate passageways, driveways or other means of
circulation and access to and from a street or way. Such space shall be
readily accessible to and within a reasonable distance from the buildings
served thereby and shall be on the same lot as the main buildings or lot
adjacent thereto, except when authorized as a special exception. No parking
space required by this article shall have a maximum slope of greater than
6%.
A. Construction. Unless otherwise specified, all parking spaces shall be
paved in accordance with all Township ordinances and regulations.
B. Maintenance of parking areas.
(1) The surface of any parking space, loading space or access to
facilities used by the public shall be continuously maintained free
of any potholes or other obstruction which would constitute a
safety hazard. Upon notification from the Township, the property
owner of any parking facilities with such conditions shall abate the
condition by patching and repairing the facility to its original grade
within 10 days of written notification from the Township.
(2) All parking areas, loading areas, and driveways shall be graded and
surfaced with asphalt or other suitable materials to prevent dust
and erosion. Such area shall also be drained in conformance with
municipal standards to prevent excessive water flow onto streets to
adjoining properties. All parking spaces and parking areas shall be
clearly line-striped and maintained.
C. Plan approval. Plans for all new stand-alone parking facilities in excess
of eight parking spaces shall be submitted to the Township's Planning
Commission for review and shall meet generally accepted design
standards for parking layouts and be approved by the Board of
Supervisors as a land development. All other parking in excess of four
spaces shall be on a measured drawing submitted to the Building
Official and Zoning Officer for review.
D. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served. However, in
all cases where it is sought to utilize adjacent premises for parking
facilities, the applicant or owner shall be required to enter into an
appropriate agreement, duly acknowledged, for recording, reciting that
the property upon which the aforesaid establishment is erected and the
§ 172-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-131
1:737
§ 172-132. Required number of parking spaces.
Below is the minimum parking spaces to be provided for various uses.
Where multiple uses occur at a single facility, minimum parking shall be
the total of the required parking specified for each separate use. Where
fractions occur, they shall be rounded to the highest whole parking space.
said adjacent premises are both owned by the applicant, that they
are to be used with relation to each other, as above provided, and
that neither property shall be separately sold or encumbered, unless
other provisions for compliance with this chapter shall have first been
entered into, in writing, and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
E. Handicapped persons parking. All uses shall designate reserved
parking spaces for handicapped persons as close as possible to the
main entrance of the building, with the exception of single-family or
twin dwellings, service stations, garages, cemeteries or any other use
for which 10 or fewer spaces are required under this chapter. Said
spaces shall be considered as part of the required spaces and shall be
appropriately marked with signs to designate handicapped use, as
approved by the Board of Supervisors. (For shopping center
requirements, see other provisions of this chapter.)
F. In a residential district, all vehicles must be parked on a paved surface.
All parked vehicles must have a current inspection. Nonregistered
vehicles are not permitted. Registered vehicles without a current
inspection must be registered as or eligible to be registered as antique
or classic vehicles and must be stored on a paved surface and in a
garage, shed or carport. These regulations are promulgated because of
the safety concerns surrounding uninspected vehicles or those with a
potential to cause ground contamination caused by leaking oil-based
products, fuels and leaded fuels.
A. Dwellings:
(1) For all dwelling units, other than multiple dwellings, two off-street
paved parking spaces per family unit, plus one additional parking
space for every 200 square feet devoted to a home-based business.
(2) For apartment units and other multifamily units, two off-street
paved parking spaces per dwelling unit, plus adequate space for
loading and unloading, guest parking and handicapped parking in
accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
(3) For hotels and motels, 1 1/2 paved parking spaces for each rental
or dwelling unit, plus adequate space for loading and unloading,
guests and the handicapped as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Parking for a restaurant and employees must also be provided in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Community service facilities:
§ 172-131 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-132
1:738
(1) For auditoriums, assembly or meeting rooms or other similar
places of public or private assembly, one paved parking space for
every four seats or stacked chairs available for assembly.
(2) For community centers, libraries, museums or other similar places,
one parking space for every 800 square feet of floor area in public
use. Where the usable spaces within are being used for purposes
set forth in Subsection B(1) above, the parking requirements of
that provision will be applied.
(3) For stadiums, one parking space for every two seats.
(4) For hospitals, one parking space per bed, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest work shift, with a minimum of two
parking spaces assigned for employees or 1 3/4 parking spaces per
bed, including employees.
(5) For institutional homes or for retirement centers, two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit or room or 1 1/2 parking spaces for
each bed, whichever is greater.
(6) For a skilled nursing home facility providing skilled, intermediate
and residential care, 1/2 a parking space per bed. [Amended
5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-4]
C. Commercial and other uses, other than shopping centers. For each of
these uses, in addition to the parking spaces required below, one
parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest work
shift, with no fewer than two parking spaces assigned for all employees:
(1) For retail stores, banks and other commercial buildings, one
parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area.
However, no more than 4 1/2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area, including employee parking provisions, shall be
required under this article.
(2) For bowling alleys, three parking spaces for each bowling lane.
(3) For movie theaters and other similar places of paid admission, one
parking space for every two seats.
(4) For funeral homes, one parking space for every 75 square feet of
gross floor area.
(5) For restaurants which do not provide for carrying out of food, one
parking space for every two seats. For restaurants providing carryout
service as well as sit-down service, two additional parking
spaces shall be provided for each service window or cashier.
(6) For public garages, automobile and gasoline service stations and
repair facilities, at least one parking space for each 100 square feet
of gross floor area, which shall be in addition to the space allocated
to normal storage of motor vehicles being repaired or serviced.
§ 172-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-132
1:739
(7) For car wash operations, 25 parking spaces per washing unit,
including storage or stacking lanes.
(8) For open areas used for commercial purposes, at least one parking
space for each 1,000 square feet of ground (example: car dealers,
nurseries, etc., but not including driving ranges and golf courses
which shall require the following: two parking spaces for each tee
in a driving range and five parking spaces for each golf hole at a
golf course). Vehicle storage for vehicle sales agencies shall be in
conformance with the definition of "spacing" found in § 172-2.
D. Offices, wholesale and industrial uses:
(1) For office buildings, wholesale and industrial uses, one parking
space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area. Where the office
building exceeds 1,000 square feet, there shall be 4 1/2 parking
spaces for each multiple of 1,000 square feet, and the provision of
parking spaces where fractional shall increase to the next highest
level.
(2) For laboratories, 1.1 parking spaces for every employee or one
parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is less.
(3) For a corporate headquarters office building, 0.85 parking spaces
per employee or one parking space for every 450 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater. In order to qualify for a
corporate headquarters office building, the following conditions
must be satisfied:
(a) Such building or aggregate of buildings must contain a
minimum of 250,000 square feet of gross floor area; and
(b) At least 70% of the building or aggregate of buildings must be
occupied by a single corporate or other business entity, or its
affiliates or subsidiaries.
(4) For any of the uses set forth above, if parking spaces are to be
separately designated (other than handicapped spaces required to
be so designated by law), then visitor parking or customer parking
must be designated. If a large parking lot is present for an office
building complex or corporate headquarters, directional signs to
visitor or customer parking must be made part of a plan submitted
to the Township.
E. Shopping center and similar uses, including the C-2 District:
(1) Five paved car parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area of stores in the shopping center, and, in addition,
there shall be provided a minimum of one unpaved car parking
space per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area of stores in the
§ 172-132 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-132
1:740
shopping center, and, with regard to the unpaved car parking
spaces (parking reserve area):
(a) Within five years of the issuance of the last certificate of
occupancy relating to the final completion of the shopping
center, the Board of Supervisors has the right to require the
owner, developer or builder to pave the unpaved car parking
spaces at any time within the aforesaid period.
(b) The unpaved car parking spaces shall not, for purposes of the
C-2 Commercial District, be calculated as green area, as
defined in § 172-75C(2), nor may they be used for future
development.
(2) A minimum of three paved car parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable area of office buildings in the shopping center
shall be provided in addition to the space required for other specific
uses.
(3) A minimum of one paved parking space for every 10 seats of a
theater in the shopping center.
(4) For motel and related facilities, a minimum of 1 1/2 paved parking
spaces for each motel rental unit.
(5) For commercial and other uses, see § 172-132C above.
(6) Notwithstanding the specific requirements set forth above, an
owner may use the guideline of 4 1/2 parking spaces for 1,000
square feet of leasable area, if the leasable area exceeds 1,000
square feet, for all uses within the center if the spaces are
reasonably distributed, upon approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception.
(7) The applicant may submit an alternative plan for a lesser number of
spaces than set forth above to the Board of Supervisors as part of a
traffic and parking management plan subject to conditional use
approval.
(8) Any additional space developed subsequent to the original
development must add parking spaces in accordance with that
specified in this chapter for the particular uses, or the applicant
must present a traffic management and parking plan as an
alternative to the Board of Supervisors for conditional use
approval.
(9) "Gross leasable area" is the total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, if
any, expressed in square feet, measured from center lines of joint
partitions and exteriors of outside walls. The gross leasable area
does not include the area of any common walkways or public
§ 172-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-132
1:741
facilities and does not include areas used exclusively for basement
storage.
F. Motor vehicles sales agency use. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-04]
(1) A motor vehicles sales agency shall provide the following minimum
parking spaces:
(a) One parking space for each employee on the shift of greatest
employment (employee parking);
(b) One parking space for every 800 square feet of building floor
area accessible to the public and devoted to the sale of motor
vehicles (customer parking), or 10 customer parking spaces,
whichever is greater.
(c) One parking space for every inventory vehicle that is displayed
for sale and accessible to customers (inventory parking).
Inventory parking may be stacked in rows no more than three
cars deep, with only one row having direct access to a drive
aisle. Rear rows of vehicles can gain access to the drive aisle by
moving vehicles in front. Inventory parking inside the building
showroom shall be serviced by an accessway of sufficient width
and height to allow sequential movement of display inventory
vehicles in and out of the showroom. Display motor vehicles
may be placed in the showroom in any manner that
accommodates sequential movement of such vehicles by
employees in and out of said showrooms; and
(d) In connection with motor vehicles being serviced, two parking
spaces per service bay, in addition to any spaces that are
provided in the service bay (service parking). Service parking
may be stacked in rows no more than three cars deep, with
only one row having direct access to a drive aisle. Rear rows of
vehicles can gain access to the drive aisle by moving vehicles
in front.
(2) Inventory vehicles that are not displayed for sale and are not
accessible to customers shall be considered inventory storage, not
parking areas or inventory parking. Inventory storage is to be
marked as "off limits" to customers. The minimum requirements for
parking spaces, the size of parking spaces and the design features
for parking areas provided elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance do
not apply to inventory storage, except all buffer requirements shall
be observed and as set forth in this section.
(3) Parking spaces for customer parking shall measure 10 feet by 20
feet. Parking spaces for employee parking, inventory parking and
service parking shall have a minimum size of nine feet by 18 feet.
§ 172-132 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-132
1:742
(4) Parking lot green area requirements of § 172-135 shall only apply
for customer and employee parking. Chapter 172, Attachment 3,
Figure 7, shall be met for customer and employee parking, but shall
not apply to inventory parking, inventory storage and service
parking. For inventory parking, inventory storage and service
parking, the required parking lot green area under § 172-135 shall
not apply; provided, however, that the ten-percent green area for
any inventory parking, inventory storage and service parking is
provided elsewhere on the property, in addition to any other green
area or pervious coverage requirements for the property.
(5) The minimum parking requirements, including, but not limited to,
size and number of parking spaces, setbacks and any other design
features set forth in Subsection F(1), (2), (3) and (4) hereof, or as
may be set forth elsewhere in the Township Zoning Ordinance, may
be modified, altered and/or reduced up to 25% by conditional use
application filed with the Board of Supervisors under this
Subsection F(5). The twenty-five-percent cap shall not apply to any
conditional use relief requested in connection with any adjoining
boundary line setback requirements for adjoining lots/parcels
supporting a motor vehicle sales agency use and/or any component
thereof. The Board in such cases shall be authorized to modify,
alter, reduce or waive such requirements, notwithstanding the
twenty-five-percent cap hereunder provided. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider the following factors in an application
for conditional use relief hereunder:
(a) Whether or not the proposed motor vehicles sales agency
requires the number of parking spaces and/or design as set
forth by Township ordinances due to the nature and scope of
applicant's specific business model, price and nature of
vehicles sold or other factors affecting volume, need for
parking;
(b) Whether historical data and statistics of a comparable motor
vehicles sales agency or agencies of similar nature supports
the requested reduced parking or reduction or waiver of other
Township ordinance requirements;
(c) Whether the reduction in parking and/or parking design
modifications are needed to accommodate the proposed motor
vehicles sales agency development and operations;
(d) Whether there would be any material adverse impact on
surrounding properties which cannot be mitigated by alternate
design features and improvements; and
(e) Whether, after considering proposed mitigating improvements,
the requested modification of any Township ordinance
requirement will create on-site or off-site conditions which
would interfere with emergency vehicles or otherwise pose a
§ 172-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-132
1:743
§ 172-133. Storage areas for drive-in facilities.
At least 200 linear feet of storage area for vehicles awaiting service shall be
provided for drive-in facilities and uses. The 200 linear feet of driveway in
one or more usable lanes shall be measured from the right-of-way line of a
public street or from the cartway of any private way to the window or other
place in the building where the vehicle must enter or pass for service. The
storage area shall be so designed that vehicles awaiting service shall not
back out into the street or way or create a stacking condition on a street or
way.
§ 172-134. Loading and unloading facilities.
In addition to required off-street parking spaces, off-street loading and
unloading space with proper access from a street or alley shall be provided
on any lot on which a building for trade or business is hereafter erected or
substantially altered.
§ 172-135. Required green area. [Amended 6-9-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-10; 8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-8]
danger or have a material adverse impact on the public health,
safety and welfare.
A. Where parking areas, loading and unloading facilities and
accompanying access from a street or alley (collectively "paved area")
are between 3,000 square feet and 150,000 square feet, a minimum of
10% of all paved area shall be devoted to green area. Where the paved
area exceeds 150,000 square feet, a minimum of 15% of all paved area
shall be devoted to green area. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-9]
B. Where any part of the parking area is located adjacent to a building, a
minimum of five feet of green area shall be provided between the
building and the parking area, except at areas required for access to
the building. This area is not included as part of the required green area
for the parking area, but is to be included as part of the overall green
area requirement for the site. However, an option to provide additional
green area or buffer requirement between other uses or along a street
or way may be used when granted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception, but no less than the amount required by this
subsection may be considered.
C. For all off-street parking areas covered under this section, green areas
shall be provided at the ends of rows, and, except for parking areas
requiring a minimum green area of 15% of all paved areas, green areas
shall be interspersed within the row of parking spaces. For parking
areas requiring 15% green area, the green areas shall be interspersed
within the parking area. Such green areas shall be a minimum of eight
feet in width. Also, green areas may be provided between rows of
parking spaces, and such area shall be a minimum of eight feet in width.
§ 172-132 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-135
1:744
§ 172-136. Curbs. [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-9]
All parking areas, excluding those that require 15% green area and those
serving single-family and two-family dwelling units, shall have curbs located
in such a manner that at least one side of each parking space shall have a
curb.
§ 172-137. Parking reserve areas.
The total number of parking spaces required by this article shall be clearly
set forth and labeled as such on development, subdivision or other plans
required to be filed by the owner and/or developer with the Township before
Except in parking areas requiring 15% green area, there shall not be
more than 90 feet of parking area in a continuous strip without adjacent
green areas. However, an option to provide additional green area or
buffer requirement between uses or along a street or way may be used
when granted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, but
no less than the amount required by this subsection may be considered.
[Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-9]
D. The green area shall be covered with lawn grass, ground cover plants
or low-growing plants or shrubs, with weed-free shredded hardwood or
other approved mulch. In addition, green areas may be used as the
location for planting of shade trees.
E. Except for parking areas requiring 15% green area, refer to Figure 7 of
this chapter.179 [Amended 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4;
9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-9]
F. The green areas required by this section shall not constitute a portion
of any green area otherwise required by this article or any other
ordinance or regulation of the Township. The exact design and location
of green areas required by this section shall be disclosed on a
development or subdivision plan or other similar plan and be
permanently maintained as such.
G. See also the buffer requirements set forth in the residential zoning
districts of this chapter and the specific buffer requirements set forth in
Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development, for all uses set forth
in § 148-58I, which buffer requirements are specifically incorporated
into this chapter.
H. Buildings or uses other than those specified shall be made by the
Building Official/Zoning Officer consistent with the standards set forth
herein for comparable buildings or uses.
I. All parking areas exceeding four spaces must be depicted on a
measured drawing submitted to the Township as the official parking
plan for a site.
179. Editor's Note: Figure 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 172-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-137
1:745
the issuance of a building, use or occupancy permit. However, the number
of spaces required to be constructed by this article may be reduced, and the
land area equal to the reduction shall be denoted as "parking reserve area."
Such reduction may be accomplished only upon compliance with each of the
following conditions:
§ 172-138. Existing parking facilities.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to be applied retroactively to
existing land uses. In this regard, the minimum off-street parking space
requirements to permit an enlargement of a use or building existing on
October 9, 1978, shall be the sum total of the components set forth in
Subsection B below, except that any expansion of the physical facility or use
must satisfy the additional parking needs of that expansion and use.
A. The landowner or developer shall submit a plan of parking, meeting all
the requirements of this article, for the use to which the lot or property
is to be devoted, without any reduction.
B. The landowner or developer shall mark upon his plan that portion of the
total parking area to be specified as a "parking reserve area" and shall
certify that the parking needs for the use to which the lot or property is
to be devoted is less than those required by the terms of this article.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall concur with the requested reduction or
to a reduction of a lesser amount upon the recommendation of the
Township's Planning Commission, upon the condition, however, that the
reduction must be replaced if the proposed use is changed to another
more intensive use.
D. The parking reserve areas so created shall be utilized as green area and
shall be maintained in accordance with terms and conditions as
imposed at the time of approval of the Board of Supervisors. The green
areas so created shall not constitute a portion of the green areas
otherwise required by this article or any other ordinance or regulation
of the Township. This parking reserve area shall contain sufficient area
to provide the parking spaces and the ten-percent green area required
in § 172-135.
E. The parking reserve area shall be converted to parking area at such
time as the Board of Supervisors shall determine. Upon notification of
the Township to the owner and occupant of the land, such reserve areas
shall be paved pursuant to applicable ordinances or regulations of the
Township immediately after such notification and shall be completed
within the time set forth by the Township in its notice, but in no case
less than 30 days. The design of this area shall conform to this section.
A. For the proposed enlargement to the existing facilities, the parking
shall be calculated according to current provisions.
§ 172-137 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-138
1:746
B. For the existing facility, parking shall be calculated in accordance with
Ordinance No. 1959-2 and Ordinance No. 1974-4, at the end of this
chapter (Appendix A180).
180. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 172-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-138
1:747

ARTICLE XXV
Green Areas
[Amended 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-2]
§ 172-139. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GREEN AREA — That area set aside for growing of vegetation, including
trees, bushes, grass, flowers and plants, and also includes lakes, ponds,
streams and other natural growth. "Green area" may include walkways for
nonvehicular traffic only, but only to the extent that such walkways are
provided to cross green areas.
§ 172-140. Required green area. [Amended 8-10-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-10; 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
Any lot used or occupied in any of the following districts shall be provided
with minimum green areas based upon the following percent of the lot area:
Article District Percent
VI R-1 Residence 35%
VII R-1A Residence 35%
VIII R-2 Residence 35%
IX R-3 Residence 35%
X R-4 Residence 40%
XI R-4A Residence 40%
XII R-5 Residence 35%
XIII A Apartment 35%
XIV A-O Apartment Office 25%
XV O Office 30%
XVI C-1 Commercial 5%
XVII C-2 Commercial 15%
XVIII I Light Industrial 30%
XIX SU-1 Special Use 30%
XX SU-2 Special Use 30%
A. Areas set aside for recreational use shall not be counted as green area,
except that those areas devoted exclusively to golf course use,
including a driving range when conducted as an accessory use thereto,
but not including a miniature golf course, may be counted towards the
requisite area.
B. Green area requirements under this article shall not be used to satisfy
green area requirements under Article XXIV.
§ 172-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-140
1:749

ARTICLE XXVI
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 172-141. General regulations.
A. Continuation. Any lawful use of a building or land existing at the
effective date of this chapter or authorized by a building permit issued
prior thereto may be continued although such use does not conform to
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Extension. A nonconforming use may be extended upon the lot occupied
by such use and held in single and separate ownership at the effective
date of this chapter when authorized as a special exception, provided
that any extension or enlargement shall conform to the area and height
regulations of the district in which it is situated.
C. Changes. A nonconforming use of a building or land may be changed to
a nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification if no
structural alterations are made therein, provided that such change may
include structural alterations when authorized as a special exception.
Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or land has been changed
to a use of a more restricted classification or to a conforming use, such
use shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted
classification.
D. Restoration. A nonconforming building which has been damaged or
destroyed by fire, explosion, casualty or act of God or a nonconforming
building which has been legally condemned may be reconstructed and
used for the same nonconforming use, provided that the reconstructed
building shall not exceed in height, area and volume the building
destroyed or condemned, and the building reconstruction shall be
commenced within one year from the date the building was destroyed
or condemned and shall be carried on without interruption.
E. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use of a building ceases for a
continuous period of one year or more or if a nonconforming use of land
ceases for any length of time for any reason, subsequent use of such
building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Nonconforming uses. Where a structure is proposed to be expanded on
a nonconforming lot and where the expansion will not encroach further
into the front, side or rear yard setback, then such expansion will be
reviewed by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
§ 172-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-141
1:751

ARTICLE XXVII
Lot Reduction
§ 172-142. (Reserved)
§ 172-143. General regulations.
In any subdivision made under the Newtown Township ordinance in R-1 or
R-1A Residence Districts, lot areas, except corner lots, may be reduced to
not less than 75% of the minimum lot area permitted in the district, and
requirements for frontage, side yards and rear yards may be reduced by not
more than 15%, provided that:
A. The Board of Supervisors approves.
B. The average of the areas of the individual lots within the subdivision
shall be not less than the minimum lot area required for the district.
C. If any lot created within such subdivision is of such size that it could be
further subdivided, further subdivision thereof shall be prohibited by a
deed restriction or agreement satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and
recorded in the county office for the recording of deeds prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the erection of any structure within the
subdivision or, if acceptable to the Township, either by transfer of a
conservation easement or development rights to the Township.
D. Any lot, tract or area created within such subdivision for park or
recreational purposes, if acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, may
be dedicated to the Township by a formal deed of dedication. If any such
lot, tract or area is not so dedicated, provision for its conservation,
maintenance and future use shall be made by deed restriction or
agreement satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and recorded in the
county office for the recording of deeds prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the erection of any structure within the subdivision.
§ 172-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-143
1:753

ARTICLE XXVIII
Helicopters
[Amended 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-3]
§ 172-144. Restrictions on landing and takeoff.
No person shall land, discharge, load or take off in a helicopter in any place
within the Township, other than at a heliport, except for which a permit,
issued by the Township as hereinafter provided, is in force, unless such
landing or takeoff is done:
§ 172-145. Use restrictions; permit requirements; heliport
standards.
Heliports are prohibited in A-O Apartment Office, A Apartment and C-1
Commercial Districts. In all other districts, personal use heliports may be
permitted as a conditional use. Public use heliports are prohibited in the
Township. All heliports shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. In conjunction with a special event, such as an athletic contest, a
holiday celebration, parade or similar activity, after at least two
working days' advance notice has been given to the Zoning Officer of
the Township and permission has been obtained to make such landings
or takeoffs.
B. When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for emergencies.
C. In connection with a construction project where a helicopter is to be
used to lift equipment or materials in connection with such project.
A. A use permit be obtained from the Township authorizing the same.
B. The size of the property upon which the heliport is to be constructed is
adequate to provide for safe operation of the helicopter and shall not be
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the Township residents
and their property.
C. There shall be a three-foot fence around the heliport, except for those
heliports on a rooftop. The fence shall be located so as to not be
hazardous to helicopter operations.
D. The edge of the takeoff and landing area may not be closer than 200
feet to any property line.
E. Heliports in residence districts shall be used only by executive-type
helicopters under 5,000 pounds maximum gross weight.
F. Permits for heliports shall be issued for a period of one year and may be
renewed annually. Permits shall be deemed automatically revoked if:
(1) The Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation revokes or refuses to relicense
the heliport after one of its periodic inspections;
§ 172-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-145
1:755
(2) The Federal Aviation Administration withdraws or revokes its
approval or clearance; or
(3) The heliport is not in compliance 30 days after the Zoning Officer
has notified the permit holder at its last known address, in writing,
that the heliport is no longer in compliance with the requirements
of the Township.
G. Heliport standards. No land, water or building in the Township shall be
used as a location for landing, takeoffs, storage, servicing or fueling of
any helicopter until the following standards have been adhered to:
(1) The proposed heliport shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the published rules and regulations
of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Aviation and the National Fire Protection Association
governing the use of heliports.
(2) Each application for a heliport shall include:
(a) A copy of the Federal Aviation Administration Form 7480-1,
Notice of Landing Area Proposal.
(b) A copy of a letter of no objections from the FAA.
(c) A copy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania application for
approval of landing area site and the letter of site approval
from the Bureau of Aviation.
(d) An aerial photograph or drawing of a scale no less than one
inch equals 200 feet indicating the approach and departure
routes and the location of all residences, schools, churches,
hospitals and areas used for the outdoor assembly of people, as
well as other noise-sensitive areas within a radius of 1/2 mile of
the proposed heliport site.
(e) A statement of property ownership for authorization of the
owner for the property proposed to be used as a heliport.
(f) A description of the purpose for which the heliport is being
established and a schedule of proposed activities, including:
[1] Number of monthly operations.
[2] Hours of operation.
[3] Support activities, such as storage, maintenance and
refueling.
(g) A site plan, which shall contain the following information:
[1] The location, nature and height of proposed security
fences, berms, landscaping and other security and noise
attenuation structures.
§ 172-145 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-145
1:756
§ 172-146. Rooftop heliports.
Where heliports are located on rooftops or other elevated structures, the
following conditions shall apply in addition to provisions in § 172-145:
§ 172-147. Fire extinguishers; fueling.
§ 172-148. Prohibited landing hours.
No landings shall be made between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., unless
permitted by conditional use.
[2] The location and type of fire-fighting equipment and
materials.
[3] The location and type of fuel-storage facilities, if
applicable.
[4] The location of all existing and proposed buildings.
[5] The location of the helicopter takeoff and landing areas,
parking areas and the method of surface preparation or
stabilization.
A. Fuel basins and fuel spillage drainage lines shall be provided.
B. Two fire escapes shall be provided.
C. Standard heliport markings shall be provided.
D. There shall be a fence or restraining wall at least four feet in height
around that portion of the roof structure, exclusive of the landing pad,
designed for human occupancy. No other obstruction above the landing
level shall be permitted in the flight path.
E. Heliports shall comply with the standards of the current Township
Building Code.181
F. A certification of structural compliance attested to by a registered
professional engineer or architect shall be furnished with each
application for a rooftop or other elevated heliport.
A. All heliports shall be provided with fire extinguishers in accordance
with current NFPA-recommended requirements for heliports.
B. Fueling and refueling of aircraft shall be permitted within the Township
when authorized by the Fire Marshal.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 79, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 172-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-149
1:757
§ 172-149. Exemptions.
Any heliport licensed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Bureau of
Aviation of the Department of Transportation before February 13, 1978, is
hereby exempt from the provisions herein relating to heliports.
§ 172-149 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-149
1:758
ARTICLE XXIX
Amendments
§ 172-150. Procedure.
§ 172-151. Public hearing; notice. [Amended 2-9-1976 by Ord. No.
1976-2]
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map.182
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. If, after any public hearing
held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is revised or
further revised to include land previously not affected by it, the Board
of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public
notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
A. The proposed amendment shall be submitted at a regular or special
meeting of the Board of Supervisors, which shall fix the time and place
of a public hearing thereon and cause notice, which shall state the
general nature of the proposed amendment, to be given as follows:
(1) By publishing notice once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to every association of residents of the
Township which has registered its name and address for this
purpose with the Board of Supervisors.
B. Notice of applications for amendment to this chapter shall be given to
the Planning Commission so that the Commission may make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the proposed
amendment. This requirement of notice to the Planning Commission
shall not require the Commission to hold public hearings on proposed
amendments if it does not desire to do so. It is the intent of the Board of
Supervisors in inserting this subsection that the procedure set forth in
Section 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S.
§ 10607) need not be followed since such procedure is required only
182. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 172-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-151
1:759
§ 172-152. Amendments requested by applicants. [Amended
11-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-7]
where a zoning ordinance is originally enacted. It is further stated
that it is the intention of the Board of Supervisors that if at any time
any proposed amendment is adopted and a Planning Commission is
not in existence or if the Commission fails to make any report or
recommendation on a proposed amendment or if the Board of
Supervisors adopts an amendment to this chapter without giving notice
as stated by this subsection, it shall in no manner invalidate the
amendment. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
C. Where the Official Zoning Map183 of the Township is to be amended, all
affected property owners and owners of property within 600 feet of the
affected property shall receive written notice.
D. At any public hearing on a proposed amendment, full opportunity to be
heard shall be given to all parties in interest.
A. Where an applicant, other than the Board of Supervisors or the
Planning Commission, seeks to amend, supplement, change, modify or
repeal this chapter, he shall do so by submitting a written request for
the change to the Zoning Officer, together with the appropriate filing
fee as established by § 172-153, and submitting the following reports
and documents:
(1) A legal description of the property.
(2) A plot plan of all property involved and all properties immediately
abutting the affected property.
(3) A list of the names and addresses, if available, of all property
owners within 600 feet of the property.
B. In addition to the aforesaid fees, the applicant shall deposit with the
Township an additional sum estimated by the Zoning Officer in escrow,
from which all Township costs of any proceedings before the Board of
Supervisors, including but not limited to the cost of legal advertising,
cost of preparing amendatory ordinances and the cost of amending the
official records of the Township, including the Zoning Map and
codifying any revised ordinances, shall be charged. If the escrow proves
to be insufficient, the Township Zoning Officer may request additional
sums to be placed into escrow before the application is processed any
further.
183. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 172-151 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-152
1:760
ARTICLE XXX
Fees
[Amended 11-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-7]
§ 172-153. Establishment of fees.
The Board of Supervisors, from time to time, shall establish, by resolution,
fees to be charged by the Township for applications and permits under this
chapter. When adopting such a resolution, the following categories shall be
provided for:
A. Use permits.
B. Sign permits.
C. All classes of applications to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. All classes of amendments to this chapter.
E. Such other categories as the Township may establish by ordinance from
time to time.
§ 172-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-153
1:761

ARTICLE XXXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 172-154. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he is hereby given the
power and authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Permits for
construction and uses which are a special exception to the requirements of
this chapter shall be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 172-155. Permit requirements.
§ 172-156. Enforcement notice. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
A. A permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof and prior to the use or change in
use of a building or land and prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use.
B. Applications for permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer on such
forms as may be furnished by the Township. Each application shall
contain all information necessary for such official to ascertain whether
the proposed erection, alteration, use or change of use complies with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. No building permit or use and occupancy certificate shall be issued
until the Zoning Officer or his or her designee has certified that the
proposed building or alteration and the proposed use of the property
complies with all the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
11-14-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-4]
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
§ 172-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-156
1:763
§ 172-157. Causes of action. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-4]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or, with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township or any aggrieved
owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person
will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner
or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Township at least 30
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Board of Supervisors. No such action may be maintained until such
notice has been given.
§ 172-158. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-4]
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 calendar days in accordance with
procedures set forth in this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.184
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 172-156 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-158
1:764
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid
over to the Township.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. The Magisterial District Judge shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 172-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-158
1:765

ARTICLE XXXII
CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community District
[Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
§ 172-159. Applicability.
In CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community Districts, the regulations
contained in this article shall apply.
§ 172-160. Purpose.
The purpose of the CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community District
is to provide residential living and health care facilities providing a
continuum of care for senior persons.
§ 172-161. Permitted uses.
A building or buildings may be erected, altered or used, and land may be
used for the following purposes:
A. Continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
B. The following uses as accessory to a CCRC when located on the same
tract intended to serve the residents of the CCRC and their visitors:
(1) Administrative offices and operational facilities for management of
the permitted uses.
(2) Personal services such as barber shop, beauty salon or commissary.
(3) Bank branch and/or automated teller machine.
(4) Dining facilities.
(5) Community center.
(6) Library.
(7) Educational and recreational facilities.
(8) Theater.
(9) Fitness center and swimming pool.
(10) Physical therapy facilities.
(11) Physicians' offices for residents.
(12) Massage therapy room.
(13) Gift/convenience shop.
(14) Storage and maintenance facilities supporting the CCRC.
(15) Any other accessory uses commonly found in a CCRC.
§ 172-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-162
1:767
§ 172-162. Frontage, area and height regulations.
A. Lot area and frontage. There shall be a street frontage of not less than
300 feet and a minimum lot area of 50 acres.
B. Density. There shall be a maximum of eight dwelling units per acre.
Each residential living unit and each personal care living unit shall be
considered a dwelling unit. Every five beds in a skilled nursing facility
shall be considered a dwelling unit for the calculation of density.
C. Impervious surface and building area. Not more than 60% of the lot
area shall be covered by impervious surfaces, and not more than 30% of
the lot area shall be occupied by buildings.
D. Building setback. Buildings shall be set back not less than 50 feet from
the right-of-way line of any street which the CCRC abuts or any
property line except where the lot is immediately adjacent to an R-1,
R-1A, R-2 or R-3 District, in which case buildings shall be set back not
less than 100 feet from the property line adjacent to the R-1, R-1A, R-2
or R-3 District.
E. Setbacks for parking areas and driveways. No driveway or parking area
shall be located within 25 feet of a street line or any property line,
except that portion of a driveway providing ingress and egress to the
property.
F. Height regulations. The maximum building height of any building shall
be 45 feet.
G. Buffer area. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts
an R-1, R-1A, R-2 or R-3 District of the Township or similar district in an
adjoining municipality, a buffer planting strip of not less than 25 feet in
width shall be provided. On the buffer planting strip, there shall be
placed shrubbery, trees or other plantings sufficient to provide a
reasonable screen of the CCRC from the specified abutting residential
districts and to ensure that the residential character of those abutting
districts is not adversely affected by such CCRC. Existing trees and
shrubbery shall be preserved to the extent reasonably practicable and
shall count towards the required buffer strips which shall be
supplemented if and where necessary to provide an adequate screen.
H. Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between buildings
shall be 30 feet, except that the distance between buildings comprised
of townhouses may be reduced to 20 feet provided that the attics of the
townhouses are provided with automatic fire sprinkler protection or
provided that the Township Fire Marshal determines that, taking into
consideration the nature of the proposed construction or other relevant
factors, a twenty-foot distance between buildings is adequate for fire
protection purposes without requiring sprinkler protection for the
attics, in which case the twenty-foot distance between buildings shall
be permitted without automatic sprinkler protection in the attics.
§ 172-162 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-162
1:768
§ 172-163. Design standards.
I. Building frontage, depth or length. The greatest dimension in frontage,
length or depth of a building section erected or used under this article,
excluding covered walkways, enclosed corridors or bridges, shall not
exceed 150 feet. However, the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Newtown Township Planning Commission, may,
in connection with any land development application, approve buildings
with greater dimensions if it determines that such buildings are
architecturally pleasing and suitable for a CCRC and avoid monotony
and excessive bulk.
A. General design standards.
(1) All land and buildings erected in a CCRC District shall be under one
ownership and/or management responsible to the owner or
operator of the CCRC; provided, however, residential living units
and personal care living units may be sold as life estates or leased
to life tenants who are in residence.
(2) All new utilities, including but not limited to water, electricity, gas,
telephone and cable, shall be installed and maintained
underground.
(3) Public water and public sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be
provided.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be in accordance with a landscape plan and
planting schedule prepared by a landscape architect and approved
by the Board of Supervisors during the land development
application process.
C. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) All off-street parking and loading design standards in the Newtown
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance185 and in
Article XXIV of this Newtown Township Zoning chapter shall apply.
The following numbers of parking spaces shall be provided for uses
in a CCRC District:
(a) One parking space for each residential living unit.
(b) One parking space for every four personal care living units.
(c) One parking space for every four beds in a skilled nursing
facility.
(d) One employee parking space for every two employees on the
highest shift.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 172-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-163
1:769
§ 172-164. Special plan requirements.
D. Lighting.
(1) All driveways, parking areas, and areas of pedestrian use shall be
adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be designed and located
to direct light away from any adjoining residential development and
areas zoned for residential development.
E. Signage.
(1) One sign of not larger than 40 square feet indicating the name of
the CCRC will be permitted at each major entrance to the site. Such
sign shall be in accordance with plans submitted to and approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Directional signs not larger than four square feet. Such signs shall
be in accordance with plans submitted and approved by the Board
of Supervisors.
A. A land development plan, which delineates the overall development of
the property for which an application is made, or that delineates that
portion of an already developed CCRC where additional development is
proposed, shall be filed as part of a land development application,
which land development plan shall include the following:
(1) The number of residential living units, personal care living units
and the number of skilled nursing beds.
(2) Such other information as required by the Newtown Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.186
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 172-163 NEWTOWN CODE § 172-164
1:770
Appendix
Chapter A176
FEE SCHEDULE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1995-6 8-14-1995 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Res. No.
1995-11
8-14-1995 Fee schedule
amendment
See Ch. A176
Ord. No. 1995-7 9-26-1995 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 1995-8 1-2-1996 Salaries and
compensation
Ch. 41
Ord. No. 1996-1 2-26-1996 Bartram Bridge Joint
Preservation Board
amendment
Ch. 8
Res. No.
1996-11
9-9-1996 Fee schedule
amendment
See Ch. A176
Ord. No.
1996-1a
10-15-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 1996-2 11-25-1996 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1996-3 11-25-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 1996-4 11-25-1996 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1997-1 1-6-1997 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1997-2 6-9-1997 Obscene materials Ch. 109
Ord. No. 1997-3 6-9-1997 Amusement tax Ch. 152, Art. IV
Ord. No. 1997-4 4-14-1997 Wastewater
management
Superseded by
Ord. No. 2002-3
Ord. No. 1997-5 Number not used
§ 172-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:771
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1997-6 7-14-1997 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No. 1997-7 9-8-1997 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1997-8 9-8-1997 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1997-9 9-8-1997 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 1998-1 1-12-1998 Television amendment Ch. 155
Ord. No. 1998-2 5-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 1998-3 1-12-1998 Soil erosion and
sediment control
amendment
Ch. 138
Ord. No. 1998-4 11-23-1998 Condemnation and
acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
Ord. No. 1998-5 11-23-1998 Moratorium NCM
Ord. No. 1999-1 1-4-1999 Condemnation and
acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
Ord. No. 1999-2 Number not used
Ord. No. 1999-3 7-12-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 2000-1 2-28-2000 Manager amendment Ch. 24
Ord. No. 2000-2 5-8-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 2000-3 5-22-2000 Extension of moratorium NCM
Ord. No. 2000-4 9-11-2000 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2000-5 9-11-2000 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2000-6 9-11-2000 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No. 2000-7 9-11-2000 Slope conservation
amendment
Ch. 134
Ord. No. 2000-8 9-11-2000 Soil erosion and
sediment control
amendment
Ch. 138
§ DL-1 NEWTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:772
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 2000-9 9-11-2000 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2000-10
9-25-2000 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No.
2000-11
11-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 2001-1 3-26-2001 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2001-2 10-9-2001 Nonuniformed
employees pension fund
amendment
Ch. 30, Art. I
Ord. No. 2001-3 10-9-2001 Police pension fund
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 2012-03
Ord. No. 2001-4 12-27-2001 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2001-5 12-27-2001 Food establishments Ch. 86
Ord. No. 2001-6 12-27-2001 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
Ord. No. 2002-1 3-25-2002 Environmental Advisory
Council
Ch. 15
Ord. No. 2002-2 5-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 2002-3 8-12-2002 Wastewater
management
Ch. 168
Ord. No. 2002-4 8-12-2002 Incurrence of debt NCM
Ord. No. 2002-5 9-9-2002 Flood damage
prevention repealer
Ch. 91, reference
only
Ord. No. 2002-6 9-9-2002 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2002-7 9-23-2002 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No. 2002-8 10-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 2003-1 2-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2003-02
8-18-2003 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 162
Ord. No.
2003-03
7-14-2003 Police pension fund
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 2012-03
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:773
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2004-01
6-28-2004 Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 79
Ord. No.
2004-02
11-29-2004 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2004-03
12-13-2004 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2005-01
1-31-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2007-06
Ord. No.
2005-02
3-14-2005 Soil erosion and
sediment control
amendment; stormwater
management
Ch. 138; repealed
by Ord. No.
2013-07
Ord. No.
2005-03
Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2005-04
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2005-05
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2005-06
4-25-2005 Business registration Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-01
Ord. No.
2006-01
2-13-2006 Television amendment Ch. 155
Ord. No.
2006-02
2-13-2006 Streetlight districts
amendment
Ch. 42
Ord. No.
2006-03
2-13-2006 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
Ord. No.
2006-04
2-13-2006 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
Ord. No.
2006-05
2-13-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
right-of-way permit
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2012-07
Ord. No.
2006-06
9-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2007-01
1-22-2007 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
Ord. No.
2007-02
1-22-2007 Council of governments:
Delaware County
Consortium of
Governments
Ch. 12, Art. II
Ord. No.
2007-03
2-26-2007 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
§ DL-1 NEWTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:774
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007-04
Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2007-05
Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2007-06
11-26-2007 Local services tax Ch. 152, Art. I
Ord. No.
2008-01
6-23-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2008-02
6-23-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 2009-03
Ord. No.
2009-01
3-23-2009 Sewer connections and
use amendment
Ch. 130, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009-02
7-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2009-03
6-8-2009 Zoning Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2010-01
2-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2010-02
4-26-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 115
Ord. No.
2010-03
5-24-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2010-04
6-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2011-01
2-14-2011 Sewer connections and
use amendment
Ch. 130, Art. I
Ord. No.
2011-02
8-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2011-03
11-14-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2011-04
11-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2012-01
4-9-2012 Recreation boards:
Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 21, Art. II
Ord. No.
2012-02
3-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2012-03
6-25-2012 Police Pension Plan Ch. 30, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:775
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2012-04
6-25-2012 Property maintenance Ch. 127
Ord. No.
2012-05
9-10-2012 Uniform Construction
Code amendment
Ch. 79
Ord. No.
2012-06
9-10-2012 Sewer connections and
use amendment
Ch. 130, Art. I
Ord. No.
2012-07
9-10-2012 Street opening and
excavation; right-of-way
occupation and
obstruction
Ch. 145, Art. II;
Ch. 145, Art. V
Ord. No.
2013-01
3-11-2013 Business registration Repealed by Ord.
No. 2013-03
Ord. No.
2013-02
3-11-2013 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 130, Art. II
Ord. No.
2013-03
5-13-2013 Business registration Ch. 75
Ord. No.
2013-04
8-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2013-05
8-12-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2013-06
8-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2013-07
10-15-2013 Stormwater
management
Ch. 143
Ord. No.
2013-08
10-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2013-09
10-15-2013 Alarm devices
amendment
Ch. 55
Ord. No.
2013-10
10-28-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2013-11
10-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2013-12
11-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2014-01
6-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2014-02
10-14-2014 Sewers: on-lot and
community systems;
grinder pumps; holding
tanks
Ch. 130, Art. III
§ DL-1 NEWTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:776
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014-03
10-14-2014 Sewers: sewer
connections and use
Ch. 130, Art. I
Ord. No.
2014-04
11-10-2014 Brush, grass and weeds:
brush, grass, weeds,
trees and bushes
amendment; bamboo
Ch. 66, Art. I; Ch.
66, Art. II
Ord. No.
2015-01
3-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2015-02
4-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2015-03
9-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2015-04
9-28-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 127
Ord. No.
2016-01
1-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2016-02
3-28-2016 Solid Waste Authority
agreement amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2016-03
2-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2016-04
2-22-2016 False alarms: abuse of
911 system
Ch. 56, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-05
2-22-2016 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 162
Ord. No.
2016-06
2-22-2016 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 61, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-07
5-23-2016 General obligation notes NCM
Ord. No.
2016-08
5-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2016-09
5-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2016-10
6-27-2016 General obligation
bonds
NCM
Ord. No.
2016-11
9-12-2016 Sewers: grease traps Ch. 130, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2016-12
12-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2017-01
11-13-2017 Slope conservation
amendment
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:777
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017-02
11-27-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2017-03
12-11-2017 Streetlight District
amendment
Ch. 42
Ord. No.
2018-01
3-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No.
2018-02
4-23-2018 Noise Control Ch. 106
Ord. No.
2018-03
6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2018-04
9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2018-05
9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 172
Ord. No.
2018-06
9-24-2018 Bond NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2019-01
8-12-2019 Subdivision and Land
Development
Amendment
Ch. 148 6
Ord. No.
2019-02
8-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 172 6
Ord. No.
2019-03
8-12-2019 Property
Maintenance
Ch. 127 6
Ord. No.
2019-04
10-28-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 172 6
§ DL-1 NEWTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:778