Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-15-2012 by Ord. No. 1184]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of
Northampton, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 250, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Northampton, which shall be known
and is hereby designated as the “Code of the Borough of Northampton,”
hereinafter referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Northampton, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Northampton which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-19-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions.
(1) In addition to the changes and revisions described above, changes
and revisions of a substantive nature are hereby made to various
ordinances and resolutions included in the Code, as provided
below. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it
is the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. All
such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the
effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
(2) Specific changes.
(a) Chapter 83, Animals, Article I, Animal Control and
Maintenance. Section 83-2 is amended to repeal Subsection 5,
Registration and licensing of cats, and Subsection 6, regarding
designated feral cat areas.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
(b) Chapter 250, Zoning.
[1] Section 250-20A is amended as follows: "...with the special
exception use procedure established in § 404(2) Schedule
I, Schedule of the Controls..."
[2] Schedule II, Bulk and Coverage Controls, is amended to
delete notes a), b) and c).
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials are updated as indicated:
(1) “Department of Environmental Resources” or “DER” to
“Department of Environmental Protection” or “DEP.”
(2) “Department of Community Affairs” or “DCA” to “Department of
Community and Economic Development” or “DCED.”
(3) “Justice of the Peace,” “District Magistrate” and “District Justice”
to “Magisterial District Judge.”
(4) “Soil Conservation Service” or “SCS” to “Natural Resources
Conservation Service” or “NRCS.”
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 1-9
1:6
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 15, 2012.
§ 1-14 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 4
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance — See Ch. 24.
§ 4-1. Independent auditor established.
There is hereby provided for the appointment of an independent auditor for
the Borough of Northampton in accordance with the applicable law.
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 240.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:9

ARTICLE I
Northampton Borough Municipal Authority
[Adopted 8-9-1939 by Ord. No. 437 (Ch. 1, Part 4, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 8-1. Intention to organize authority.
It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the Borough
of Northampton to organize an Authority under the General Municipal
Authorities Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved June 28,
1935, P.L. 463, its amendments and supplements,1 for the purpose of
acquiring, owning and operating, or leasing, water works, water supply
works and a water distribution system, and for such other projects as may
from time to time be specified by the Borough of Northampton.
§ 8-2. Name of authority.
The name of the proposed authority is "Northampton Borough Municipal
Authority."
§ 8-3. Articles of incorporation. [Amended 5-11-1977 by Res. No.
11-77]
The amended Articles of Incorporation of said Authority are as follows:
1. The name of the Authority shall be Northampton Borough Municipal
Authority.
2. Authority and Term of Existence.
A. The Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1935, the Act of June 25, 1935, P.L. 465, since repealed, but
whose corporate existence and powers were continued under the
"Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended and supplemented.2
B. The term and existence of the Authority shall extend to April 30, in
the year 2027 A.D.
3. No authority has been organized under the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as
amended and supplemented, or is in existence for the incorporating
municipality named herein.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of
Northampton, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities at the time of
organization are:
1. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:11
[Here followed the names and addresses of the principal elected and
appointed officers at the time of incorporation in 1939.]
§ 8-4. Necessity for enactment.
This article is deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health,
peace, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough of
Northampton.
§ 8-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 8-4
1:12
Chapter 15
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
§ 15-1. Educational Service Agency established.
There hereby is established an Educational Service Agency in the Borough
of Northampton.
§ 15-2. Appointment and terms of members.
The Educational Service Agency shall be composed of the Borough
Manager, the Police Chief and the Borough Treasurer. Provided, that the
three individuals who are appointed at the time of the establishment of the
Educational Service Agency, that one term shall expire on the first day of
January of the first year after the establishment of the Agency, that the term
of one member shall expire on the first day of January after the second year
of the establishment of the Agency, and that the term of one member shall
expire on the first day of January after the third year of the establishment
of the Agency. All subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms
coinciding with the calendar year.
§ 15-3. Ineligibility of certain elected officials.
No elected Borough or school district official shall be eligible for
appointment or membership on the Educational Service Agency.
§ 15-4. Compensation.
The members of the Educational Service Agency shall not receive any
additional compensation for serving on this Agency other than their regular
rate of pay as fixed from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 15-5. Authority and function.
The function of the Educational Service Agency shall be to employ and
supervise school crossing guards also referred to as special school police
to direct traffic at and/or near schools. In order to enable the Educational
Service Agency to perform that function, the Borough delegates to the
Educational Service Agency the authority to appoint and supervise crossing
guards or special school police as set out in the Borough Code.
§ 15-6. Duties.
The Educational Service Agency shall have the following authority and
duties:
A. Submit a recommendation to Borough Council each year on the amount
of revenue needed for the employment of school crossing guards (this
can be included in the annual budget submitted by the Borough
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-6
1:13
§ 15-7. Transfer of moneys.
The Borough shall transfer and pay over to the Educational Service Agency
the moneys that the Borough is required to pay as compensation to special
school police under the Borough Code, or other agreement executed with
the School District, as provided in the Borough Code, as well as other
moneys as necessary to cover expenditures budgeted, for the Educational
Service Agency as provided in § 15-8 in this article. If the Agency so desires,
the accounts can be set up as part of the regular budget accounts in the
general fund.
§ 15-8. Duration of existence.
The Educational Service Agency hereby recognized and formally
established shall continue until changed or abolished by action of the
Borough or until the suspension of Act 108 of 19793 as adopted by the
legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accord with the terms
thereof.
Manager); employ and/or discharge crossing guards or special school
police to serve in the Borough.
B. Exercise supervision and control over crossing guards or special school
police by:
(1) Establishing, administering, and enforcing rules and regulations
for the work and conduct of the crossing guards or special school
police;
(2) Establishing work schedules and designating the locations where
and the time when the various individuals are to be on duty;
(3) Providing the supervision as necessary;
(4) Exercising any and all other prerogatives normally associated with
personnel management.
C. Make all payments for the services of school crossing guards or special
school police and make all other expenditures as prescribed by law.
These payments can be made through the regular accounting
procedure of the Borough.
D. Receive, in addition to payments by the Borough, any payments by the
school district or any other gift, grant, devise, or bequest.
E. Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its control, and
establish one or more separate bank accounts into which all income
shall be deposited and from which all expenditures shall be made. The
Agency can use the regular accounting procedures and accounts within
the general fund if they so desire.
3. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 15-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 15-8
1:14
Chapter 19
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 28. Police department — See Ch. 50.
§ 19-1. Establishment.
A local emergency management agency is hereby established and shall be
known as the "Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency."
§ 19-2. Authority.
The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency is
established pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Management
Services Code (35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.).
§ 19-3. General duties and responsibilities.
The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency shall have
the responsibility for emergency management and disaster response and
recovery within the Borough of Northampton. The Borough of Northampton
Emergency Management Agency shall also provide emergency
management and disaster response and recovery services outside the
Borough of Northampton as required by the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 19-4. Declaration of disaster emergency.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared by the Mayor or Borough
Council President. In addition, the appointed coordinator is hereby
authorized to declare a local disaster emergency subject to ratification
by the Northampton Borough Council within 72 hours of such
declaration.
B. A local disaster emergency shall only be declared upon finding by the
Mayor, Borough Council President, or appointed coordinator that a
disaster has occurred or is imminent.
C. The declaration of a local disaster emergency shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of 72 hours unless approved by the
Borough Council.
D. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and a
copy of any such order or proclamation shall be filed promptly with the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
§ 15-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:15
§ 19-5. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
Upon declaration of a disaster emergency, the Borough of Northampton,
pursuant to § 7501(c) of the Emergency Management Services Code,4 shall
be authorized to exercise the powers granted in this chapter without regard
to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the
employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase
of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds. In addition, upon the declaration of a disaster
emergency, the Borough of Northampton is authorized to avail itself of the
provisions of the Act of August 5, 1941, (P.L. 752, No. 286), known as the
"Civil Defense Act,"5 in connection with the employment of personnel in
local organizations established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 19-6. Local coordinator of emergency management.
E. Upon declaration of a local disaster emergency, the applicable response
and recovery aspects of the Borough of Northampton local emergency
management plan shall be activated, and all provisions for aid and
assistance thereunder shall be authorized.
A. The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency shall
have a Coordinator who shall be responsible for the planning,
administration, and operation of the agency subject to the direction and
control of the Borough Council.
B. The Coordinator of the Borough of Northampton Emergency
Management Agency shall be appointed by the Governor of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania upon recommendation of the Borough
Council. The Borough Council may recommend to the Governor a
candidate for Coordinator for emergency management activities. The
Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Coordinator shall
serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
C. The Coordinator of the Borough of Northampton Emergency
Management Agency shall:
(1) Be professionally competent and capable of planning, effecting and
coordinating operations among agencies of government and
controlling coordinated operations by local emergency
preparedness forces.
(2) Attend and successfully complete the first phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within one year after
appointment.
4. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501(c).
5. Editor's Note: See now 35 Pa.C.S.A § 7101 et seq.
§ 19-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 19-6
1:16
§ 19-7. Powers and duties of the emergency management agency.
The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency is hereby
directed to:
(3) Attend and successfully complete the second phase of the career
development program as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency within three years after
appointment.
(4) Attend basic and advanced seminars, workshops and training
conferences called by the Director of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency and/or its Director of Training and Education.
(5) Failure to attend and successfully complete the career
development program phases, as described above, or failure to
attend a prescribed training program for two consecutive years
shall be cause for replacement of the Coordinator of the Borough of
Northampton Emergency Management Agency.
(6) Responsibility for the professional in-service training of the
Coordinator of the Borough of Northampton Emergency
Management Agency shall rest with the Emergency Management
Coordinator of Northampton County.
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the
Borough of Northampton for the prevention and minimizing of injury
and damage caused by disaster, for prompt and effective response to
disaster and for disaster emergency relief and recovery in consonance
with the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Plan and the
Northampton County Emergency Management Plan.
B. Establish, equip, and staff an emergency operations center for the
Borough of Northampton.
C. Establish a warning and communications system for the Borough of
Northampton that will support governmental operations in
emergencies.
D. Provide essential facilities and equipment to those agencies and
organizations that have been assigned emergency functions under the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Provide individual and organization training programs for police
officers, fire fighters, rescue personnel, ambulance personnel, fire
police, emergency management volunteers and the general public to
insure prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency service.
F. Organize, prepare, and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment, and facilities necessary for disaster
emergency readiness, response and recovery.
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-7
1:17
§ 19-8. Emergency Management Advisory Council.
G. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of a disaster.
H. Execute and enforce such rules, regulations and orders as the Borough
of Northampton Emergency Management Agency may adopt pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
I. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agencies or
entities in achieving any purpose of this chapter.
J. Have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules, regulations, and orders of the
Governor and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
K. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
L. Make monthly reports to the Borough Council on the status and
programs of the Borough of Northampton Emergency Management
Agency, its personnel, programs, and plan.
M. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as may be adopted by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
N. Make timely recommendations to and secure the consent of the
Northampton Borough Council concerning the development of plans,
the acquisition of materials, supplies, and equipment and the
development of a budget for the agency, except as provided for in
disaster emergencies.
O. Identify areas within the Borough of Northampton that are particularly
vulnerable to disaster.
P. Upon request of Borough Council or the Borough Manager, assist the
Borough of Northampton and/or its police, fire, rescue, or emergency
medical services in handling and coordinating special, non-disaster
emergencies and situations.
A. In support of the programs and activities of the Borough of
Northampton Emergency Management Agency, the Borough Council
shall appoint, upon recommendation of the Emergency Management
Coordinator, an Emergency Management Advisory Council consisting
not more than 12 members. Members of the Emergency Management
Advisory Council shall include the Mayor, Council President, Council
Vice President, the Chief of Police, the Captain of the Fire Police,
Captain of the Ambulance Association, the Chief of the Fire
Department, Borough Manager, a practicing physician or nurse, a
representative of the Chapter of the American Red Cross and two atlarge
residents of the community.
§ 19-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 19-8
1:18
§ 19-9. Coordination, assistance and mutual aid.
The Coordinator of the Borough of Northampton Emergency Management
Agency shall develop and maintain mutual aid agreements with adjacent
political subdivisions for reciprocal emergency assistance. The agreements
shall be consistent with the plans and program of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency and the Northampton County Emergency
Management Agency. The agreements shall stipulate that direction of
emergency disaster assistance is the responsibility of the lower levels of
government affected, that the County Emergency Management Agency
shall provide coordination and support when more than one political
subdivision within Northampton County is affected, and that the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency or its area organization shall
provide coordination and support when two or more counties are affected.
In disaster emergencies, request for mutual aid assistance shall be referred
(1) With the exception of the at-large resident members, the members
of the Emergency Management Advisory Council shall service
continuously during their term of public office except for the
physician or nurse, who shall serve until replaced by the Borough
Council.
(2) Upon initial appointment to the Emergency Management Advisory
Council, all at-large resident representatives shall be appointed for
three-year terms.
(3) At-large resident members on the Emergency Management
Advisory Council shall serve not more than three consecutive
terms.
(4) Only designated members of the Emergency Management Advisory
Council may vote on matters before the Council.
B. The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Advisory
Council shall:
(1) Elect its own chairman and other officers as the body may deem
appropriate.
(2) Provide recommendations and assistance to the Coordinator as
deemed appropriate concerning the plans, activities, and role of
the Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency.
(3) Assist in the preparation and maintenance of the Northampton
Borough Disaster Emergency Plan.
(4) Recruit and assist in the training of emergency personnel and
represent the Borough of Northampton Emergency Management
Agency at training programs, seminars and public meetings.
(5) Provide whatever other aid or assistance that the Coordinator may
request.
§ 19-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9
1:19
to the organization, as outlined above, having responsibility for coordination
and, in time of emergency, it shall be the duty of the Borough of
Northampton Emergency Management Agency to render assistance in
accordance with these mutual aid agreements. In all cases, support services
provided from outside the affected area shall remain under the command
and control of the receiving area.
§ 19-10. Approvals and ratification of agreements.
§ 19-11. Gifts and grants of monies.
Any gift or grants of monies made to the Borough of Northampton
Emergency Management Agency or to the Borough of Northampton for the
payment of expenses incurred or to be incurred by or for the Emergency
Management Agency shall be deposited in the treasury of the Borough of
Northampton and shall be appropriated only for the purpose for which the
gift or grant was made.
§ 19-12. Representation on boards and agencies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the Borough
of Northampton Emergency Management Advisory Council from providing
representation to other boards or agencies, as outside emergency
management advisory boards, emergency health services councils, regional
communication committees, that coordinate with or otherwise impact the
delivery of emergency management services.
§ 19-13. Insignia and identifying marks.
The Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency shall, with
the approval of the Borough Council, adopt such insignia and/or other
identifying marks or markings as are necessary to ensure the correct,
prompt identification of its personnel, equipment and facilities.
A. Northampton Borough Council shall:
(1) Approve all expenditures of the Borough of Northampton
Emergency Management Agency in advance.
(2) Approve attendance and participation of personnel of the
Emergency Management Agency at training sessions, seminars,
and meetings.
(3) Review and approve the Northampton Borough Emergency
Management Plan.
B. All mutual aid agreements (§ 19-9) shall be ratified by the Borough
Council and by the governing bodies of the other affected municipalities
prior to implementation.
§ 19-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 19-14
1:20
§ 19-14. Applicability of state statutes.
The provisions of the Emergency Management Service Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 1978-323 (P.L. 1332)6 shall govern the
emergency management activities of the Borough of Northampton and the
Borough of Northampton Emergency Management Agency and its Borough
of Northampton Emergency Management Advisory Council except in
circumstances where the Emergency Management Services Code does not
address local provisions or conditions provided for by this chapter.
Chapter 24
FINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 4.
6. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:21

ARTICLE I
Collection Procedures for Money Owed Borough
[Adopted 5-9-1963 by Ord. No. 657 (Ch. 1, Part 3A, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 24-1. Cost plus 15% charged for services performed by Borough;
exception. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A charge of 15% shall be added to the actual cost of the work done
as payment for Borough services connected therewith, except when the
Borough's participation in the work is in conjunction with an agreement
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the reconstruction
of a state highway.
§ 24-2. Interest charged against delinquent accounts.
Interest at the rate of 6% shall be charged during any period of time that
any account for work done is delinquent, including nonpayment according
to a schedule as hereinafter set forth.
§ 24-3. Payment scheduling for balances of less than $500.
[Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Whenever the total cost (including the 15% charge) or the unpaid balance
of such work is less than $500, then the Borough Manager shall have the
authority to schedule payment thereof either in lump sum or by periodic
payments within the same calendar year, with final and full payment being
made not later than December 15.
§ 24-4. Quarterly payments of unpaid balances between $500 and
$1,000. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Whenever the total cost (including the 15% charge) or the unpaid balance
of such work is more than $500 but less than $1,000, then the Borough
Manager, with the approval and consent of the proper committee of
Borough Council, shall have the authority to schedule payment thereof by
quarterly payments extending into the calendar year following that during
which the work was performed, with final and full payment being made not
later than December 15 of the current year.
§ 24-5. Quarterly payments of unpaid balance over $1,000.
[Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Whenever the total cost (including the 15% charge) or the unpaid balance
of such work is more than $1,000, then the Borough Manager, with the
approval and consent of the proper committee of Borough Council, shall
have the authority to schedule payment thereof by quarterly payments
extending into the second calendar year following that during which the
work was performed, with final and full payment being made not later than
December 15 of the current year.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:23
§ 24-6. Appeals from payment schedule.
Any property owner claiming that the schedule of payments provided for
him as in §§ 24-3 through 24-5 above will impose undue hardship upon him
shall have the right of appeal to the Borough Council within 30 days of the
date of said plan, and the Borough Council may either grant the appeal and
provide a substitute schedule of payments or deny the appeal and thereby
confirm the original schedule of payments.
§ 24-7. Status report of accounts. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
The Borough Manager shall report all accounts where he has scheduled
payment in accordance with this article where the total cost (including the
15% charge), or the unpaid balance, was more than $500 to the Borough
Council at the next succeeding meeting, and he shall submit a summary
report of the status of all such accounts to the Borough Council at the last
meeting of each year.
§ 24-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 24-7
1:24
Chapter 28
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management agency — See Ch.
19.
Firemen's relief association — See Ch. 31.
Pension plans — See Ch. 43.
Police department — See Ch. 50.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 56.
§ 28-1. Appointment of Fire Chief, three assistants, and three
captains. [Amended 2-12-1954 by Ord. No. 526; 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
The Council of the Borough of Northampton shall biennially appoint a Chief;
a First Assistant Chief, a Second Assistant Chief, and a Third Assistant
Chief; and three Captains of the Fire Department.
§ 28-2. Qualifications of Fire Chief and assistants. [Amended
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Said Chief, his assistants, and his captains shall be citizens of the Borough
of Northampton and shall be members in good standing of a fire company
of said Borough.
§ 28-3. Tenure of Fire Chief and assistants. [Amended 2-12-1954 by
Ord. No. 526]
Said Chief of the Fire Department and his assistants shall serve for the
period of two years until their successors have been duly appointed and
their appointments confirmed.
§ 28-4. Duties of Fire Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to attend to all
fires and alarms, superintend and direct the operation of the several fire
companies of said Department; he shall have full control of all the men
and apparatus, issue and enforce all such orders as in his judgment may
be best calculated for the protection of property, the extinguishment of
fires and the welfare of the Department. He shall enforce all the rules and
regulations of the Fire Department, and the Borough ordinances pertaining
thereto. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be First Fire Marshal of the
Borough, and shall perform all duties pertaining to that office which are or
may be prescribed by law or ordinance. He shall visit all the firehouses and
make a personal examination of the same, at least once per month, examine
carefully the condition of the houses, etc., as to order and cleanliness.
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:25
§ 28-5. First, Second, and Third Assistant Chief assume duties of
Chief during absence. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
In the absence of the Chief of the Fire Department, the First Assistant shall
be in charge and assume the duties of Chief as set forth in § 28-4 hereof. In
the event of the absence of both the Chief and his First Assistant, then the
Second Assistant shall be in charge and assume the duties of the Chief, and
so on, as hereinbefore set forth.
§ 28-6. Compensation. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 846;
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Council shall fix the compensation to be paid to the Chief, Assistants, and
Captains of the Fire Department at the time of their appointment.
§ 28-7. Duties of members of Fire Department.
It shall be the duty of every member of the Fire Department to obey the
rules and regulations of the Department, as well as the constitution and
bylaws of their respective companies, and upon hearing an alarm of fire, to
repair at once to the fire apparatus of the company to which he may belong,
and render all possible assistance in the extinguishing of conflagrations and
fires.
§ 28-8. Repairs to fire apparatus. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No.
846; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
All repairs to fire apparatus under the cost of $1,000 may be done without
approval of Council. All repairs to apparatus over $1,000 shall be done only
after approval by Council.
Chapter 31
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management agency — See Ch.
19.
Fire department — See Ch. 28.
§ 31-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
A. The following association(s) is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough of
Northampton:
(1) Northampton Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 28-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 31-1
1:26
§ 31-2. Certification to auditor general.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage
of service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such
certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 31-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act
of December 18, 1984, No. 205, § 701 et seq.,7 as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s)
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 38
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension plans — See Ch. 43. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 56.
§ 38-1. Office of Manager created.
The Office of the Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Northampton, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time
to abolish such office.
B. The above named association(s) have been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above named association of the Borough of Northampton is
designated the proper association to receive such funds as are due and
payable to the Borough Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of
Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 31-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-2
1:27
§ 38-2. Appointment; tenure, removal; filling of vacancy. [Amended
10-18-1957 by Ord. No. 570; 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 850]
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all of the members of
Council. While said office exists, the Council shall, from time to time, and
whenever there is a vacancy, elect by vote of a majority of all the members,
one person to fill said office, subject to removal by the Council at any time
by a vote of the majority of all the members.
§ 38-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in,
or his knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough, or
of the state of Pennsylvania, at the time of his appointment; but as soon as
possible thereafter, he shall become, and during his tenure as Manager shall
remain, a resident of the Borough.
§ 38-4. Bond. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 850]
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give bond
to the Borough, with a bonding company as surety, in an amount to be
determined by Council.
§ 38-5. Salary. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 850]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 38-6. General powers and duties. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No.
850]
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and duties shall
relate to the general management of all Borough business not expressly,
by statute or ordinance, imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to approval by Council, any of his nonlegislative powers and duties.
§ 38-7. Specific powers and duties. [Amended 5-6-1954 by Ord. No.
537; 1-19-1961 by Ord. No. 619; 6-28-1971 by Ord. No. 804;
7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 850; 3-7-1985 by Ord. No. 971]
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager shall
include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
§ 38-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 38-7
1:28
not have been delegated to the Manager by the Mayor or by Council, as
the case may be.
B. He shall recommend to Council the hiring and, when he shall deem it
necessary for the good of the service, the suspension or discharge of all
employees under his supervision, and, as authorized by Council, shall
hire, suspend or discharge such employees; provided, that persons
covered by the Civil Service provisions of the Borough Code shall be
hired, suspended or discharged in accordance with such provisions.
C. He shall prepare and submit to Council not later than the first day of
December of each year a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or
an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board, or officer, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he requests. The Manager
shall review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the
budget to the Council.
D. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
E. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, execute and enforce the laws
of the commonwealth, and ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the
Borough.
F. He shall hold the offices of Borough Manager, Borough Secretary and
Sewer Manager, and shall perform all the duties of all such officers, in
addition to the specific duties assigned to the Manager by this chapter.
G. He shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council and of its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and he shall
receive notice of all special meetings of Council and of its committees.
H. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
I. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs;
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances and
such other reports as the Council shall request; and shall make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
J. He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
K. He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
L. He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Borough.
§ 38-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:29
§ 38-8. Manager delegates person to serve during absence or
illness.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the Borough, he shall
delegate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform such duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
Chapter 43
PENSION PLANS
Chapter 47
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
M. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
Borough officer by statute.
N. He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
Borough's claims.
O. He shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments,
and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by Council,
make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
P. He shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all
matters that the best interests of the Borough and of the general public
may be maintained.
Q. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by
him, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager
shall report thereon to Council.
§ 38-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 38-8
1:30
§ 47-1. Planning Commission established. [Amended 7-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 1048]
A Borough Planning Commission, to be composed of five members, is
hereby established for the Borough of Northampton. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed
for necessary and reasonable expenses not to exceed $25 per regularly
scheduled meeting. The Borough Manager, the Borough Solicitor and the
Borough Engineer shall be considered ex officio members of the Planning
Commission.
§ 47-2. Appointment; term and vacancy.
Each member of the Planning Commission shall be a resident of the
Borough of Northampton and shall be appointed by the Borough Council
for a term of four years or until his successor shall be appointed and
qualified, except that the terms of the initial members to be appointed to the
Commission of five members shall be so fixed that no more than two shall
be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year; namely, one
member for a two-year period, two for a three-year period, and two for a
four-year period. The chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly
notify the Borough Council concerning vacancies and such vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 47-3. Removal.
Any member of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed may
be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office or for just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council, after such
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a
vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
§ 47-4. Conduct of business.
A. The Commission shall elect its own chairman, vice chairman and
secretary, who shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
The Commission may make and alter rules, bylaws, and regulations to
govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the Borough of
Northampton and the laws of the commonwealth. The Commission shall
make a full record of its business and shall annually make a written
report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the Borough Council.
Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary, or as
requested by the Borough Council. All official actions of the Planning
Commission shall be made by resolution, concurred in by a majority of
those members present who represent a quorum. Such resolutions shall
be numbered consecutively for each calendar year and shall be signed
by the chairman and attested to by the secretary of the Commission.
§ 38-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:31
§ 47-5. Powers and duties of Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and shall be required to:
Administrative assistance shall be provided by the Borough Manager as
determined between the chairman of the Commission and the Borough
Manager.
B. The Planning Commission shall meet at least quarterly and such
meetings shall be open to the public. It may schedule other work
sessions privately as required.
A. Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Borough
and present it for the consideration of the Borough Council and the
general public.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its actions. All records and files
shall be maintained by and in the possession of the Borough Council at
the Borough Municipal Building.
C. Prepare and present for consideration of the Borough Council, and after
adoption, maintain and make recommendations for changes to:
(1) An official map of the Borough.
(2) A zoning ordinance.
(3) Subdivision and land development regulations.
(4) Planned residential development regulations.
(5) A building code.
D. Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
E. Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies
and individuals as to the effectiveness of the development and planning
proposals of such agencies and individuals.
F. Hold public hearings and meetings.
G. Require from other departments and agencies of this Borough, through
their proper channels and through such individuals as may be in
positions of authority, such available information as relates to the work
of the Planning Commission.
H. In the performance of its functions, to enter upon any land to make
examination and surveys either after permission has been obtained
from the owner or after public notice.
I. Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the obligations and duties imposed by this chapter.
§ 47-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 47-6
1:32
§ 47-6. Approval of Borough Engineer.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of
the Planning Commission which involves engineering considerations shall
be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
§ 47-7. Advisory Commission.
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Borough Council that any
recommendations by the Northampton Borough Planning Commission shall
be advisory only.
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management agency — See Ch.
19.
Fire department — See Ch. 28.
Pension plans — See Ch. 43.
§ 50-1. Police Department established.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Northampton. Provided, the Police Department previously created in and
for the Borough of Northampton shall constitute the Police Department
hereby created.
§ 50-2. Subordinate classifications.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department shall be
established such classifications of police officers as the Council shall from
time to time appoint and designate. The number of persons to serve in such
subordinate classifications, on a full-time and/or part-time basis, and the
compensation of each shall be determined by the Borough Council from
time to time.
§ 50-3. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
§ 50-4. Certain authority of Mayor over police delegated to
Manager. [Added 3-13-1975 by Res. No. 9-75]
The Mayor of the Borough of Northampton does hereby delegate, with the
permission of the Borough Council, authority to the Borough Manager in
accordance with the Borough Code and the desires of the public officials
§ 47-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:33
aforementioned to manage, regulate and administrate the following areas
of police activity:
§ 50-5. Authorization for police overtime. [Added 3-13-1975 by Res.
No. 11-75]
Police overtime shall only be authorized with the prior permission of the
Borough Manager, with the following exceptions:
Chapter 56
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 38. Pension plans — See Ch. 43.
A. Administrative procedures in compliance with the procedure manual of
standard operating procedures and rules and regulations as well as all
other administrative policies and procedures previously or later
adopted by the Borough Council and the Mayor.
B. Management, control and regulation of police overtime.
C. Any other responsibilities directly or indirectly connected with the
above as well as any other authorities later delegated by the same
public officials.
A. Emergencies (defined as a sudden, generally unexpected occurrence
demanding immediate action; i.e., crime, law enforcement, hot line
requests).
B. Court attendance.
§ 50-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 50-5
1:34
ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 11-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1074 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 101, of the
1993 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 56-1. Salary of Mayor.
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Northampton shall be hereby
fixed at $2,600 annually beginning January 1, 1997.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:35

ARTICLE II
Council Members
[Adopted 11-27-1996 by Ord. No. 1075 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 102, of the
1993 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 56-2. Compensation of councilmen.
The salary of the President of Council shall be fixed at $2,500 annually and
the salary of each Council member shall be set at $2,250 annually beginning
January 1, 1997.
§ 56-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-2
1:37
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 70
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 28. Police department — See Ch. 50.
§ 70-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Audible Alarms
Ordinance."
§ 70-2. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found that with consistency, at certain times, a threat to public
health, safety and welfare arises from the strain upon municipal services
created by the response to false audible alarms in the Borough of
Northampton. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the amount of false
audible alarms, as well as the excessive strain upon municipal services
resulting from such unnecessary audible alarms and to insure that the
municipal services will not be hampered by said alarms. Furthermore, to
advise the inhabitants of Northampton Borough that effective November 7,
1994, at 09:00 hours, the Northampton Borough Police Department will no
longer monitor any audible alarms that are connected to the Northampton
Police Department.
§ 70-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM — Any device designed to provide, or which will provide an audible,
visual or other type of signal, which is intended to advise or alert municipal
or private services to respond to an emergency in the Borough of
Northampton.
DESIGNATED AREA — The entire Borough of Northampton, including
residential, commercial and any with all other structures or places.
PERSON(S) — A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or any other
entity.
§ 70-4. General rules.
Effective November 7, 1994, at 0:900 hours, the Northampton Borough
Police Department, and all other municipal services, including but not
limited to fire, ambulance or emergency, will cease to monitor any alarms
that are connected to the Northampton Police Department. Inhabitants are
§ 56-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 70-4
1:38
advised to have all said alarms removed and disconnected prior to said date
and are suggested to contact a private alarm company.
§ 70-5. False alarm.
No person shall cause or permit an alarm to be in a state of disrepair or
allow said alarm to be in a state of disrepair or cause the emitting of the
signal thereof when there is no actual intrusion and/or fire or emergency.
§ 70-6. Exclusions.
This chapter shall not apply to alarms originating in any municipal,
emergency, police, fire, ambulance or other governmental agency/building
operating within the Borough.
§ 70-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall violate the false
alarm provision of this chapter shall, upon first offense per calendar year,
receive a written warning; upon second offense per calendar year, pay a
fine of $25; upon third offense per calendar year, pay a fine of $50; and
upon every subsequent offense per year, shall pay a fine of $100, plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be subject to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 74
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 70-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7
1:39

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 8-12-1982 by Ord. No. 949 (Ch. 6, Part 3, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 74-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Liquor and malt or brewed beverages as said
terms are defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, Act of April 12, 1951,
P.L. 90, as amended.8
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or any substantial group
thereof has access but shall not include an establishment licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board or a Borough park when a valid permit
for the use of alcoholic beverages has been obtained. A "public place" shall
include but not be limited to such places as public sidewalks, public streets,
parking lots, and the area to the front, rear, or adjacent to any school, store,
restaurant, tavern, or other place of business.
§ 74-2. Prohibited behavior.
§ 74-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person found guilty of a violation of §§ 74-1 and 74-2 shall be obliged
to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $600 and costs and, in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in
any public place within the Borough of Northampton.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any opened vessel
containing any alcoholic beverage while in or about any public place
within the Borough of Northampton.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
on the property of another except with the consent of the owner(s) or
legal occupant(s) thereof.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any opened vessel
containing any alcoholic beverage on the property of another except
with the consent of the owner(s) or legal occupant(s) thereof.
8. Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:41
Chapter 78
AMUSEMENTS
§ 78-1. Amusement license required. [Amended 2-23-1937 by Ord.
No. 429; 5-16-1946 by Ord. No. 462; 6-6-1946 by Ord. No. 464;
1-8-1953 by Ord. No. 495; 12-4-1958 by Ord. No. 589; 7-18-1974 by
Ord. No. 845; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Unless a license has been previously obtained and payment therefor made
in advance as hereinafter prescribed, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation, whether principal or agent, to show, exhibit or conduct
in the Borough of Northampton public entertainments, except upon the
payment of a license fee as established from time to time by the Borough
Council. Provided, no license fee shall be charged for lectures on scientific
or literary subjects, or for exhibitions of art conducted by citizens of the
Borough, nor for public entertainments given for benevolent, religious or
charitable purposes; provided further, that no public entertainment shall be
conducted later than 12:00 midnight, unless permission to do so is given
by the Mayor at the time of securing the license, which extension of time
shall not be later than 2:00 a.m.; provided further, that all licenses must
be applied for before 12:00 noon, for any afternoon public entertainment
and before 5:00 p.m. for any evening public entertainment; and provided
further, that no license or permit which has been issued shall be extended or
renewed for any cause whatsoever beyond the time specified in the license.
§ 78-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-12-1954 by Ord. No.
524; 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 845; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 83
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 135.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 74-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 78-2
1:42
ARTICLE I
Animal Control and Maintenance
[Adopted 2-9-1978 by Ord. No. 916 (Ch. 2, Part 1, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 83-1. Unauthorized animals. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048; 4-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1071]
It shall be unlawful to keep any pigs, chickens, sheep, cows, horses,
donkeys, pot-bellied pigs, rats, mice, ducks, geese, ostriches, pigeons (other
than homing pigeons and racing pigeons), ferrets, ocelots, monkeys,
chinchillas, poisonous and nonpoisonous snakes, scorpions, poisonous and
nonpoisonous frogs, skunks or wild animals of any kind on any properties.
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal in a manner which causes foul,
nauseous or other animal-type odors to permeate beyond the property
boundary. Said determination of the violation to be within the discretion
of the Health Officer. It shall be unlawful to keep more than six cats or
dogs or any combination thereof on a property within a residential district
as defined by Chapter 250, Zoning, or in any house. The Board of Health
of Northampton shall have the authority to prohibit the keeping of other
animals which it determines are detrimental to the public and/or safety
of the residents of the Borough. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the
keeping of more than six dogs or cats in any business regularly engaged in
the retail sale of animals; provided, that all appropriate local, State and/or
county licenses are held. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the keeping of
any animal otherwise prohibited under this article for commercial purposes
in the Conservation Zoning District; provided, that the said use is otherwise
lawful and appropriately licensed, and that the animals are not permitted
to run at large. Nothing in this article shall prohibit anyone who owns and
maintains homing pigeons and racing pigeons prior to the effective date of
this article, said resident shall be allowed to keep said animals until such
time as they pass away; provided, that said animals are registered with the
Animal Control Officer within 90 days of the effective date of this article.
§ 83-2. Regulation of animals. [Amended 4-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1071]
A. Defecation by animals. No person owning, harboring, keeping, or in
charge of any animal shall cause, suffer or allow such animal to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the
owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to
that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which shall be
used to curb such animals under the following conditions:
(1) The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such animal by any sanitary method approved
by the Board of Health.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:43
§ 83-3. Accumulation of animal waste.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit the accumulation of
any animal waste on any residential property within the Borough.
§ 83-4. Procedures regarding animal bites.
In the event that any person sustains a bite by any animal, such person or
his agent, or in the case of a juvenile, the person having legal custody, shall
as soon as it is practical, report the bite to the Borough Police Department.
The Chief of Police or police officers designated by him shall investigate the
complaint and make contact with the owner of the offending animal. The
owner of the offending animal shall be required to confine the animal for a
period of 10 days. Such confinement shall be in a manner which guarantees
that the animal in question has no contact with any other animals during
the confinement period. If the owner of the animal agrees to adequately
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any animal curbed in accordance with the provisions of
this article, in a sanitary manner approved by the Board of Health.
B. Control of animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any
animal to fail to keep at all times such animal either: confined within the
premises of the owner; or firmly secured by means of a collar and chain
or other device so that it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it
is secured; or under the reasonable control of some person, or when
engaged in lawful hunting or field training, accompanied by an owner
or handler.
C. Noise violations by animals. No person owning, harboring, keeping or
in charge of any animal shall cause, suffer, or allow such animals to
make noise to the extent that it becomes a nuisance to other persons.
Such noise shall be considered a nuisance when the residents of two or
more separate households file complaints. However, any official
authorized to enforce this article may, in the absence of two separate
complaints, deem the noise created by any animal to be a nuisance if
the noise is in his presence and he considers it to be a substantial
infringement upon the rights to peace of residents of the neighborhood.
D. Feeding of animals which run at large. It shall be unlawful for any
person to feed any cat, dog, duck, goose, pigeon or other animal which
runs at large or congregates in the Borough, unless the animals are in a
designated feral cat area managed by the Northampton Borough
Animal Shelter or the resident(s) has/have been expressly instructed by
the Animal Control Officer to feed said animal and take said animal to
the shelter.9
9. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 5, Registration and licensing of cats, and Subsection 6,
regarding designated feral cat areas, which followed this subsection, were repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 83-4
1:44
confine the animal, he shall indicate his intention to comply on an Animal
Confinement Agreement Form supplied by the Police Department. If the
owner refuses or fails to confine the animal or if the confinement measures
taken by the owner are insufficient to guarantee separation of the animal
from other animals, the Police Department shall seize the animal and
confine it for the ten-day period. Cost of such confinement shall be borne
by the owner of the animal. At the expiration of the ten-day confinement
period, the animal in question shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian
to guarantee that the animal is free of rabies. A copy of the veterinarian's
findings shall be forwarded to the Borough Police Department. The cost of
this examination shall also be borne by the owner of the animal in question.
§ 83-5. Liability for damages.
Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of any animal shall
be responsible at all times for the actions of that animal. Such person shall
be liable for any injury or death wrongfully caused by such animal to any
person or any other animal and for the property damage sustained by any
person as a result of the actions of such animal.
§ 83-6. Seizure of animals.
The Animal Control Officer or other persons authorized by the Chief of
Police or Borough Manager shall have the authority to enter any premises
within the Borough and seize any animal which is sick or injured and is not
being properly cared for or where any animal is in any way being maltreated
to the extent that the animal's health is threatened. Such animal shall be
provided with adequate shelter and shall be given whatever professional
care is needed to restore it to health. In the event that a licensed
veterinarian determines that the animal is suffering and is beyond recovery,
steps shall be taken to dispose of the animal. The cost of this care or
disposal shall be borne by the owner of the animal. The owner of any animal
seized under this section shall have the right to have the animal returned
at such time that adequate steps have been taken to guarantee the proper
care for the animal and provided that there is no history of animal abuse
by the individual. The owner of a seized animal shall initiate the return of
the animal by filing with the Police Department a Request of Seized Animal
Form. Such form shall detail the steps taken by the owner to guarantee
the future safety of the animal. This form shall be reviewed by the Animal
Control Officer, who shall determine whether the animal shall be returned.
In the event that the owner does not wish the return of the animal or
where there is a history of animal abuse or where the owner refuses to take
reasonable steps to guarantee the future safety of the animal, the Animal
Control Officer shall take appropriate steps to place the animal.
§ 83-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Health Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or any official so designated by
the Borough Manager.
§ 83-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-8
1:45
§ 83-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 83-8
1:46
ARTICLE II
Waterfowl
[Adopted 11-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1069 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 83-9. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Waterfowl Ordinance."
§ 83-10. Purpose.
Relating to prohibiting the feeding of migratory waterfowl or creating
any condition causing a congestion of said waterfowl which results in an
accumulation of waterfowl droppings or damage to plants or property or
which results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or welfare,
reading in words and figures as follows.
§ 83-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL — Shall include those species of birds not
otherwise defined as a domesticated animal in this article, commonly known
as swans, geese, brants, river and sea ducks and any other waterfowl falling
under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Game Commission or otherwise
defined by the laws of this commonwealth as wild birds, game birds or
waterfowl.
§ 83-12. Prohibition of feeding.
It shall be unlawful for any person either to:
§ 83-13. Enforcement.
A. Feed any migratory waterfowl, wild bird or game bird.
B. Create any condition, or allow any condition to exist, which results in a
congregation or congestion of the foregoing birds which:
(1) Results in an accumulation of feces or droppings.
(2) Results in damage to flora, fauna, on private or public property.
(3) Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(4) Results in a threat to the health, safety or welfare of said migratory
waterfowl.
A. Health Officer's duty to abate a waterfowl nuisance. Whenever the
Health Officer becomes aware that migratory waterfowl are being fed
§ 83-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-13
1:47
in violation of this article, or that a congregation or congestion of said
migratory waterfowl, as prohibited by this article exists, he shall:
(1) After notifying and consulting with the appropriate Pennsylvania
Game Commission official, declare that a nuisance exists.
(2) Shall give notice of the nuisance to the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which the nuisance exists or the feeding is
occurring. Notice shall be deemed sufficient if it shall have been
served either personally, or by posting such notice upon the
property in question or by mailing such notice through the United
States mail; mailed notice to be deemed served upon proof that
such notice was deposited in the United States mail, first-class
postage prepaid and addressed, in the case of an individual, to his
business address, residence address or such address as the records
of the assessor shall reveal to be his address for tax purposes; or, in
the case of a corporation, to the registered office or agent of such
corporation as the records of the Secretary of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania shall reveal. If the owner of the property is the
commonwealth, service shall be upon the Pennsylvania Game
Commission. If the owner of the property is the county, service shall
be upon the county executive. If the owner of the property is the
Borough of Northampton, service shall be upon Borough Council.
Such notice shall order the nuisance to be immediately abated and/
or that such feeding shall immediately stop.
B. Health Officer's power to remove a congregation.
(1) The Health Officer shall have all powers necessary, upon
application by a citizen, or at his own discretion, to disperse or
remove any congregation or congestion of migratory waterfowl by
any lawful means.
(2) Before taking any steps to remove or disperse any congestion or
congregation of migratory waterfowl, the officer shall meet and
confer with the appropriate Commission official, and with the
advice and consent of that official, determine the appropriate
method and means of removing or dispersing the migratory
waterfowl considering first the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Borough of Northampton, and, second, the health,
safety and welfare of the migratory waterfowl.
(3) Whenever the officer, after consultation with the Pennsylvania
Game Commission, determines that waterfowl shall be dispersed
by scare tactics or noise tactics, he may delegate implementation of
the plan developed by his consultations to any responsible citizen
or citizens in the affected neighborhood. This subsection shall not
be construed to authorize any private citizen to discharge any
firearm or to use any device which launches a projectile of any type.
(4) The Health Officer shall apply for and secure all permits necessary
by law prior to taking any action.
§ 83-13 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 83-13
1:48
§ 83-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. The continuation
of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the
violation may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
C. Avian nuisances. Whenever the Health Officer becomes aware that
birds, not otherwise protected, regulated or controlled by federal or
state law, rule or regulation, are congregating or flocking together in
such numbers as to cause a health hazard or are interfering with the
peace, quiet, comfort or repose of the inhabitants of the Borough of
Northampton, he may take whatever steps are necessary to remove or
disperse the congregation or flock.
D. Health Officer may delegate certain powers.
(1) In order to remove or disperse congregations or flocks of birds
constituting a nuisance as defined by this article, the Health Officer
may delegate the implementation of his dispersal plan to any
responsible citizen or citizens in the affected neighborhood by
permit, specifying the name of the permittee, date of issuance, date
of expiration and details of the plan to be delegated.
(2) This article shall not be construed to empower the Health Officer to
authorize any private citizen to discharge any firearm or to use any
device which launches a projectile of any type.
§ 83-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-14
1:49
Chapter 90
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 90-1. Definition. [Amended 2-12-1954 by Ord. No. 528]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Shall include every device propelled by human power upon
which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is
over 20 inches in diameter.
§ 90-2. Registration.
Every bicycle owned wholly or in part by a resident of the Borough of
Northampton, except such as are carried in stock by dealers, shall be
registered with the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the owner
to furnish a complete description of each bicycle on an application form
provided for this purpose, which upon approval shall constitute registration.
Registrations shall be serially numbered and filed as a public record.
§ 90-3. Identification tag required; registration and reregistration
fees. [Amended 6-4-1964 by Ord. No. 676; 5-14-1970 by Ord. No.
784]
The Police Department shall, upon registration of a bicycle, affix an
identification tag, serially numbered to correspond with the registration
of such bicycle. Such tag shall remain affixed unless removed for cause
or replacement. A charge of $0.50 shall be made for the registration and
tagging of each bicycle. A charge of $1 shall be made for reregistration at
other than the dates announced therefor by the Chief of Police.
§ 90-4. Expiration of registration. [Amended 6-4-1964 by Ord. No.
676; 5-14-1970 by Ord. No. 784]
Registrations shall expire every two years on the first day of June beginning
on the first day of June 1972, and no extension of this time shall be provided
except for reason upon order by the Borough Council or by the Mayor.
Reregistration can be made within 30 days prior to the expiration date on
the dates announced therefor by the Chief of Police; provided, however,
that current reregistration shall be made as soon as possible on the dates
announced therefor by the Chief of Police.
§ 83-14 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 90-5
1:50
§ 90-5. Change of ownership.
Within 10 days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed
ownership, or been dismantled, such information shall be reported to the
Police Department by the person in whose name the registration was made.
§ 90-6. Riding bicycle without registration and tag unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle upon any street or public place within
the Borough, unless said bicycle shall have been properly registered and
tagged as herein provided.
§ 90-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-12-1954 by Ord. No.
528; 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 847; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 105
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 47.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 125.
Numbering of properties — See Ch. 162.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-7
1:51

ARTICLE I
Code Enforcement Office
[Adopted 10-9-1972 by Ord. No. 823 (Ch. 5, Part 1, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 105-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough of Northampton."
§ 105-2. Establishment of Office of Code Enforcement.
§ 105-3. Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Creation of Office of Code Enforcement. There is hereby created by the
Council of the Borough an office of the Borough to be known as the
"Office of Code Enforcement." Said office shall have the responsibility
for administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and of
those other codes and/or ordinances of the Borough which designate
said Office of Code Enforcement as their official administrative and
enforcement agency.
B. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed by
the Borough Council, a Code Enforcement Officer who shall be in
charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Northampton. The Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise such other
employees or assistants as shall be necessary for the administration
and execution of the responsibilities of said Office.
C. Relief from personal liability. The Code Enforcement Officer or other
official or employee shall not, while acting for the Borough, render
himself liable personally because of any act or omission as required or
permitted in the discharge of his official duties. Any suit instituted
against such Code Enforcement Officer, official or employee, because of
any act performed by him in the lawful discharge of his duties, shall be
defended by the Solicitor of the Borough and in no case will said officer,
official or employee be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding.
D. Official record. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Office of Code Enforcement and all such records shall
be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times.
A. Enforcement by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall enforce and administer all of the provisions of this article
and of those other applicable codes and ordinances which establish the
Office of Code Enforcement as their official administration and
enforcement agency.
B. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. The duties of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall include the receipt of applications, the
issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders, the making of
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:53
§ 105-4. Permits, certificates and fees. [Amended 5-7-1981 by Ord.
No. 939; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
inspections to determine conformance with applicable codes and
ordinances, the undertaking of research and investigations, the
establishment of appropriate rules, the keeping of records, the issuance
of written annual reports and such other activities as may be required.
C. Right of entry.
(1) In the discharge of his duties, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative shall, upon showing proper
identification, have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour,
any structure or premises in the Borough to enforce the provisions
of this article and of those other applicable codes and ordinances.
The assistance and cooperation of all other Borough officials,
including Police and Fire Departments, shall be available to the
Code Enforcement Officer to assist in the performance of his duties
and in securing right of entry.
(2) The owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge of any
structure or premises shall give the Code Enforcement Officer free
access thereto and it shall be unlawful to refuse or impede
entrance of the Code Enforcement Officer to said structure or
premises for the purpose of making any required inspection.
(3) If any such owner, operator or other occupant or other person in
charge refuses or impedes any required or lawful inspection, the
Borough may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order
that such owner, occupant or person in charge shall cease and
desist with such interference.
A. Permit required. An application for a permit shall be required in
accordance with the provisions of those other applicable codes and
ordinances which the Office of Code Enforcement has the responsibility
to administer. Said application shall be submitted in such form as may
be prescribed by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be
accompanied by any required fee.
B. Action on application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said
application to determine compliance with those other applicable codes
and ordinances of the Borough and shall, within 15 days after filing,
either approve or reject said application. If said application is rejected,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall inform the applicant in writing,
stating the reasons for such rejection.
C. Required fees.
(1) Applicants for permits required by any of the following applicable
codes and ordinances shall pay, at the time of application, to the
Code Enforcement Officer, for use by the Borough, fees as
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council:
§ 105-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 105-4
1:54
§ 105-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No.
879; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
(a) BOCA National Building Code.
(b) BOCA National Plumbing Code.
(c) National Electrical Code.
(d) BOCA National Fire Prevention Code.
(e) CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
(f) BOCA Mechanical Code.
(2) All permits granted under any of the above applicable codes and
ordinances shall be good for a period of one year, provided that
extensions may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer for
good reason; except that any permit granted for demolition
activities shall be valid for six months only and if such demolition
work is not completed within that time, any bond posted by the
applicant shall be forfeited.
D. Certificates. The following certificates shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of those other applicable codes or ordinances which
the Office of Code Enforcement has the responsibility to administer:
(1) Certificate of use and occupancy. In accordance with the applicable
section of the BOCA Basic Building Code, a certificate of use and
occupancy shall be required, and no new building or portion of an
existing building which is enlarged or altered, shall be used or
occupied in whole or in part, until such a certificate of use and
occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) Certificate of approval. In accordance with the applicable sections
of the BOCA Basic Building Code, a certificate of approval shall be
required for any electrical or plumbing work completed under the
provisions of the applicable codes and ordinances. All applicants
shall apply to the Office of Code Enforcement for such a certificate
of approval within 30 days of the completion of the building,
structure, work or premises.
(3) Other certificates. Any other permits, certificates or licenses as
required by the applicable codes and ordinances shall be obtained
by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of said
applicable codes and ordinances. Application for such permits,
certificates or licenses shall be made to the Code Enforcement
Officer.
A. Procedure in case of violations. Whenever the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this article, or of the other
applicable codes and ordinances, or of any rule or regulation adopted
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:55
§ 105-6. Variances and appeals. [Amended 8-13-1981 by Ord. No.
944; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
responsible owner, operator or occupant as provided hereafter. Said
notice shall consist of the following:
(1) It shall be in writing and shall be signed by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(2) It shall include a statement of the reasons why the notice is being
issued and the remedial actions required.
(3) It shall allow a reasonable time for the initiation and correction of
the violation alleged or of the remedial actions required except
where emergency conditions exist which require immediate
corrective action.
B. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Provided: each day's
failure to comply with any such provision or requirement or any such
order shall constitute a separate offense. Provided further: the
imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the solicitor
representing the Borough from initiating appropriate actions or
proceedings at law, or in equity, to effect the purposes of this article.
A. Code Hearing Board. There is hereby established a Code Hearing Board
consisting of five members as appointed by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Northampton, said members to be appointed at the regular
meeting of Borough Council in January of each year to hold office for
two-year terms with the exception that the original Board, however,
shall have three members thereof appointed for three years and two
members thereof appointed for two years, and thereafter two members
shall be appointed during the odd-numbered years and three members
shall be appointed during the even-numbered years.
B. Powers of the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall have
the following powers and duties:
(1) Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or on request of any Borough official, the Code
Hearing Board shall decide any questions involving the
interpretation of any provision of this article or of those other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Variances. The Code Hearing Board may grant a variance where
the strict application of this article or of those other applicable
codes would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
and where the public health and safety shall not be jeopardized.
§ 105-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 105-6
1:56
(3) Decide appeals. The Code Hearing Board shall hear all appeals
made to it and, depending on its findings, shall decide whether
such appeals shall be granted.
C. Requests for appeals or variances. Any person requesting a variance or
aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or by any
other employee or official charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article or of those other applicable codes or
ordinances, may take an appeal to the Code Hearing Board. All appeals
shall be made in writing stating the grounds upon which the appeal is
based and shall be transmitted to the Office of Code Enforcement. An
appeal must be taken within 15 days of the action or of the receipt by
written notice of any decision or ruling which is being appealed.
D. Appeals and variance procedure.
(1) Public hearing. The Code Hearing Board shall meet and conduct a
hearing within 30 days of the receipt of an appeal or a request for a
variance. All hearings shall be public and all persons whose
interest may be affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A record shall be kept of all evidence and testimony presented at
the hearing.
(2) Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing
and a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board shall also
retain in its files a copy of each decision, which files shall be
available for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth
fully the reasons for the decision of the Code Hearing Board and
the findings of fact on which the decision was based. The Code
Hearing Board shall make an order on its decision and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action to carry out said
order.
E. Appeals from the decision of the Code Hearing Board. Any person or
persons aggrieved by any final order or decision of the Code Hearing
Board may appeal such order or decision within 30 days to the Court of
Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable, the Rules of
Civil Procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from
administrative agencies.
F. Reports by the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall
report to the Council of the Borough periodically, at intervals of not
later than 12 months. The report shall summarize all applications and
appeals made to it since the last report and shall contain a summary of
the Board's decision on each case. A copy of the report shall be filed
with the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board may also
submit to the Council of the Borough advisory reports recommending
changes and modifications in this article or in those other applicable
codes or ordinances.
§ 105-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-6
1:57
G. Code Hearing Board fee. The following fees will be established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council:
(1) For appeals to the Code Hearing Board of decisions of the Code
Enforcement Officer relating to residential construction.
(2) For appeals to the Code Hearing Board of decisions of the Code
Enforcement Officer relating to commercial or industrial
construction.
§ 105-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 105-6
1:58
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1122]
§ 105-7. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Northampton hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-72.10.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 105-8. Adoption and incorporation by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Northampton.
§ 105-9. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of
Northampton shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the governing body of the Borough of Northampton from
time to time by resolution:
§ 105-10. Board of Appeals established.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of the Borough of Northampton in conformity with the requirements of the
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Northampton to
serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough of
Northampton;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Northampton and, as
such, the Borough of Northampton hereby appoints Michael Edelman,
as an independent contractor/agency to act on behalf of the Borough of
Northampton;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough of
Northampton;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 105-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-10
1:59
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities. Said election for joint administration may be made by
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Northampton.
§ 105-11. Effect on other provisions.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted
by the Borough of Northampton on or before July 1, 1999, are hereby
superseded and replaced by the Uniform Construction Code and, further,
all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are specifically
repealed.
§ 105-12. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Northampton for the administration
and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
§ 105-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 105-12
1:60
Chapter 118
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 118-1. (Reserved)10
§ 118-2. Use of air rifles, bows and arrows or similar devices
regulated. [Amended 12-8-1977 by Ord. No. 913]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any
implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet of any kind with a
force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place
within the Borough of Northampton except on a properly constructed and
supervised target range that has been inspected and approved by the Mayor
and the Chief of Police.
§ 118-3. Exceptions. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
This chapter shall not apply to any law enforcement officers when used in
the discharge of their official duties.
§ 118-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
Chapter 125
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
10.Editor’s Note: Former § 118-1, Discharge of firearms regulated, as amended, was repealed
3-5-2015 by Ord. No. 1199.
§ 105-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-4
1:61

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 125-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Northampton Borough Council ("Council") of the
Borough of Northampton ("Borough") does hereby order as follows.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-1
1:63

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 125-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 125-3. Applicability.
§ 125-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other chapter provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 125-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 125-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough unless a permit has been
obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 125-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-6
1:65
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 125-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-6
1:66
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 125-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 125-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough.
§ 125-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Assistant to the Borough Manager is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill
the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations; B)
delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; or C) enter into a written agreement or written contract
with another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Zoning Officer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);11 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
11.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 125-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-9
1:67
§ 125-10. Application procedures and requirements.
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 125-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-10
1:68
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 125-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-10
1:69
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and Floodway Area (See § 125-19A.), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 125-19B.), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 125-25F, Storage, and § 125-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 125-25F and 125-26 which are
§ 125-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-10
1:70
§ 125-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 125-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 125-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 125-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 125-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 125-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-14
1:71
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 125-15. Start of construction.
§ 125-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the chapter and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time
the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
§ 125-14 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-16
1:72
§ 125-17. Appeals.
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
the Borough of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs of
prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.12
12.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 125-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-17
1:73

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 125-18. Identification.
§ 125-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Borough, classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 16, 2014, and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by the Borough and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one-foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
§ 125-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-19
1:75
§ 125-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 125-23B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 125-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough and any party aggrieved
by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 125-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 125-19 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-22
1:76
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 125-23. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: 1)
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or 2) any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or 3) alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges); the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 125-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-23
1:77
§ 125-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 125-19C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 125-19C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
§ 125-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-24
1:78
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard.
All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from chapter
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
§ 125-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-24
1:79
§ 125-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
§ 125-24 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-25
1:80
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and
"The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 125-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
§ 125-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-25
1:81
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 125-25 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-25
1:82
§ 125-26. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A below shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,13
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: 1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or 2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or 3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
13.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 125-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-26
1:83
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 125-26A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 125-23, 125-24 and 125-25.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 125-26A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 125-23, 125-24
and 125-25 including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992)," or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 125-26 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-27
1:84
§ 125-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least two
lots or at least one acre, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 125-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
A. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
B. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
C. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated
to the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 125-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-29
1:85
§ 125-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 125-28.
§ 125-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-29
1:86
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 125-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,14 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
14.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 125-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-30
1:87

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 125-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 125-32 shall apply.
§ 125-32. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 125-19C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 125-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-32
1:89

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 125-33. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
§ 125-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 125-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 125-19C.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by prohibited activities (Article VI) or to development
which may endanger human life (§ 125-26).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
§ 125-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-34
1:91
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 125-34 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-34
1:92
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 125-35. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 125-36. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-orgreater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 125-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-36
1:93
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 125-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-36
1:94
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 125-18 and 125-19 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after July 16, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after May 3,
1982, and before July 16, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
§ 125-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-36
1:95
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 5-3-1982,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 5-3-1982,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 125-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-36
1:96
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 125-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-36
1:97
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 125-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-36
1:98
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 125-37. Adoption; effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on July 16, 2014, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Northampton,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
§ 125-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-37
1:99
Chapter 135
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 83.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewer regulations — See Ch. 190.
§ 125-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 125-37
1:100
ARTICLE I
Health Nuisances; Abatement
[Adopted 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 874 (Ch. 10, Part 1, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 135-1. Conditions which may constitute a nuisance.
§ 135-2. Violations of health rules and laws; abatement of nuisance.
In the event that the Board of Health, after due consideration of the above
criteria and consideration of the health rules and laws of the state and of
the Borough, whenever any condition or place in the Borough is found by
the Board to be a nuisance or a menace to the health of the people of the
Borough, it shall, as provided by law:
A. The Board of Health of the Borough of Northampton, in determining
what conditions may constitute a nuisance in fact, shall consider the
following:
Anything that is set up, maintained or continued so as to be deleterious
to the health, safety or welfare of any person or persons within the
Borough of Northampton, whatever is dangerous to human life or
health, whatever renders air, food, water or other drink unwholesome,
and whatever building or part thereof is unsafe, unsanitary,
overcrowded or not provided with adequate means of ingress or
egress, or is not sufficiently ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned,
lighted or supported either by its own construction or connection, may
be declared a nuisance and abatable as such as provided by law.
B. It is not the intention of this article to declare anything or condition as a
nuisance per se, but it is to be used as a criterion in determining what
may be a nuisance in fact.
A. Issue a written order of abatement, directed to the owner or agent of
the owner of the premises, stating that the conditions specified therein
constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health, and ordering an
abatement thereof within such time as may be specified by the Board in
such order.
B. In case such order of abatement is not obeyed within the time specified
therein, the Board shall thereupon issue a further written order to the
Health Officer or Inspector, directing him to remove or abate the same;
which order shall be executed by him and his subordinates and
workmen, and the expense thereof, with a penalty of 10% added thereto
shall be recoverable from the owner, or his agent, of the premises upon
or from which the nuisance or menace to health is abated or removed,
in the manner as provided by law.
C. The Board may proceed to enforce such other remedy or inflict such
penalty as may be specifically provided by ordinance.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-2
1:101

ARTICLE II
Food Services
[Adopted 3-12-1981 by Ord. No. 938 (Ch. 10, Part 2, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 135-3. Health Administration.
§ 135-4. Eating places; definitions. [Amended 7-21-1988 by Ord. No.
1006; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Administration of health laws. The health laws of the Borough of
Northampton shall be under the supervision of the Board of Health.
B. Office of Health Officer and Health Inspector. The Health Officer and
Health Inspector shall enforce the health laws and shall be appointed
by Borough Council. The Health Officer shall be a medical doctor or
other person meeting the qualifications of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection for designation as a Health Officer. The
Health Inspector shall be a person qualified to enforce the health laws
as determined by Borough Council. The Health Officer and Health
Inspector shall have the power and it should be their duty to enforce the
Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania together with the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and to make and enforce such additional rules and
regulations as permitted them by law as well as any rules and
regulations now and hereafter adopted by the Council of the Borough of
Northampton. The Health Inspector shall be under the direct
supervision of the Health Officer.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who handles food or drink during
preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or
cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink
is prepared or served.
FOOD — Includes all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or
condiment, whether simple, mixed or compound and all substances or
ingredients used in the preparation thereof.
HEALTH OFFICER and HEALTH INSPECTOR — The persons appointed
by Borough Council to enforce the health regulations.
§ 135-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:103
INTINERANT RESTAURANT — One operating for a temporary period
of not more than one week in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition or other similar gathering.
MEAT and MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS — Any food for human
consumption of which the flesh of any organ of any cattle, calves, sheep,
swine, goats, horses or mules, forms the whole or a constituent part. It
shall not include poultry or seafood of any sort.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association.
RESTAURANT — Any restaurant, coffee shop, grocery store, cafeteria,
short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, drugstore and
soda fountain serving food, and all other eating or drinking
establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or
drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.
B. Permits and certificates required; posting and location. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the Borough of
Northampton who does not possess a nonrevoked permit from the
Health Inspector. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be
entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Any person conducting an
itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit. Such a
permit may be temporarily suspended by the Health Inspector upon the
violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, or revoked
after an opportunity for a hearing by the Health Officer upon serious or
repeated violations. It shall be unlawful for any employee to handle food
or drink during preparation or serving, to come in contact with any
eating or drinking utensils, or to be employed in a room in which food or
drink is prepared or served without first acquiring the health certificate
issued by the Health Inspector in accordance with the provisions of the
Public Eating and Drinking Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Inspection of restaurants. At least once in six months, the Health
Officer and/or Health Inspector shall inspect every restaurant located
within the Borough of Northampton, and if the Health Officer and/or
Health Inspector discovers a violation of any item on sanitation, he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall
be used in determining compliance with abating the defect in
sanitation. Any violation of the same item on sanitation on such second
inspection shall call for immediate suspension of permit. For
reinstatement of license, as a result of a violation, a fee, as established
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, shall be charged.
D. Certificate, license and inspection fee.
(1) All owners or operators of restaurants or other food establishments
shall pay to the Borough of Northampton an annual license and
inspection fee, as established from time to time by resolution of
§ 135-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 135-4
1:104
§ 135-5. Food handlers. [Amended 2-16-1989 by Ord. No. 1013]
Borough Council, for each restaurant or other food establishment
inspected in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Itinerant restaurants shall be required to pay a daily fee, as
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, for
a temporary license.
(3) Nonprofit organizations shall be waived from payment of license
and inspection fees.
E. Enforcement interpretation. This article shall be enforced by the Health
Officer and Health Inspector in accordance with the interpretations
thereof contained in the United States Public Health Service Code
regulating and controlling eating and drinking establishments;
provided, however, that should any provision, item or part thereof fail to
meet the minimum requirements of state law, the requirements of said
state law shall apply only to that provision, item, or part thereof so
affected.
A. Employees with diseases.
(1) No employee with any disease in a communicable form or who is a
carrier of such disease, shall work in any public eating or drinking
place in any capacity which brings him into contact with the
production, handling, storage or transportation of food or
equipment used in public eating or drinking places.
(2) No proprietor shall employ in any such capacity any such person, or
any person suspected of having any disease in a communicable
form, or of being a carrier of such disease.
(3) Any employee who has a discharging or infected wound, sore or
lesion on hands, arms or any exposed portion of the body, shall be
excluded from those operations which will bring him into contact
with food, beverages, utensils or equipment used in public eating
or drinking places.
B. Control of infectious employees. When suspicion arises as to the
possibility of transmission of infection from any employee, the licensor
shall be authorized to require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from the eating or
drinking place.
(2) The immediate closing of the eating or drinking place concerned
until, in the opinion of the licensor, no further danger of disease
outbreaks exists.
(3) Restriction of the services of the employee to some area of work
where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:105
§ 135-6. Food products.
(4) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and his associates,
with such laboratory examinations as may be necessary.
C. Cleanliness.
(1) All employees shall wear clean outer garments, maintain a high
degree of personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic practices
while on duty. They shall wash their hands thoroughly in an
approved hand-washing facility before starting work, and as often
as may be necessary to remove soil and contamination. No
employee shall resume work after visiting the toilet room without
washing his hands with soap and warm water.
(2) Hair nets, caps or other effective hair covering shall be used by
employees engaged in the preparation and service of food or
washing of utensils and equipment to keep hair from food and foodcontact
surfaces.
(3) Persons engaged in the preparation, handling or service of food
shall not use tobacco in any form while in equipment and utensil
washing, food preparation or food serving areas. However,
designated locations in such areas may be approved by the licensor
for smoking, where no contamination hazards will result.
A. Inspection and approval of meat and meat food products. No meat or
meat food products shall be offered for sale, displayed, sold or stored
within the Borough of Northampton unless such products have first
been inspected and passed by either an authorized agent of the United
States Department of Agriculture, the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection; provided that the Board of Health may, in its discretion,
permit the sale of meat or meat food products which have been
inspected and passed by a duly authorized agent of the county
commissioners of any county who is a qualified and licensed
veterinarian wherein the procedure followed in conducting inspections,
including the facilities for making the same, the requirements with
respect to the sanitation of the establishment and the marking,
branding, or identifying of meat or meat food products, shall conform
with the regulations of the Department of Agriculture of the United
States or the Department of Agriculture of this commonwealth.
B. Meat and meat food products to be marked with inspection legend. No
meat or meat food products shall be offered for sale, displayed, sold, or
stored in the Borough of Northampton unless the same shall be marked
in a clear and legible manner with the official meat inspection legend
designated by the United States Department of Agriculture, or by the
official meat inspection legend designated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture, or by an official meat inspection legend
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
§ 135-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 135-6
1:106
§ 135-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
or by an official meat inspection legend approved by the Board of
Health.
C. Disposal of unfit meat and meat food products. If any meat or meat food
products inspected and passed as above set forth are subsequently
found by an agent of the United States Department of Agriculture, or of
the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, or of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, or by a duly authorized agent
of the county commissioners of any county who is a qualified and
licensed veterinarian, to have spoiled or to have likewise become unfit
for human consumption since said original inspection, it shall not be
offered for sale, sold, displayed, or stored within the Borough, but shall
be immediately disposed of.
D. Inspection of establishments. Any slaughtering, meat canning, curing,
smoking, salting, packing, rendering, or other similar establishment
where meat or meat food products are prepared for sale in the Borough
of Northampton, regardless of whether such establishment is located
within the Borough, shall be subject to inspection by the Board of
Health. No meat or meat food product prepared in any slaughtering,
meat canning, curing, smoking, salting, packing, rendering, or other
similar establishment where meat or meat food products are prepared,
refusing the right of inspection stored in the Borough of Northampton.
A. Fines and imprisonment. Any person or persons who shall violate any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $1,000 and costs of
prosecution. Upon each subsequent conviction, he shall be fined not
less than $50, nor more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
B. Additional penalties. If after being fined, any proprietor, owner,
manager, or operator of any business or any employer in the Borough of
Northampton, who shall permit the handling of food stuffs or drink
intended for public consumption by any individual who has not been
examined under the provisions of the rules and regulations for food
handlers shall have his health certificate suspended and/or revoked.
§ 135-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-7
1:107
Chapter 140
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 28.
§ 135-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 135-7
1:108
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow
[Adopted 5-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1045 (Ch. 1, Part 12, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 140-1. Fire insurance proceeds escrow procedures.
With respect to any fire loss to any building located within the Borough
occurring after the effective date of this article, the following procedure
shall be established.
§ 140-2. Amount of escrow.
In all cases in which the loss agreed to between the named insured and the
insurance company, association or exchange covering the property for fire
damage equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limit of liability on all fire
policies covering the building (so long as the amount recoverable for said
fire loss also exceeds $5,000), then said company, association or exchange
shall be required to pay to the appropriate Borough official as designated
hereunder an amount calculated as follows:
§ 140-3. Apportionment of proceeds.
The amount transferred in the event that there is more than one company
providing insurance shall be apportioned between said companies on a pro
rata basis calculated on the amount of insurance provided by each said
company.
§ 140-4. Effect of submission of contractor's estimate. [Amended
7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1167]
In the event that payment is made to the designated municipal official as
provided under § 140-2A, if after said transfer the named insured submits a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing and securing
the building or other structure, then the Borough Manager shall return the
amount of the funds transferred (if any) in excess of said estimate, providing
that the Borough has not already commenced to remove, repair and secure
the building itself.
A. An amount in the aggregate of $1,000 for each $20,000 (and/or fraction
thereof) amount of said loss.
B. In the alternative, if at the time said loss is agreed to between the
named insured and the insurance company, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure, the amount
specified in such estimate.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:109
§ 140-5. Separate escrow fund required.
Upon receipt of the proceeds transferred under § 140-2 hereunder, the
designated Borough official shall place the proceeds in a separate escrow
fund to be used solely as security against the total cost of removing,
repairing or securing said property as incurred by the Borough.
§ 140-6. Notification of named insured.
Upon receipt of said funds, the Borough shall immediately notify the named
insured (providing that the company, association or exchange providing
insurance has properly notified the Borough of the name and address of the
named insured) and certify that the proceeds have been received and that
this article will be in effect.
§ 140-7. Distribution of escrow fund. [Amended 7-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 1167]
Said escrow funds shall be maintained until all repairs, required removals
and securing of the building or other structure in accordance with the
Borough Health and Safety Codes has been completed and proof thereof
submitted to the designated municipal official, at which time the funds shall
be disbursed as follows:
§ 140-8. Actions preserved.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
to take any action against the named insured or any other responsible
individual under the Borough health and safety codes, nor shall the
establishment of said escrow fund limit in any way the Borough's ability
A. In the event the Borough has itself incurred costs for repairs, removal
or securing of the property as authorized by the Borough health and
safety codes, then said costs shall be paid from said escrow fund.
B. Following the completion of said repairs, removal and securing of a
building or other structure, and reimbursement from said fund to the
Borough (if said repairs, removal and securing has been performed by
the Borough), the remainder of the funds, if any, shall be released to the
named insured or his/its designee.
C. No payment shall be made unless and until the insured or his/its
designee certifies, warrants, and represents that he/it or the designee is
solely entitled to the escrow funds; and generally releases and
discharges the Borough of Northampton from all claims from any third
parties, persons, or entities who may claim said funds; and further
indemnifies, and holds harmless the Borough from any such claims.
Said general release shall be in substantially the attached form as set
forth in Exhibit A.15
15.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 140-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 140-8
1:110
to pursue any action for imposition of any penalties or recovery of any
amounts in excess of said escrow fund from any responsible party including
the named insured.
§ 140-9. Designated Borough official.
The designated Borough official responsible for administering said escrow
fund shall be the Borough Manager.
§ 140-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-9
1:111

ARTICLE II
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 4-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1095]
§ 140-10. Appointment.
The Treasurer of the Borough of Northampton or such official's designee is
hereby appointed as the designated Borough officer who is authorized to
carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 140-11. Fire loss.
A "fire loss" or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this article and covered under an policy of fire
insurance, including all endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 140-12. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
entity") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Borough of Northampton (hereinafter the "Borough") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insuring entity is furnished by the Borough Treasurer
with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the Insurance
Company Law of 1921,16 as amended (the "Insurance Law") and § 140-13 of
this article, and unless there is compliance with Sections 508(c) and (d) of
the Insurance Law and the provisions of this article.
§ 140-13. Certificate contents.
The Borough Treasurer shall, upon the written request of the named
insured specifying the tax description of the property, name and address
of the insuring agent and the date agreed upon by the insuring entity and
the named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim,
furnish the insuring entity either of the following within 14 working days of
the request:
A. A certificate to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request,
there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges
against the property and that, as of the date of the Borough Treasurer's
certificate, the Borough has not certified any amount as total costs
incurred by the Borough for the removal, repair or securing of a
building or other structure on the property; or
B. A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and use charges against the property as of the
date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the date of
the Borough Treasurer's certificate and also showing, as of the date of
16.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 140-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-13
1:113
§ 140-14. Receipt by insuring entity.
Upon receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 140-13A, the insuring entity
shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with policy terms,
except that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring
entity equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
insurance policies covering the building or other structure, the procedures
set forth in § 140-16 below shall be followed.
§ 140-15. Application of proceeds.
Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 140-13B, the insuring
entity shall return the bill to the Borough Treasurer and transfer to the
Borough Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to
pay taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill, or
the full amount of the insurance proceeds, whichever is the lesser amount.
The Borough shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of
the items shown in the bill. Further, the terms of § 140-16 shall be followed,
if applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Borough to recover any deficiency.
§ 140-16. Claims of at least 60% limits.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of the Insurance Law,17 and
§ 140-13A, the Borough Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there
are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
real property, the Insuring Entity shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and
the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire insurance policies covering the building or other structure, the
following procedures must be followed:
the Borough Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the total costs, if
any, certified to the Borough Treasurer that have been incurred by
the Borough for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other
structure on the property. For the purposes of this subsection, the
Borough shall provide to the Borough Treasurer the total amount, if
any, of such costs, if available, or the amount of costs known to the
Borough at the time of the Borough Treasurer's certificate. A tax,
assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the time and
on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the property
by the Borough under applicable law.
A. The insuring entity shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Borough Treasurer in the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a
claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this section to be
applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount transferred
to the Borough shall be $2,000.
17.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 140-13 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 140-16
1:114
B. If at the time of a loss report the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under Subsection A above, the insuring entity shall
transfer to the Borough from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds to the Borough shall be on a pro rata basis by
all companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or other
structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the Borough
shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the Borough Treasurer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or
secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Borough shall do the
following:
(1) The Borough Treasurer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Borough. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Borough
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring entity when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Borough with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the Borough Treasurer shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Borough and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed;
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
procedures, regulations and orders of the Borough and the
required proof of such completion received by the Borough
Treasurer, and if the Borough has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the Borough has incurred costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the building or other structure, the cots
shall be paid from the fund and if excess funds remain, the Borough
shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this section, and such proceeds are not
returned to the named insured, such interest shall belong to the
§ 140-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-16
1:115
§ 140-17. Additional regulations authorized.
The Borough Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Section 508 of the Insurance Law18 and this article and may
by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to the Insurance Law and this article, including
but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of
inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 140-18. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring entity who
or which violates any provision of this article shall, upon a judicial
determination thereof, be subject to a judgment for each such violation of
not more than $1,000, reasonable attorney's fees, plus costs of suit. All such
sums shall be paid to the Borough of Northampton.
§ 140-19. Filing of article.
Upon adoption of this article, an exact copy hereof shall be filed with
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development,
together with the name, position and phone number of the Borough
Treasurer.
Borough. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named
insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to
the named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Borough to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Borough and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
18.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 140-16 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 140-19
1:116
Chapter 152
MOVING OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS
§ 152-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed
to them is this section, except where the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
LESSOR — One who grants a lease or rents real estate to another for either
business or dwelling purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any tangible property that is the subject of
ownership and is possible to be moved and which is generally used in the
operation of business or for the maintenance of household.
TRANSPORTATION — The moving of personal property or household goods
by way of public streets or highways.
§ 152-2. Notice of moving required.
It shall be unlawful for any individual 18 years of age or older to move into,
out of or from one place to another within the Borough of Northampton
without first giving notice to the Borough Manager of such moving. In
the case of individuals moving into the Borough of Northampton, said
notice shall be given within one week after moving into the Borough of
Northampton. In the case of individuals moving out of the Borough of
Northampton or from one place to another, notice shall be given at least
24 hours before said move is made. Included in each notice as given shall
be the name of the moving person, the address from which the person is
moving, and the address to which said person is moving.
§ 152-3. Moving permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport or cause to be
moved or transported into, out of or within the Borough of Northampton any
personal property in bulk without first securing from the Borough Manager
a permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 152-4. Application.
The application for a moving permit shall include the name and address of
the applicant, the name of the owner or reputed owners of the personal
property to be moved or transported, the address and location from which
the personal property is to be moved or transported, and the address or
location to which the personal property is to be moved or transported.
§ 140-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:117
§ 152-5. Fee. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
The Borough Manager shall, upon application, issue a permit for a charge
as established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council. Said
permit shall set forth the name of the permittee as well as the name or
names of the owners of the personal property to be moved or transported
and the address from which the personal property or household goods are
to be moved and the address to which the personal property or household
goods are to be delivered.
§ 152-6. Obligation of lessor.
Any lessor leasing or renting any premises or part thereof within the
Borough of Northampton to another person for the purpose of either a
business or as a dwelling shall give the Borough Manager notice within one
week after the leasing of said property to a tenant and at least 24 hours'
notice of the intention of the lessee or tenant to move or vacate the leased
or rented premises.
§ 152-7. Obligation of moving companies.
Any person who is in the business of transporting or moving personal
property in bulk from one location to another as hereinbefore described
shall be obligated to verify that the proper permit has been issued prior
to the moving or transporting of any personal property either within the
Borough of Northampton or to a point outside of the Borough of
Northampton.
§ 152-8. Denial of permit.
The Borough Manager shall not issue any permit until after the applicant for
a permit has paid all taxes and fees levied with the exception of real estate
taxes.
§ 152-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 152-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Code Enforcement Officer, or any official so designated by the Borough
Manager.
Chapter 156
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS
§ 152-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 152-10
1:118
ARTICLE I
Attorney's Fees
[Adopted 7-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1072 (Ch. 1, Part 14, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 156-1. Compliance with statutory procedures.
In any situation in which the Borough of Northampton seeks to assess or
impose attorney's fees in connection with the collection of a delinquent
account and the filing and prosecution of a municipal and lien, the Borough
of Northampton shall first comply with the procedures set forth in § 3(a)(2)
of the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No.
153, as amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 7106(a)(2).
§ 156-2. Inclusion of claim for fees.
The Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to include a claim
for attorney's fees in all municipal claims and liens filed on behalf of the
Borough of Northampton under the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, Act
of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153, as amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.,
to the extent permitted by law.
§ 156-3. Fees. [Amended 10-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1196]
The official Borough schedule of attorney's fees within the meaning of
§ 3(a)(1) of the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law is as follows: the
prevailing renumeration expended per hour in the collection of a claim,
whether before the filing of a municipal claim, in connection with the filing
of a municipal claim, in prosecuting a municipal claim to final judgment, in
connection with the execution of judgment or otherwise.
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-3
1:119
Chapter 162
NUMBERING OF PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 162-1. Numbering system.
A system of numbering properties and principal buildings is hereby adopted
for use in the Borough of Northampton:
§ 162-2. Assignment of numbers and requirements for display.
All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Northampton shall hereafter be identified by reference to the numbering
system. (As many of the original identification names and numbers will
remain as possible.) This number shall be known as the "street address
number." Property owners shall be required to notify all tenants of the
assignment of the street address number and shall be required to obtain
multiple numbers in case of multiple occupancy. Property owners shall also
be responsible for the placement of display.
§ 162-3. Display of street address number.
A. There shall be no R.D. numbers, box numbers or duplication of Borough
street names; no similarities of Borough street names (to include
neighboring municipalities, if possible).
B. No half numbers or alphabetic letters for house numbers (except for
those existing).
C. Road center line used as dividing line in most cases.
A. Each residence, prior to occupation or sale, shall have at least two
displays for the residence, depending on location; more may be
required. The display shall be neat, using Arabic numbers, horizontal,
reading left to right or vertical, reading top to bottom.
B. On homes occupied at the time of the adoption of this chapter, the
display shall be on the front door or front face of the main residence
building, easily legible by responding emergency personnel at all times.
On new residences or construction specs, the display shall comply with
all other requirements of this chapter. In addition, it shall be no less
than four inches high.
§ 156-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 162-3
1:120
§ 162-4. Administration.
The Borough Zoning Officer or delegate shall assign to any property owner
within the Borough of Northampton, upon request and without change, the
street address number for each principal building as appropriate.
§ 162-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer.
§ 162-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be given
notice of violation and 30 days to correct said violation. If the violation is
not corrected within 30 days, then the person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be prosecuted and, upon conviction, be fined not more
than $500, and in default of payment of fine and costs, be imprisoned not
more than 90 days, and each and every day the violation continues after
such person has been notified thereof by certified mail, arrest or any other
personal service, shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
Chapter 167
PARKS AND RECREATION
C. If there is a freestanding mailbox located on the property that would
readily identify the designated street address number, the number can
be placed on both sides of the mailbox or supporting structure, or both
sides of an attached sign, in neat arrangement of not less than two
inches high shall be used.
D. In the event that there is no freestanding mailbox located on the
property in a location that would readily identify the proper street
address number, or if the mailbox is located in a group of mailboxes or
on a street other than that of the designated street address number, the
street address number shall be displayed on the mailbox and in addition
on a sign located in the front yard of the principal building no more than
25 feet from the edge of the street, lane, pavement at a location that is
easily seen from the street, lane, pavement, by responding emergency
personnel or in a place mutually agreed upon by the Zoning Officer and
the homeowner.
§ 162-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:121

ARTICLE I
Use of Facilities
[Adopted 3-17-1988 by Ord. No. 1005 (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, recreation structures
and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all other land
or property or structures under the jurisdiction of the Borough Council, now
or hereafter owned or acquired by the Borough for park or recreational
purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Borough Council under the authority herein
conferred.
§ 167-2. Park hours.
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as Borough
Council may from time to time designate, but in no event shall any person
be permitted to be in attendance in any park between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., unless special permission be granted by Borough Council.
§ 167-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
No person in attendance at a park shall:
A. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of the
Borough located within the park.
B. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
C. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of
Borough Council.
D. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
Borough Council.
E. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of Borough Council; nor shall
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:123
any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by authority
of said Council.
F. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of Borough
Council; distribute, sell, service or rent any services or commodity or
solicit for any purpose without permission of Borough Council.
G. Operate, stop or park any motorized vehicle, bicycle or other means of
conveyance except in areas where permitted or designated by proper
authority of Borough Council, or operate the same in a reckless or
negligent manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a
manner as to become a nuisance to other area users.
H. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
I. Carry or discharge slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or other missilepropelling
instruments or explosives or arrows, or other dangerous
weapons which have such properties to cause annoyance or injury to
any person or property, unless permission has been granted by Borough
Council in designated areas; police officers in the performance of their
duties will be exempt from these provisions. [Amended 10-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 1195]
J. Be allowed to play golf or practice hitting golf balls.
K. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
L. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purpose.
M. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle
recreational or otherwise except on designated roads, trails, or areas
set aside for their use.
N. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
O. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
P. Hold any public meeting or rally with more than five persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or other
organization without permission of Borough Council, which requires a
statement of information, including the name of the organization, its
purpose, number of persons expected to be invited, expected duration
and name(s) in charge.
Q. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Borough Council member,
or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation,
warning, prohibition, instruction or direction given by an authorized
person and posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster, or
§ 167-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 167-3
1:124
§ 167-4. Fishing. [Amended 3-17-1988 by Ord. No. 1005]
All laws pertaining to fishing in the commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 167-5. Reservation for specific uses. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
The use of all ballfields and pavilions shall be on a first-come, first-served
basis unless otherwise reserved.
§ 167-6. Permit fees. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
All organized activities require a permit issued by the Borough Manager.
The fees for such permits shall be as established, from time to time, by
resolution of Borough Council. Activities for which permit fees shall be
charged are as follows:
when notified or informed as to its existence by Borough Council or an
authorized person.
R. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise, and to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park, a shotgun
or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind.
S. Be permitted to walk or ride any type of animal.
A. Pavilion will not be available before March 1 or after October 31. (Rest
room facilities may not always be available during March and October
due to weather conditions.)
B. No permits for the use of any recreational facilities will be taken until
on or after March 1 of the year in which they are requested.
C. The Borough shall not be obligated to pay for any additional electrical
service than is otherwise provided at the park and pavilion areas.
D. The issuance of a permit on weekends (Saturday and Sunday) for a
pavilion shall also include the use of the ballfields which are adjacent to
these facilities. The restriction on the use of the ballfields does not
preclude a baseball team from renting the pavilion area on weekends.
E. In the event that a rain date is requested by any organization or
individual, there will be an additional charge, as established from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council, for the rain date and the rain
date must be at least one month from the date of the original request to
utilize the facility. There will be no rain dates granted after August 15 of
any year.
§ 167-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-6
1:125
§ 167-7. Authority to close areas.
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of Borough Council.
§ 167-8. Enforcement.
The police officers of the Borough of Northampton are charged with
enforcement of the provisions of this article (and of rules and regulations
promulgated by Borough Council).
§ 167-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days.
A. Use of the baseball fields on a daily basis, with the only exception being
if an organized league in the Borough of Northampton rents any of the
baseball fields for a season. The seasonal fee for a Northampton league
shall be calculated on the basis of the daily charge, with an upper and
lower limit as established by resolution of Council.
B. Use of the pavilion areas shall require a fee as established, from time to
time, by resolution of Borough Council.
C. Waiver of fees must have approval from Borough Council.
D. No permits for the use of any recreational facilities can be issued until
on or after March 1 of the year in which they are requested for Borough
of Northampton residents or organizations and until on or after April 1
of the year in which they are requested for non-Borough residents or
organizations.
§ 167-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 167-9
1:126
ARTICLE II
Recreation Center Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1110; amended in its entirety
12-4-2003 by Ord. No. 1115]
§ 167-10. Fighting policy.
§ 167-11. Equipment use.
All members and nonmembers should be aware that all items issued to them
remain the property of the NBRC. Special care must be given to every piece
of equipment and other items (basketball, volleyball, etc.) given them to use,
and said item is only to be utilized for its intended use. Each member and
nonmember is responsible to return the borrowed property. If any property
or pieces of equipment are lost or damaged, the member or nonmember is
responsible to pay for those items. Any member or nonmember who fails to
make restitution for lost or damaged property will be subject to arrest and/
or fined.
§ 167-12. Telephone use.
The telephones at the front desk are to be used for NBRC business.
Emergency calls will be made by NBRC staff on behalf of requester. All
social and nonemergency calls are to be made from the pay phone.
§ 167-13. Foul language.
All members must refrain from using foul language, profanity, antisocial,
discriminatory and/or abusive language.
§ 167-14. Clothing.
All members must wear proper attire (workout clothing; not street clothes,
sneakers, etc.) while utilizing the facilities.
A. If one individual initiates a fight, the second individual is directed to
walk away from the situation and report the incident immediately to the
front desk. The Northampton Borough Recreation Center realizes that
peer pressure makes walking away and reporting the incident difficult
for any person, young or old; but failure to do so will result in a
minimum one-month suspension of all NBRC privileges for both
participants.
B. Any member or nonmember who engages in a fight or instigates a fight
while participating with any organization, including but not limited to:
Northampton Athletic Association, Basketball or Volleyball, will be
suspended for a minimum of one month. Also, said member or
nonmember will lose all NBRC privileges for a minimum of one month.
There will be no exceptions regarding the NBRC's fighting policy.
§ 167-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-15
1:127
§ 167-15. Safety.
All members must exercise safety when using the gym or exercise room.
§ 167-16. Alcohol and tobacco.
No alcoholic beverages or smoking are permitted on the property of the
Northampton Borough Recreation Center.
§ 167-17. Lockers.
All members must remove their locks from the lockers after using the
Northampton Borough Recreation Center.
§ 167-18. Weight/exercise/fitness room equipment use.
Be alert! The fitness equipment in this facility presents hazards which, if
not used properly, could cause injury. Prior to using the equipment, read the
warning labels and instruction placards affixed to each machine. If you are
unsure on how to use a machine, seek the assistance of our floor personnel.
We will be happy to instruct you on how to use the equipment properly.
Immediately report any piece of equipment that is not functioning properly
to our floor personnel so that it may be evaluated and serviced promptly.
Do not attempt to use or fix any piece of equipment that is not functioning
properly. All members must refrain from dropping plates and dumbbells
(i.e., throwing plates or dumbbells to the mat). All plates and dumbbells
must be placed back on their appropriate racks after usage. All equipment
in the fitness and exercise room must be wiped clean after usage.
§ 167-19. Age for exercise room use.
All members must be 14 years of age or older to use the exercise room.
§ 167-20. Miscellaneous.
Water is the only kind of beverage allowed in the exercise room. All other
beverages and food may be consumed in the concession area only. Food and
drink are not permitted in the gymnasium. All coaches of team sports in
the gym are responsible for cleaning up the gym after practices and games,
including the bathrooms and locker rooms.
§ 167-21. Ejection.
The Recreation Center reserves the right to eject and/or suspend for a
period, as solely determined by Northampton Borough Recreation Center
Board, any person(s) who does not act in accordance with Center and/
or Borough policies, regulations, rules and ordinances, or the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 167-15 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 167-22
1:128
§ 167-22. Membership/cards.
All members must present their card to staff member at the front desk
and print their name in full on the sign-in sheet. There is a $5 fee for a
replacement card. No member will be issued a locker key or any piece of
equipment without a membership card or some identification. Membership
and/or membership cards are nontransferable.
§ 167-23. Nonmembers/day passes.
All day-pass individuals or nonmembers utilizing the facility must conform
to the rules and regulations of the Northampton Borough Recreation
Center. Violation of any rule will result in immediate expulsion from the
Center. No nonmembers will be issued a locker key or any equipment
without a valid form of identification.
§ 167-24. Refunds.
The Northampton Borough Recreation Center will not refund the cost of
a membership once it is purchased. The NBRC Board can revoke any
membership without issuing a refund, if said member has violated the Rules
and Regulations of the NBRC.
§ 167-25. Cameras/camera phones/video recorders.
No pictures can be taken with a camera, camera phone or video recorder of
anyone either inside or outside the NBRC or on the property of the NBRC.
§ 167-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-25
1:129
Chapter 171
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 167-25 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 167-25
1:130
ARTICLE I
Loitering
[Adopted 7-7-1977 by Ord. No. 908 (Ch. 6, Part 2, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 171-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any public street or public sidewalk, as well as the front of and
the area immediately adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant,
tavern, or other place of business.
§ 171-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 171-3. Discretion of police officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 171-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
article.
§ 171-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 171-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose
hearing, they are made.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-4
1:131
costs, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
§ 171-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 171-4
1:132
ARTICLE II
Cruising
[Adopted 9-3-1992 by Ord. No. 1041 (Ch. 6, Part 5, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 171-5. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cruising Ordinance."
§ 171-6. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found that with consistency, at certain times, a threat to the
public health, safety and welfare arises from the congestion created by
repetitive unnecessary driving of motor vehicles on thoroughfares within
the Borough of Northampton. The purpose of this article is to reduce the
dangerous traffic congestion, as well as the excessive noise and pollution
resulting from such unnecessary repetitive driving, and to insure sufficient
access from emergency vehicles to and through the Borough thoroughfares
now hampered by this repetitive driving of motor vehicles.
§ 171-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle on a street past a traffic control
point, as designated by a Northampton Borough Police Officer, more than
twice in any two-hour period, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.
The passing of a designated control point a third time under the aforesaid
conditions shall constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and therefore a
violation of this article.
DESIGNATED AREA — The entire Borough of Northampton.
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A reference point on the street within the
Borough of Northampton selected by a Northampton Police Officer for the
purpose of imposing this article.
§ 171-8. Cruising prohibited.
No person shall engage in unnecessary repetitive driving, also known,
for purposes of this article, as "cruising." For purposes of this article,
the person having control and/or ownership of a motor vehicle shall be
considered the person cruising, without regard as to whether that person
was actually driving the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control
point. Having control or ownership of a motor vehicle shall mean either the
owner of the vehicle as stated on the vehicle registration if present in the
vehicle at the time of the violation, or if the owner is not present in the
vehicle, the person operating the vehicle at the time of the violation of this
article.
§ 171-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-9
1:133
§ 171-9. Exclusions.
This article shall not apply to any municipal, emergency, police, fire,
ambulance, or other governmental vehicle when same is being operated
in an official capacity. In addition, this article shall not apply to any duly
licensed public transportation vehicle nor to any vehicle utilized for
business and/or commercial purposes.
§ 171-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 171-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 171-10
1:134
Chapter 175
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 171-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-10
1:135

ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Businesses
[Adopted 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 875 (Ch. 13, Part 2, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 175-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 175-2. License required; fee; conditions thereof. [Amended
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following:
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample
or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house, within the
Borough of Northampton.
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise, from a fixed location within the Borough, on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or
celebrations, for seasonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific
yearly holidays.
(2)
B. Interpretation. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
Borough of Northampton without first having obtained from the Chief
of Police or his agent, a license, for which a fee, as established by
resolution of Borough Council, shall be charged. Provided; no license
fee shall be charged under this section:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce;
(2) For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose;
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk or milk products, but all
persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee shall
be required to register with the Chief of Police and obtain a license
without fee.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-2
1:137
§ 175-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring a license under this article shall first make
application to the Chief of Police for such license. If such person shall also
be required to obtain a license from any state or county officer, he shall,
when making such application, exhibit a valid license from such state or
county officer. The applicant shall give his name and address; his criminal
record, if any; the name and address of the person by whom he is employed;
the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business; the length of time for which such license is to be
issued; and the type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
§ 175-4. Issuance of license; information thereon; custody and
display or exhibit thereof.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Chief of Police,
if he shall find such application in order, shall issue the license required
under this article. Such license shall contain the information required to
be given on the application therefor. Every license holder shall carry such
license upon his person if engaged in a transient retail business from house
to house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds or
shall display such license at the location where he shall engage in such
business if doing so at a fixed location. He shall exhibit such license, upon
request, to all police officers, Borough officials, and citizens or residents of
the Borough.
§ 175-5. Prohibited acts.
No person engaged in any transient retail business shall:
B. Provided further, any person dealing in one or more of the abovementioned
exempted categories, and dealing with other goods, wares
or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment of the
license fee fixed by this section for his activities in connection with the
sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempted categories.
Provided further, the Chief of Police may similarly exempt from
payment of the license fee, but not from registering with him, persons
working without compensation and selling goods, wares or
merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
grounds in the Borough.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Borough for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
§ 175-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 175-5
1:138
§ 175-6. Supervision by police; records and reports.
The Chief of Police shall supervise the activities of all persons holding
licenses under this article, and he shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder, and shall make a report thereof each month to the Borough
Council.
§ 175-7. Suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license
issued under this article when he deems such suspension or revocation
to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, or for violation of
any of the provisions of this article, or for giving false information upon
any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or
revocation may be made to the Borough Council at any time within 10
days after such suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license shall have been suspended or
revoked.
§ 175-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or of
any stock or wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity prohibited in the Borough of
Northampton by general or special law applicable thereto.
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-8
1:139
Chapter 180
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 135.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 175-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 175-8
1:140
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-16-2006 by Ord. No. 1136]
§ 180-1. Property Maintenance Code adopted. [Amended 3-5-2015
by Ord. No. 1198]
A certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the Borough
Office of the Borough of Northampton, being marked and designated as the
"International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Northampton, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the assurance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the
Borough Office of the Borough of Northampton are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if full set forth at length herein, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 180-2
of this article.
§ 180-2. Amendments to code. [Amended 8-17-2006 by Ord. No.
1142; 3-5-2015 by Ord. No. 1198]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2009 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: "Borough of Northampton."
B. Section 103.5. Amend by replacing the phrase, "the following
schedule," with the phrase, "a schedule to be established by the
Borough Council of Northampton by resolution and amended by the
Borough Council of Northampton by resolution from time to time."
C. Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows: "Any person who shall
violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits
provided by the state or local laws. The violator shall be fined $500 for
each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served and
shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Section 602.3. Insert: September 30 to April 15.
E. Section 602.4. Insert: September 30 to April 15.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:141
§ 180-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-5-2015 by Ord. No.
1198]
Any violation of the provisions of this article or of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as amended, shall be punishable by a
fine of $500. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 180-4. Effect on court proceedings.
Nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 180-2 or this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 180-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 180-4
1:142
ARTICLE II
Exterior Storage of Personal Property
[Adopted 4-2-2009 by Ord. No. 1166]
§ 180-5. Short title.
This article may commonly be referred to as the Borough of Northampton
"Prohibition of Exterior Storage of Personal Property."
§ 180-6. Prohibited activities.
No owner, possessor or responsible agent of real property shall accumulate,
permit or store items such as furniture designed or manufactured primarily
for indoor use, durable goods (refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), small
appliances, carpets, tires, vehicle parts, automotive products or municipal
waste, hazardous waste, residual waste or construction or demolition debris
on the exterior of the property if it is a threat to the physical appearance,
safety or public health of the Borough or if its presence constitutes a public
nuisance.
§ 180-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates this article shall be charged with a
summary offense and upon conviction thereof before the appropriate
Magisterial District Judge, shall be sentenced to pay the costs plus a fine
levied as follows: $100 against a person or entity violating this article,
with each day of continued violation constituting a separate offense, to a
maximum fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 180-8. Other remedies.
Nothing herein contained shall inhibit or impair the Borough from enforcing
its rights in law or equity.
§ 180-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-8
1:143
Chapter 184
PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 167. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 180-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 180-8
1:144
ARTICLE I
Tampering
[Adopted 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 873 (Ch. 6, Part 1, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 184-1. Unlawful to tamper with public property or property on
streets, alleys or public grounds.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough of Northampton,
within or without the Borough, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work,
building, streetlight or water stop box on or in any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds in the Borough.
§ 184-2. Unlawful to tamper with stakes, posts and monuments.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with,
or pull, drive, change, alter, or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Northampton, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or
set, or caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough in any survey
of or in any street, alley or public ground in the Borough, to evidence the
location, elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 184-3. Unlawful to tamper with warning lamps, signs or
barricades.
No person or persons shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or
deface or obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade
erected by the authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or
corporation doing work by permission of the authorities of the Borough on
any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or bridges in the Borough or on any
public grounds of the Borough, within or without the Borough, as a warning
of danger.
§ 184-4. Unlawful to take material from streets, alleys or public
grounds.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the Borough.
§ 184-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon, or to
incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by
authority of the Borough.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-6
1:145
§ 184-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Provided: the fact that a violator has been
penalized, after hearing, as herein provided, shall not preclude the Borough
or other injured party from taking proper legal action to recover damages
resulting from such violation.
§ 184-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 184-6
1:146
Chapter 186
RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
Alarms — See Ch. 70.
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
§ 186-1. Incorporation of preamble.
The above Whereas clauses are incorporated herein by reference.19
§ 186-2. Knox Box required for certain structures.
The following structures shall be equipped with the Knox Box:
§ 186-3. Structures exempt from Knox Box.
A. Commercial and industrial buildings;
B. Multifamily residential building, with three units or more, with
restricted access through a locked door which has a common corridor
which leads to separate units;
C. Government structures, schools; churches; hospitals, assisted living
facilities; nursing care facilities; personal care homes; hotels, etc.
D. Any structure with restructured access through a locked security gate,
including a commercial building or residence.
E. Any new commercial structure shall have a Knox Box installed prior to
an occupancy permit being issued.
F. Any structure, listed above, existing after the adoption of this chapter
which has undergone major improvements (in excess of $5,000, as
determined by the Borough) including remodeling or additions shall be
required to install a Knox Box prior to an occupancy permit being
issued.
G. Any existing buildings prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
have one year in order to install a Knox Box and have it fully
operational.
A. Single-family residential homes.
B. Multifamily structures that do not meet the requirements herein in
§ 186-2.
19.Editor's Note: Said Whereas clauses are found in Ord. No. 1194, adopted 11-6-2014.
§ 184-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-3
1:147
§ 186-4. Knox Box system.
§ 186-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days; each day that
a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be administered by the Police Department
of the Borough.
Chapter 188
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 171.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
C. Structures with twenty-four-hour, three-hundred-sixty-five-day on-site
security personnel or other personnel on site.
A. The Knox Box Rapid Entry System is a UL-listed system and shall be
equipped with a key lock bock installed at or near the main entrance of
the structure or in an area approved by the Northampton Borough Fire
Chief.
B. Any property or structure with a gated secure driveway that does not
have an alternative method of opening the gate shall have the Knox Box
installed outside of the gate.
C. The Knox Box shall be master keyed to the key configuration assigned
to the Fire Department serving as the first responder in the geographic
area where the structure is located.
§ 186-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 186-5
1:148
ARTICLE I
Residential Rental Unit Regulation
[Adopted 9-20-2018 by Ord. No. 1207]
§ 188-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the Borough's citizens and tenants, while at
the same time encouraging owners and tenants to maintain and improve the
quality of rental housing within the community. As a means to those ends,
this article establishes a program requiring the registration, inspection
and licensing of all residential rental housing units within the Borough as
defined in this article. It is also the policy of the Borough of Northampton
that owners and tenants share the responsibility of obeying the various
codes adopted to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare
within the Borough. This article shall be liberally construed and applied to
promote its purposes and policies.
§ 188-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context within
which the term is used:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Northampton and/or any duly authorized
agent(s) or representative(s) of the Borough of Northampton.
CODES — Any federal, state or local law, code or ordinance adopted or in
effect in and for the Borough of Northampton, as amended from time to
time.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer, individual or firm
appointed by the Borough who is charged with administration of this article
or any duly authorized agent(s) or representative(s) of the Borough of
Northampton or any said officer, individual, representative or firm of such
agent or representative.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of
a residential rental unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day),
offensive, or riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable
sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report is
made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement Officer complaining of such
conduct, action, incident, or behavior.
EXEMPT UNIT — The following types of properties shall be considered
"exempt units":
A. Any hospital, nursing home, group home or other rental unit used for
human habitation which offers or provides medical or nursing services,
and wherein all operations of such facility are subject to county, state or
federal licensing or regulations concerning the health and safety of the
users, patients or tenants.
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-2
1:149
B. Hotel units, as defined herein.
C. On-campus dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses, as
defined in the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.20
HOTEL UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a hotel,
motel, bed-and-breakfast, forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping only on a transient basis for
a period of less than 14 days. The hotel unit must be registered with
Northampton County.
OWNER — Any legal or beneficial holder of title to a residential unit.
This shall include any person or legal entity having an equitable interest
in a rental dwelling; or recorded in the official records of the County
or Borough as holding title to the rental dwelling; or otherwise having
control of the rental dwelling, including the guardian of the estate of
any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate; or
any such person if ordered to take possession of a rental dwelling by a
court.
PROPERTY MANAGER OR AGENT — An adult individual designated
and authorized by the owner of a residential rental unit to act on his/
her or its behalf.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION — A document prepared by
the Borough of Northampton to the owner, required for lawful rental
and occupancy of residential rental units under this article.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any residential unit providing
independent living spaces for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation which is occupied by a person other than the owner and pays
rent to stay in the unit. In addition to exempt units identified above,
the following shall not be considered regulated rental units for the
purposes of this article:
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT LICENSE — A document issued by the
Borough of Northampton to the owner(s) of residential unit(s)
evidencing the existence of said residential rental unit upon application
by the owner to the Borough of Northampton and the passing of the
requisite inspection(s).
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling,
containing three or more rooming units.
Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than two
unrelated individuals, in addition to the owner and his/her
relatives, occupy the dwelling unit at any given time.
(1)
One dwelling unit that is on the same lot as a second dwelling unit,
provided the two dwellings are only occupied by the owner and
persons who are "related" to the owner.
(2)
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 188-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-2
1:150
§ 188-3. Appointment and duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer and/or such other qualified
individual(s) appointed by the Borough Council shall administer this article
in accordance with its terms and shall be responsible for instituting
enforcement proceedings on behalf of the Borough. All references to the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall include any individual appointed
by Borough Council.
§ 188-4. Residential rental unit registration, inspection and
licensing process.
The following process shall be utilized in administering this article:
§ 188-5. Residential rental unit registration.
TENANT/OCCUPANT — Any person or number of persons, corporation,
partnership or other entity who rents, occupies or leases a residential
rental unit they do not own for more than 30 consecutive days.
A. All residential rental unit owners are required to submit a separate
residential rental unit registration application for each rental unit.
B. After receipt of the residential rental unit registration application, the
Code Enforcement Officer will schedule an inspection of each
residential rental unit.
C. If the residential unit inspection is satisfactory, the Borough shall issue
a residential unit license for the rental unit. If there are any infractions
identified during the inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer will
provide a time line to correct all infractions before issuing a license.
A. The following rental unit registration submission process shall be used
for the registration of all rental unit(s) and for any subsequent transfer
of ownership and/or the establishment any new rental unit established
after the adoption of this article.
(1) Within 60 days of article adoption, each owner and/or, if applicable,
the manager of each residential rental unit shall submit to the
Borough a fully completed residential rental registration
application for each rental unit, along with the applicable
registration fee. The registration shall be valid for one year. The
Borough shall not process any registration application without the
required fee.
(2) Thereafter, by December 31 of each calendar year, the owner and/
or, if applicable, the manager of each residential rental unit shall
submit the application form to the Borough which shall be valid
from January 1 to December 31 of the following year. A rental
registration form must be submitted for each residential rental unit
annually along with the applicable registration fee.
§ 188-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-5
1:151
§ 188-6. Inspection and licensing of residential rental units.
(3) After the effective date of this article, any person who becomes an
owner of any parcel of real estate or any improvement on real
estate or a building located in the Borough defined as a residential
rental unit by agreement of sale, deed, or by any other means,
shall, within 60 days thereafter, report to the Borough the
information consistent with the registration applications procedure
as defined in Subsection A(1) and (2) above.
(4) Those residential rental units defined as "exempt units" under
§ 188-2 are not required to submit a residential rental unit
registration application.
B. Report of change in occupancy.
(1) After the effective date of this article, each and every owner of a
residential rental unit within the Borough shall report to the
Borough, within 10 days, any change in the use or occupancy of any
residential rental unit owned by such owner of any residential
rental unit located on property owned by any owner within the
Borough.
(2) The reported change shall include:
(a) The name or names of new tenants of such residential rental
unit;
(b) The date when the change was effective; and
(c) The forwarding address of the old tenant(s) if known.
(3) In the event that a residential rental unit was used or utilized by a
tenant(s) and then becomes vacant for a period of six months, this
change shall also be reported to the Borough.
A. Inspection requirement.
(1) Following registration by the owner, the Borough shall schedule an
inspection of the residential rental unit in accordance with a
systematic inspection program to be prepared by the Code
Enforcement Officer and made available upon request. Such
program shall ensure that the owner is given reasonable notice in
advance of the date for which the inspection is scheduled. The
penalty for not allowing an inspection shall be denial of the
residential rental license and any other penalty provided for in this
article.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer will conduct an initial inspection on
all residential rental units with subsequent inspections taking place
every four years, and/or upon a change in the occupant of a
residential rental unit, whichever shall occur first. For newly
constructed rental units, the initial inspection will not be required
§ 188-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-6
1:152
but will be substituted with the inspection(s) conducted under
the new construction building codes. All subsequent inspections
will occur every four years following the first occupancy and/or
a change in the occupancy, whichever shall occur first. The Code
Enforcement Officer may also inspect residential rental units upon
receipt of complaints and for any other reasonable cause.
(3) If the Code Enforcement Officer finds the residential rental unit(s)
is/are in compliance with all applicable codes and any other article
requirements, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a license.
(4) Once a license has been issued for a residential rental unit, the
license shall remain effective until such time as an inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer results in its revocation or
nonrenewal, provided that the owner submits all required
documentation and fees necessary to renew the license.
(5) If the Code Enforcement Officer, upon completion of the inspection,
finds that the residential rental unit(s) is/are not in compliance with
all applicable codes, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue
notices and, if appropriate, commence enforcement actions under
the procedures set forth in the Ordinance.
(6) By conducting the inspections pursuant to this article, the Borough
does not warrant or guarantee the complete safety or suitability of
the residential rental unit. The Borough, through any action or
inaction pursuant to this article, does not make any representation,
warrantees or guarantees.
B. License requirement and issuance.
(1) A residential rental license is required for all occupied residential
rental unit(s) and the license is required to be in possession of the
owner or manager for each regulated rental unit. For a rooming
house, a single license is allowed for all units within a Rooming
House building.
(2) The Borough shall issue a residential rental registration number if
the owner has submitted a completed annual residential rental unit
registration form, pays the applicable registration fee, submits a
completed and accurate occupant listing for the residential rental
units by December 31 of each year, is current on real estate taxes,
sewer fees, water fees and trash collection fees for the residential
rental unit and has successfully passed an inspection defined in this
article.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer may deny and/or revoke a
residential rental registration if any of the following occur within
the residential rental unit or on the premises:
(a) Failure upon inspection to abate any violation of this article or
any Code violation noted in the rental housing inspection form
§ 188-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-6
1:153
§ 188-7. Enforcement; denial and revocation of license; appeals;
violations and penalties.
within the time specified in the notice of violation unless an
appeal is pending.
(b) Occurrence of three violations of this article and/or of any
other Borough Codes or ordinances that apply to the
residential rental unit or premises during the term of the
registration. Before an occurrence may be considered a
violation, there must be either:
[1] A summary conviction; or
[2] The Code Enforcement Officer must send the owner a
written notice of the violation within 30 days of the
incident, and the period for the owner to file an appeal
from the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer
must have expired.
(4) The owner(s) of the premise where a residential rental unit is
located is/are responsible, jointly and severally, for filing a
registration application to the Borough for each rental unit, which
registration application must comply with all the requirements,
established pursuant to this article, and any applicable regulation
for such applications.
C. Certificate of compliance required.
(1) No license shall be issued in accordance with this article, unless a
certificate of compliance with this article has been issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer. Issuance of a certificate of compliance
shall represent compliance with the inspection requirements of this
article but shall not denote compliance, approval, certification, or
confirmation with any other applicable part, chapter, other code,
ordinance or statute. A certificate of compliance shall be valid until
there is a change in the occupant of the residential rental unit.
Every certificate of compliance shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place in the interior of the residential rental unit.
(2) No residential unit shall be occupied by any person or persons
other than the owner thereof, unless a certificate of compliance is
kept on file by the owner or designated agent as required by the
provisions of this article.
A. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations warranting
condemnation of the residential rental unit under the Property
Maintenance Code, the Code Enforcement Officer may condemn the
property. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have all the rights under
the Borough Code and applicable law, as well as the remedies under the
Property Maintenance Code.
§ 188-6 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-7
1:154
B. In addition, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed under this
article as follows:
(1) Within 20 days after receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall
take immediate steps to remedy the violation, including filing with
the Code Enforcement Officer a report on a form acceptable to the
Borough, setting forth what action the owner has taken to remedy
the violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan
as to steps the owner will take in the future if the violation
reoccurs. The failure to file a report shall be a violation of this
article.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report. If adequate
steps have been taken and the plan is adequate to address future
violations, the officer shall approve the plan. The owner shall, on
his or her initiative, enforce the plan, and failure to do so shall be a
violation of this article.
(3) The inspection fee will include one courtesy reinspection and will
be set by Borough Council.
C. The Borough may make repairs. In the event the owner of the premises
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any notice from the Borough
or its Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation of the premises
under any code in effect in the Borough within the period of time stated
in such notice, the Borough may cause the violation to be corrected
after providing sufficient notifications to the owner.
(1) In the event the Borough must make repairs, there shall be
imposed upon the owner a charge of the actual costs involved, plus
10% of said costs for each time the Borough shall cause a violation
to be corrected, plus attorney's fees and court costs, as applicable,
and the owner of the premises shall be billed after the correction
has been completed.
(2) Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time
specified therein for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of
a municipal lien upon the premises as provided by law.
(a) Such lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced and
collected as provided by law, together with interest at the legal
rate, court costs, and applicable attorney's fees.
(b) The remedies provided by this subsection are not exclusive and
the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may invoke
such other remedies available under this or applicable codes,
ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate,
condemnation proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit
for habitation.
D. Denial, revocation, reinstatement of license.
§ 188-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-7
1:155
(1) If there is an inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer and, as a
result of which, the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that
the license should not be granted, should be revoked, or should not
be renewed, due to any condition(s) that does/do not comply with
applicable regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue, to
the owner, a written notice of denial, revocation, or nonrenewal,
identifying the noncompliant condition(s) and ordering that
compliance be achieved in a timely manner.
(2) The notice shall:
(a) Identify the residential rental unit;
(b) State the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or revocation,
including the factual circumstances and the section of this
article supporting such determination; and
(c) Inform the owner of the right to appeal the denial, nonrenewal
or revocation of the residential rental license to Borough
Council under this article.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer may issue and/or reinstate a
residential rental license at any time if the owner or manager
corrects the reason for the denial, nonrenewal, or revocation of the
residential rental license, has paid the proper fees and is otherwise
in compliance with this article and all other applicable rules,
regulations, ordinances and laws.
E. Appeals. An appeal from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be taken to the Borough Manager or his agent. Such appeal shall
be made, in writing, within 10 days after such decision has been made.
The appeal shall be verified by an affidavit, stating the grounds therefor,
and be filed with the Borough Manager. The appellant and/or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such right
is requested in the written appeal. The Borough Manager shall make a
decision on such appeal within 10 days of receipt of appeal or of the
hearing, if applicable. The Borough Manager shall render a written
decision, copies of which shall be provided to the Code Enforcement
Officer and the appellant. If the owner is aggrieved by the decision of
the Borough Manager, the owner shall have the right to appeal the
decision to Borough Council or the Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with the Local Agency Law21 and Judicial Code,22 and the
decision shall so advise the owner.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) Violations. It shall be a violation of this article to commit or to
permit any other person to commit any of the following acts:
21.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 188-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-7
1:156
(a) To lease, let, or allow the occupancy of a residential rental unit
without obtaining a residential rental license where required
by this article.
(b) To refuse to permit inspections required for a residential rental
unit.
(c) To fail to perform the duties established if such person is an
owner or a manager of a residential rental unit.
(d) To fail to perform the duties established if such person is an
occupant or tenant of a residential rental unit.
(e) To place false information on or omit relevant information from
an application for a residential rental unit registration or
license.
(f) To fail to comply with any other provision of this Part of this
article.
(g) To fail to comply with the direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer who has issued a notice of violation or initiated
enforcement proceedings as specified in this article.
(2) Penalties and remedies.
(a) Allowing occupancy of a residential rental unit after a
residential rental license has been denied, revoked, or not
renewed: a fine of not less than $500 and up to $1,000 per
residential rental unit for each month the violation exists. Each
month the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
(b) Failure to submit a residential rental unit registration form: a
fine of not less than $500 and up to $1,000 per residential
rental unit for each month the violation exists. Each month the
violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
(c) Failure to seek a residential rental license. The owner or
manager shall be sent a thirty-day notice of violation, warning
them of their failure to comply with the terms of this article. If
they do not comply at the end of 30 days, there shall be a fine of
not less than $500 and up to $1,000 per residential rental unit
for each month the violation exists. Each month the violation
exists constitutes a separate violation.
(d) Any other violation of this article shall, upon a first offense, be
fined not more than $1,000.
(e) In addition to prosecution of persons violating this article, the
Code Enforcement Officer, or any duly authorized agent of the
Borough, may take any such civil, equitable or other remedies
in any court of record of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
§ 188-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-7
1:157
§ 188-8. Owner's duties.
against any person or property, real or personal, to affect the
provisions of this article.
(f) The provisions of this section and the provisions of this article
governing revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of residential
rental licenses shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the
Borough as may be deemed appropriate. The remedies and
procedures in this article are not intended to supplant or
replace, to any degree, the remedies provided to the Borough
in the Property Maintenance Code,23 Zoning Ordinance24 or
any other code, law, rule or regulation.
A. General. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all
rental units in compliance with all applicable federal or state laws and
regulations and local ordinances and to keep such property in good and
safe condition. Every owner/landlord shall be responsible for regulating
the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every dwelling which he/
she or it owns. This section shall not be construed, in any way, as
diminishing or relieving the responsibility of occupants or their guests
for their conduct or activity, nor shall it be construed as an assignment,
transfer or projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or
liability which occupants or their guests may have as a result of their
conduct or activity under any private cause of action or civil or criminal
enforcement proceeding; nor shall this section be construed so as to
require an owner to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests
when any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based upon the occupant's conduct or activity. This article is not
intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other enforcement
remedies which may be available to the Borough against an owner,
occupant or guest thereof.
B. Designation of Manager. Every owner who is not a full-time resident of
the Borough, and/or who does not live within 30 miles of the boundaries
of the Borough, shall designate a manager, who shall reside in an area
that is no more than 20 miles from the Borough boundary line.
(1) If the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if an
officer of the corporation does not reside within the abovereferenced
area. The officer, in the event that he/she lives within
the above-mentioned area requirement, shall perform the same
function as a manager.
(2) If the owner is a partnership, a manager shall be required if a
partner does not reside within the above-referenced area. The
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Property Maintenance, Art. I, Adoption of Standards.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 188-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-8
1:158
§ 188-9. Tenant's duties.
Tenants shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough.
partner, in the event that he/she lives within the above-mentioned
area requirement, shall perform the same function as a manager.
(3) The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process
and receiving of notices and demands, as well as for performing the
obligations of the owner under this article and under rental
agreements with occupants.
(4) The identity, address and telephone number(s) of a person who is
designated as a manager hereunder shall be provided by the owner
or manager to the Borough, and such information shall be kept
current and updated as it changes as designated in this article.
C. Disclosure.
(1) The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on
or before the commencement of the tenancy:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if
applicable; and
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
(2) Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a rental unit, the owner or manager, if applicable,
shall furnish the occupant with the most recent inspection report
relating to the property.
D. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable codes of the Borough and shall regularly perform all
routine maintenance, including ice and snow removal, and shall
promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this
obligation.
(2) In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this article or
other ordinances or codes for maintenance of the premises.
A. Inspection of premises. Tenants shall permit inspections of any
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times upon
reasonable notice. The Code Enforcement Officer may inspect premises
with an owner's approval at a reasonable time.
§ 188-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-9
1:159
§ 188-10. Fees.
The fees necessary to administer all provisions of this article shall be set by
the Borough Council from time to time by resolution.
§ 188-11. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of this article, so
long as it remains workable minus the invalid portion.
§ 188-12. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All existing ordinances of the Borough of Northampton, or parts thereof,
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby
repealed.
§ 188-13. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its enactment and as
otherwise provided by law.
B. Disruptive conduct. Tenants shall not engage in, shall not tolerate, nor
shall permit others on the premises to engage in disruptive conduct or
other violations of this article.
C. Health and safety regulations.
(1) The maximum number of persons permitted in any rental unit at
any time shall not exceed one person for each 40 square feet of
habitable bedroom floor space in said rental unit.
(2) A tenant shall deposit all rubbish, garbage, and other waste from
his or her rental unit into containers provided by the owner or
landlord in a clean and safe manner and shall separate and place
for collection all recyclable materials in compliance with all other
applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
D. Residential use. A tenant shall, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law or ordinance, occupy or use his or her rental unit for no
other purpose than as a residence.
§ 188-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 188-13
1:160
Chapter 190
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Water — See Ch. 240.
§ 188-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-13
1:161

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Objectives and Definitions
§ 190-1. Purpose.
This chapter sets forth the following uniform requirements for users of the
sewer system and enables the Borough to regulate the use of the sewer
system and to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and
other applicable state and national laws and regulations.
§ 190-2. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 190-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases will hereinafter have the meanings
set forth in this section, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The administrator or the regional administrator
of Region III of the EPA.
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system that will
cause interference with the operation of the sewage collection system
or the sewage treatment plant or reduce the efficiency or effectiveness
of the sewage collection system or sewage treatment plant.
B. To prevent pass-through of pollutants, inadequately treated, to the
environment.
C. To protect workers and the general public from exposure to toxic or
other dangerous substances.
D. To protect the sewer system from damage.
E. To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge.
F. To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of operating,
maintaining and administration of the sewer system.
G. To enable the Borough of Northampton to comply with all applicable
state and national laws, rules and regulations, including NPDES permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, air quality standards
and quality standards.
H. To comply with the requirements of an agreement between the Borough
of Northampton and the Township of Allen in which the Township
covenants to adopt and enforce ordinances, resolutions or rules and
regulations equal to those established by the Borough of Northampton.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:163
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE (OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER) —
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C. (64° F.) expressed in terms of weight and
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/L)].
BOROUGH — The Borough of Northampton, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, a municipal corporation existing under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Manager and Borough Council
thereof, its agents and officials.
BOROUGH USERS — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
discharge of wastewater from an improved property located in the Borough
into the sewer system.
BUILDING SEWER — A sanitary sewer conveying wastewater to the sewage
collection system and consisting of the connection sewer and the customer
sewer.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of an
industrial user's pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
categorical standards.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A principal executive officer or director having responsibility for
the overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial
user is a governmental entity, charitable organization or other such
unincorporated entity.
(3)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
in Subsection A(1), (2) or (3) if such representative is responsible
for the overall operation of facilities from which the discharge
originates.
(4)
A.
If an authorization under Subsection A(4) of this definition is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for the
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying
the requirements of Subsection A(4) of this definition must be
submitted to the Borough prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.
B.
§ 190-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-3
1:164
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer under
the laws of the state.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY — A record of sample collection indicating the place,
date and time of collection and the person collecting the sample. It shall
also include a record of each person involved in possession of the sample
including the laboratory person who takes final possession of the sample for
the purpose of analysis.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended,
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.702.
COLOR — Color of light transmitted through a waste after removal of
all suspended matter, including pseudo-collodial particles and measured in
platinum-cobalt units.
COMBINED WASTE FORMULA — A procedure for calculating discharge
concentrations of constituents of industrial waste, as defined in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
COMPLIANCE — Adherence to conditions or requirements of this chapter.
COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE — A schedule submitted by an industrial user
approved by the Borough setting forth the time within which an industrial
user shall be in compliance with provisions of this chapter.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of individual subsamples
taken at regular intervals over a specified period of time. Subsamples may
be proportioned by time interval or size according to flow (flow-portioned
composite sample), or be of equal size and taken at equal time intervals
(equal-time composite sample). A composite grab sample is composed of
individual grab samples collected and preserved individually and combined
for analysis only at the time of analysis.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee as defined and designated as a connection fee
as set forth in Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1227, No. 223, § 1 [53 P.S.
§ 306.B(t)(1)(i)], or any successor statute or amendment thereto.25
CONNECTION SEWER — That part of a building sewer extending from the
sewage collection system to the property line of an improved property.
COOLING WATER — The water from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, which does not come into contact with any product,
byproduct or waste, and to which the only pollutant added is heat.
CUSTOMER FACILITIES FEE — A fee as defined and designated as a
customer facilities fee as set forth in Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1227,
No. 203, § 1 [53 P.S. § 306.B(t)(1)(ii)], or any successor statute or
amendment thereto.26
CUSTOMER SEWER — That part of a building sewer extending from the
property line of an improved property to the improved property.
25.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:165
DAILY MAXIMUM — The highest value obtained for samples collected in
any calendar day. When used in a limit, the daily maximum is the highest
value allowed in any composite sample or the maximum value allowed as
an average of one or more grab samples taken during a calendar day. The
daily maximum may also be expressed as the maximum mass allowed to be
discharged during any one calendar day.
DISCHARGE, DISCHARGES or DISCHARGED — The conveyance of any
water or wastewater into the sewer system.
DOMESTIC WASTES — Normal household wastes from kitchens, water
closets, lavatories and laundries or any waste from a similar source and
possessing the same characteristics.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, house trailer or other
enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters
by a family or other group of persons living together or by persons living
alone, excluding, however, college and institutional dormitories.
EPA — The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate,
the term may also be used as designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical standards, which categorical standards will be applicable to
such source if the categorical standard is thereafter promulgated in
accordance with § 307 of the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid or semisolid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and within a
period of 15 minutes or less.
GROUNDWATER — Water which is contained in or passing through the
ground.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — The liquid and/or solid material from a septic
tank, cesspool or similar domestic waste treatment or containment system
or waste from holding tanks such as those found in vessels, chemical toilets,
campers or house trailers.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes shall or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — The sum of the
provisions of this chapter, amendments thereto, and any activities
authorized by this chapter as regards the regulation and control of
industrial users.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges industrial waste into the
sewer system.
§ 190-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-3
1:166
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, or form
of energy, which is produced as a result, whether directly or indirectly of
any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or activity, or in
the course of developing, recovering or processing of natural resources
and which is discharged into the sewer system; but not cooling water
or sanitary sewage. Any wastewater which contains industrial waste and
which is discharged from an industrial, manufacturing, trade or business
premises is considered industrial waste for the purposes of this chapter.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any substance which is discharged, and which
consists of or is contaminated by pathogens or other etiologic agents, and
which has not been sterilized, neutralized or otherwise rendered harmless.
Infectious waste includes, but is not limited to, contaminated blood, blood
products or other bodily fluids (excepting excreta discharged by normal
bodily functions); wastes, including excreta, from patient isolation areas;
laboratory samples or test materials; animal wastes and bedding; body
parts; pathology and autopsy wastes; and glassware, hypodermic needles,
surgical instruments and other sharps.
INTERFERENCE — The condition in which a discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources:
LOCAL LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass or
other characteristics of wastewaters or pollutants discharged or likely to be
discharged, by industrial users, and which are developed by the Borough.
MANAGER — The Borough Manager, or his duly authorized representative
as may be provided from time to time by the Borough Manager, by Borough
Council or by both.
MANHOLE — A structure allowing access from the surface of the ground to
a sewer.
Inhibits or disrupts the process or operations of the sewage treatment
plant or the sewage collection system, or the processing, use or
disposal of sludge.
A.
Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Article 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as
the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA) and including
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act or which results in or increases the severity of
a violation of other state or national environmental statutes, rules or
regulations.
B.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:167
mg/L — Milligrams per liter; a measure of concentration of waterborne
substances.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of all daily determinations of
concentration made during a calendar month. The monthly average may
also be expressed as the average mass discharged during a month, utilizing
the daily flow and associated concentration values for each day.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies
to a specific category of industrial users. National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards are enumerated in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405
through 471.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or other source from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
categorical standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section. Determination of the applicability of new source standards shall be
made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR 403.3.
NONCOMPLIANCE — Not in compliance.
NORMAL PRODUCTION DAY — For the purposes of sampling wastewater,
a normal production day is that period of time during which wastewater
is discharged and production, cleanup and other activities that normally
produce wastewater or industrial waste are occurring. If a sample is
specified to be collected during a normal production day, it should not
include aliquots taken during periods that are not representative of normal
activities, or during times when wastewater is not being discharged.
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, control or management of a
pretreatment facility for industrial wastes or of a truck used in the removal,
transport or disposal of wastewater, industrial waste or holding tank waste.
ORDINANCE (THIS ORDINANCE) — When capitalized, the term
"ordinance" refers to this chapter.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of an improved property.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge of pollutants by the POTW to the waters
of the state, so as to cause or contribute to pollution, either alone or in
conjunction with other discharges, or cause or contribute to a violation of
the Borough's NPDES permit or an increase in the magnitude or duration
of any such violation; or the concentration of pollutants in the sludge so
that the end use of the sludge causes or contributes to pollution, harm
to the environment or a violation of any state or national sludge disposal
regulation, guideline or standard.
§ 190-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-3
1:168
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representative, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
PLUMBING CODE — The official Borough rules and regulations for the
design and installation of a building sewer or any sewer plumbing within
an improved property which the Borough Council may adopt or amend by
ordinance or resolution from time to time.
POLLUTANT — Any substance including, but not limited to, dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial,
municipal and agricultural waste or having certain characteristics such
as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, ammonia-nitrogen,
phosphorus, color, pH or toxicity, which, when discharged into water, results
in pollution or increases pollution.
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as will
create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or to domestic,
municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
legitimate beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life; or contamination of the air, soil or of the environment so as to
produce or is likely to produce similar deleterious effects.
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1292). The term includes sewage collection system and the
sewage treatment plant.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a sewer system.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes or by means of other process changes except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — Agent of the Borough designated to
administer the industrial pretreatment requirements of this chapter.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement, other than a categorical standard, imposed on an industrial
user by § 303(b) and (c) of the Act, the state or this chapter.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE — Any discharge which is prohibited under
§ 190-7 of this chapter.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under
§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and 40 CFR 403.5.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:169
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated competency
in the analysis of wastewater by submission of their generally recognized
documentation of competency to the Borough or who is normally employed
in the capacity of analyst by a professional analytical laboratory.
REFRIGERATION — Maintenance of temperature for storage, preservation
of food or as a process of manufacturing.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried domestic waste from any
improved property, but excluding effluent from septic tanks or cesspools;
rain, snow or stormwater; groundwater or other collected water from roofs,
drains or basements.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer carrying only sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface or groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities owned and operated by
the Borough, as of any particular time, used or usable for collecting,
transporting, pumping and disposing of wastewater, which facilities are
connected to and served by the sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewer system owned
and operated by the Borough, which is designed to provide treatment of
wastewater and discharge of treated effluent to the environment.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater or stormwater.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewage collection system, sewage treatment plant
and any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. For
the purposes of this chapter, "sewer system" shall also include any sewers
that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant from persons who
are, by contact or agreement with the Borough, users of the sewer system.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user who:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A noncompliance which meets or
exceeds standards of significant noncompliance determined by the Borough
and contained in this chapter.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any industrial user in significant
noncompliance.
SLUG or SLUG LOAD — Any prohibited discharge.
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of industrial waste per
average workday;
A.
Discharges an organic load, in pounds of BOD per average work day,
of 5% or more of the average daily organic loading of the sewage
treatment plant;
B.
C. Is regulated by categorical standards; or
Is determined by the Borough to have the potential of adversely
affecting the operation of the POTW, causing interference or passthrough,
or of violating any pretreatment requirement.
D.
§ 190-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-3
1:170
SPCC PLAN — A spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan
prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood and intensity of
a slug load or spill and to expedite control and cleanup activities should a
slug load or spill occur.
SPILL — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a customary batch discharge, or the control
or cleanup activities associated with such an occurrence; an accidental spill
may result from the spilling, overflowing, rupture or leakage of any storage,
process or transfer container.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the Water Pollution
Control Federation (Water Environment Federation), the American Public
Health Association and the American Waterworks Association.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER — A sewer designed and constructed for the purpose of
carrying stormwater and to which sanitary sewage or industrial wastes are
not intentionally admitted. Stormwater sewers are not a part of the sewage
collection system.
STORMWATER — Any flow of water occurring during or following any form
of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Borough to supervise
the operation of the sewage treatment plant and monitor flows in the
sewage collection system, or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TAPPING FEE — A fee as defined and designated as a tapping fee as
set forth in Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1227, No. 203, § 1 [53 P.S.
§ 306.B(t)(1)(iii)], or any successor statute or amendment thereto.27
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of the dissolved and undissolved solid
constituents of water or wastewater.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS — The sum of all quantifiable values of various
organic pollutants as determined by the Borough or, for certain categorical
industrial users, as defined in the applicable categorical standard.
TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan submitted in lieu of
testing for total toxic organics in which an industrial user specifies methods
of control to assure that total toxic organics do not routinely enter the sewer
system.
27.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:171
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of § 307(a) of the Act, or other acts,
or is present in sufficient quantity, either singly or in combination with other
wastewater, so as to present risk of causing interference or pass-through,
causing harm to humans, animals or plants or creating a hazard to persons
or property, either in the sewage collection system, the sewage treatment
plant, or the environment into which it is released.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — Discharge of an unauthorized waste or
discharge which otherwise is not in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any substance which is discharged into the
sewage collection system which is not in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER — Industrial wastes or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with
any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present,
whether treated or untreated, which enters the sewer system.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in this chapter.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
§ 190-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-3
1:172
ARTICLE II
Discharges to Sewer System
§ 190-4. Discharge of stormwaters.
No person shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof water, subsurface drainage or
building foundation drainage into any sanitary sewer.
§ 190-5. Storm sewers.
No person shall, at any time, discharge any wastewater, sanitary sewage or
industrial waste into any storm sewer of the Borough, nor shall any person
construct or utilize existing private storm sewers for such purposes.
§ 190-6. Discharge limitations.
No improved property nor industrial user shall discharge sewage and/or
industrial waste, directly or indirectly, into the sewer system, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, which contains pollutants in excess of the daily
maximum limits as follows:
Pollutant
Limit
(mg/L)
Biochemical oxygen demand 250
Total suspended solids 300
Total phosphorus, as P 15
Ammonia-nitrogen, as N 30
§ 190-7. Prohibited discharge.
No user shall discharge or caused to be discharged, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the sewer system. These general prohibitions apply to all
users, whether or not the users are subject to categorical standards or
any other pretreatment requirements. No user may discharge any of the
following substances to the sewer system:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the sewer system or to the operation of the sewer system. At no time
shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point
of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more
than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter. At no time shall the closed-cup flashpoint of the
wastewater be less than 140° F. (60° C.). Prohibited materials include,
but are not limited to, the following substances in concentrations which
cause exceedance of the above standard: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-7
1:173
benzene, ethers, alcohols, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates
and carbides.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the sewer system,
such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than
1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper,
wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than six or higher than nine or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
sewer system.
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other constituents of the wastewater, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant or to exceed the limits referenced
in an applicable categorical standard.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other substances normally present in the sewer
system are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer system for maintenance and
repair.
F. Any substance which results in the formation or release of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
G. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through, but in
no case exceeding 20 mg/L.
H. Fats, oils, greases or waxes of animal or vegetable origin in amounts
which exceed 100 mg/L.
I. Any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's effluent
or any other product of the sewage treatment plant, such as residues,
sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the sewer system cause the sewage treatment plant to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
§ 190-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-7
1:174
§ 190-8. Unauthorized discharges.
Discharge of any prohibited substance listed under § 190-7 of this chapter
shall be considered an unauthorized discharge and the Borough may take
whatever steps are necessary to halt such a discharge, as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 190-9. Categorical standards.
If the categorical standards for a particular industrial user are more
stringent than local limits or other requirements imposed under this
chapter, then the categorical standards shall apply. The Borough shall notify
in writing all affected industrial users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. The National Categorical Pretreatment
Control Act or state and federal criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
J. Any substance which will cause the Borough to violate its NPDES and/
or state water quality management permits or applicable receiving
water quality standards.
K. Any wastewater with objectionable color which will pass through the
sewage treatment plant, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
L. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater with a temperature at the discharge into the sewer
system which exceed 40° C. (104° F.).
M. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to the sewage treatment plant or interfere with the
operation of the sewer system.
N. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Borough or applicable state or national regulations.
O. Any trucked wastewater or pollutants or hauled waste except those
discharged at points designated by the Borough.
P. Any wastewater which is incompatible with treatment in use at the
sewage treatment plant so as to cause or contribute to interference or
pass-through.
Q. Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin, dieldrin,
endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene, dichlorphenoxyacetic acid,
trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid or other persistent herbicides,
pesticides or rodenticides.
R. Any infectious waste.
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-9
1:175
Standards are hereby incorporated into this chapter as requirements for
those industrial users subject to such categorical standards.
§ 190-10. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than national requirements and limitations
or those established under this chapter.
§ 190-11. Local limits.
The Borough may establish, and review from time to time, local limits
regulating the discharge of specific pollutants by industrial users.
§ 190-12. Prohibition on dilution.
No industrial user shall, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as
a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in applicable categorical
standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation, including local limits,
developed by the Borough or state.
§ 190-13. Slug loads and spills.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from spills or accidental
discharges that result in unauthorized discharges or slug load discharges.
Facilities to prevent spills and slug loads shall be provided and maintained
at the owner's or industrial user's own cost and expense.
A. Local limits may be established for any substance which is discharged,
or is likely to be discharged, to the sewer system.
B. Local limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination of the two.
C. The procedure for the calculation of local limits should be as
recommended by the approval authority.
D. Local limits may be calculated to prevent interference; pass-through;
the discharge of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats to worker
health and safety; and physical, chemical or biological damage to the
sewer system.
E. Local limits may be applied to all significant industrial users and may be
included in all wastewater discharge permits. Local limits may be
applied to other industrial users if deemed appropriate by the Borough.
F. Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local limit established for that
pollutant shall constitute an unauthorized discharge. Such a discharge
is subject to the actions and penalties set forth herein.
G. Discharge of any pollutant prior to the establishment of any local limits
shall not give any industrial user any right to continue such discharge in
violation of the local limits.
§ 190-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-13
1:176
§ 190-14. Drainage of water filtration systems.
Discharge of filter backwash water to the sewer system shall be regulated
as follows:
A. Notification. In the case of a spill or slug load or other unauthorized
discharge, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the Borough of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
corrective actions being taken or planned, and expected duration.
B. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a spill or other unauthorized
discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
C. Written notice. Within five days following a spill, slug load or other
unauthorized discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the Borough
a detailed written report describing the causes of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of
any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the sewer system, fish kills or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial
user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed
by this chapter or applicable law.
D. SPCC plans. The Borough reserves the right to require all industrial
users to complete and obtain approval of a spill prevention control and
countermeasure (SPCC) plan or provide acceptable evidence that such
a plan is not necessary for their facility. Such plans shall, at a minimum,
contain the elements specified in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(2)(v)(A-D). SPCC
plans shall be submitted to the Borough for review, and shall be
approved by the Borough before implementation of the plan or
construction of any required facilities. Review and approval of such
plans, facilities and operating procedures by the Borough shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. Granular media filter backwash may be discharged to the sewer system,
subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Diatomaceous earth filter backwash, if discharged to the sewer system,
shall be connected to the sewer system through settling tanks with no
less than three months' storage capacity of spent diatomaceous earth,
which tanks shall be accessible for removing solid waste for disposal.
§ 190-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-15
1:177
§ 190-15. Trucked and hauled wastes.
The discharge of trucked or holding tank wastes to the Borough sewage
collection system shall be allowed only with prior express written consent of
the Borough. No wastewater may be discharged to the sewer system which
has not been produced or generated on the improved property connected to
the sewer system, without the prior express written consent of the Borough.
§ 190-16. Grease and sand traps.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided by the user
when the Borough determines that such devices are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewaters containing greases, oils or settleable solids.
Interceptors and traps shall be installed, operated, maintained and cleaned
properly, so that they will consistently remove the grease, oil and settleable
solids. Interceptors and traps shall be properly designed to accommodate
the maximum flow rate expected to occur, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 190-17. Garbage grinders.
The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a finely divided mass,
properly flushed with an ample amount of water, shall be permitted in
the kitchen of a dwelling unit. Such devices shall also be permitted in
food preparation areas of commercial or industrial establishments upon the
registration of each such device with the Borough. Each existing garbage
grinder requiring registration shall be registered within 30 days of receipt
by the owner thereof from the Borough of the requirements of such
registration as set forth herein.
§ 190-18. Notification requirements; hazardous wastes and
hazardous substances.
A. All industrial users shall notify the Borough, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Waste Management, in writing of
any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. Such
notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste, as set forth
in 40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges
more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the
notification shall also include the following information, to the extent
that it is known and readily available to the industrial user:
(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents in the waste.
(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration in the wastewater of
all such constituents discharged in the most recent month.
§ 190-15 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-18
1:178
(3) An estimate of the mass and concentration of such constituents
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
B. Industrial users that commence discharge after the effective date of
this chapter shall submit the report within 180 days of first discharge of
the hazardous waste, except as provided in Subsection D of this section.
C. The required report needs to be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. Industrial users regulated under
categorical standards which have already submitted such information
in baseline monitoring reports or periodic compliance reports do not
have to report this information again.
D. Industrial users that discharge less than 15 kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month do not have to comply with these reporting
requirements. This exemption does not apply to acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
E. An industrial user shall notify the Borough within five days of becoming
aware of any discharges of reportable quantities of listed or unlisted
hazardous substances, as defined at 40 CFR 302.4 (CERCLA hazardous
substances). This notification shall include the time of release; the
name of the substance; the identifying CAS number, if known; and the
approximate quantity discharged. If the discharge constitutes a spill,
change in wastewater constituents or slug load, other reporting
requirements of this chapter may also apply.
F. Each notification required by this section shall include a statement
certifying that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce the
volume and/or toxicity of the discharged wastes to the extent that it is
economically practical. This statement shall be signed by the
authorized representative of the industrial user.
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:179

ARTICLE III
Sewer Rentals, Charges and Fees
§ 190-19. Purpose.
The Borough is required to provide adequate funds for operation,
maintenance and administration costs of the sewer system. In order to
provide these necessary funds, the Borough has covenanted to fix, charge
and collect sewer rentals, charges and other fees from users of the sewer
system.
§ 190-20. Sewer rentals.
There are hereby imposed upon all Borough users of the sewer system the
following sewer rentals:
A. Water-metered sewer system users. Sewer system rental/user charges
for all users shall be billed user fees at 95% of the water billing rates in
effect at the time of billing, which shall be paid quarterly, effective the
third quarter of 2012 and billed on the first day of the fourth quarter
2012, and quarterly thereafter at the above rate until adjusted as set
forth herein. [Amended 10-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1126; 7-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 1183]
B. Nonwater metered sewer system users.
(1) All users who do not have a metered water supply shall provide and
install at their own expense a privately owned flow-measuring
device or devices as specified in § 190-22 of this article. Sewer
rental charges shall be then determined as described in Subsection
A.
(2) In the case of a user from a dwelling unit, the Borough Manager
may establish a sewer rental charge, equal to not less than the
average quarterly charge of dwelling units whose sewer rental
charge is calculated as described in Subsection A.
C. Metered water not discharged to sewer system.
(1) Whenever an industrial user with a metered water supply uses
water that is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of
water so used and not discharged into the sewer system shall be
excluded in determining the sewer rental charge of said improved
property. Provided, however, that the quantity of water so used and
not discharged into the sewer system is measured by a privately
owned flow-measuring device as specified in § 190-22 of this
article; and provided that such discharge does not violate any other
provisions of this chapter.
(2) The sewer rental charge to such improved property shall be
computed by deducting the water not discharged to the sewer
system from the total water meter readings. If, in the opinion of the
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:181
§ 190-21. Sewage and industrial waste surcharges.
There are hereby imposed upon all Borough users of the sewer system the
following sewage and industrial waste surcharges:
§ 190-22. Privately owned flow-measuring devices.
Borough Manager, it is not practical to install a privately owned
flow-measuring device to continuously determine the quantity of
water not discharged into the sewer system, an estimated amount
or percentage of water not discharged into the sewer system may
be made by the Borough Manager. Any dispute as to the estimated
amount of percentage shall be submitted in writing to the Borough
within 30 days after notice of the estimate, whose decision on the
matter shall be final and binding for the current year.
A. Calculation of surcharge amount. Any improved property and/or
industrial users which discharges sewage and/or industrial waste into
the sewer system, which contains pollutants in excess of the limits set
forth in § 190-6 of this chapter, shall pay a strength of a waste
surcharge, in addition to the applicable sewer rental charge, equal to
the sum of 1/10 of 1% for each milligram per liter (mg/L) by which the
said limits for biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, total
phosphorus and ammonia-nitrogen are exceeded. The surcharge shall
be applicable to billings for sewer service in accordance with the
provisions of § 190-20 of this chapter.
B. Determination. In establishing sewage and industrial waste strength
purposes, an analysis shall be made with procedures outlined in the
latest edition of Standard Methods. The strength of sewage and
industrial waste to be used for calculating the amount of the surcharge
shall be determined at least once annually either:
(1) By suitable sampling and analysis of the sewage or industrial waste
for a twenty-four-hour period, during which time the strength of
the sewage or industrial waste discharged to the sewer system is at
a maximum.
(2) From relationship of products produced to strength of industrial
waste from those industrial users where such relationships have
been established.
(3) From estimates.
A. Nonmetered water service; industrial wastes. A flow meter or other
measuring device shall be installed for the purpose of measuring
wastewater discharged to the sewer system from any improved
property receiving nonmetered water service from the Borough, or any
improved property which discharges unmetered water from a private
source to the sewer system.
§ 190-20 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-22
1:182
§ 190-23. Collection of sewer rentals and charges.
B. Optional flow meter. Any owner of an improved property which
discharges wastewater to the Borough sewer system may notify the
Borough, in writing, of his, her or its desire to have a wastewater flow
meter or other measuring device installed and to have the sewer rental
charge and surcharges, if applicable, calculated as set forth in this
subpart based upon the flow passing through such wastewater flow
meter, or other measuring device rather than the water consumed upon
the improved property. Borough shall have the right to reject any
request or application by any owner for use of a wastewater flow meter,
if the Borough determines that the wastewater from the improved
property to either insufficient for accurate measurement by a
wastewater flow meter, or of a type inappropriate for measurement by a
wastewater flow meter. If at any time after installation, the Borough
determines that a wastewater flow meter cannot accurately measure
the wastewater discharge, the Borough shall have the right to require
removal of such wastewater flow meter.
C. Required private water meter. If the Borough rejects any request or
application by any owner for use of a wastewater flow meter as outlined
in Subsection B above, the owner of the improved property shall be
required to furnish and install a private water meter, which shall be the
property of the owner. If the owner of an improved property fails to
install a private water meter, the Borough shall have the right to enter
upon the premises of the improved property and install a water meter,
the cost of said water meter and installation thereof being paid for by
the owner of the improved property.
D. Installation and maintenance. Prior to the installation of any flow meter
or other measuring device described in Subsection A, B or C above, the
owner of said improved property shall submit complete plans, drawings
and specifications for each proposed flow meter or other measuring
device to the Borough for its review and approval. Any costs associated
with the preparation of the plans, drawings and specifications and the
installation of said flow meter or other measuring device shall be paid
for by the owner of the improved property. All flow meters or other
measuring devices shall be maintained, repaired or replaced at the sole
cost of the owner. Upon receipt of a written request from the Borough,
the owner of said flow meter or other measuring device shall have it
inspected, tested and repaired as required, and the results of said
inspection, testing and repair submitted to the Borough in writing. The
cost of such inspection, testing and repair should be paid by the owner
of the meter. The Borough also reserves the right to observe and record
information from said flow meter or other measuring device at all
reasonable times. Should the owner of an improved property not
maintain, repair, replace or test said meter or other measuring devices,
the Borough may undertake same and bill the owner accordingly.
§ 190-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-23
1:183
A. Due date. All sewer rentals and other sewer charges shall be due as of
the billing date, as may be established by the Borough.
B. Responsibility for payment. The owner of any improved property shall
be responsible for payment of all sewer rental and other sewer charges.
Multiple owners of any improved property shall be jointly and severally
liable for any such sewer rental and other sewage charges.
C. Penalty for late payment. In the event of any default in payment of any
sewer rental, rate, charge or surcharge within 20 days after the due
date of such bill, a penalty of 10% of the total of such outstanding sewer
rental, rate, charge or surcharge will be added to all such amounts due.
Every 30 days thereafter, an additional penalty in the amount of 3% of
the outstanding sewer rental, rate, charge or surcharge are billed,
excluding any prior penalties, shall be added to all such amounts due.
D. Liens for sewer rentals and charges. Sewer rentals or charges imposed
by this chapter shall be a lien on the improved property connected to
and served by the sewer system; and any such sewer rentals or charges
which are not paid within 90 days after each due date applicable to the
particular improved property may be filed as a lien against the
improved property so connected to and served by the sewer system,
which lien shall be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of municipal
claims.
E. Payment of sewer rentals and charges on vacant or unoccupied
improved property. Sewer rental and charges shall accrue and be
payable for all periods during which an improved property has its
building sewer connected to the Borough sewer system, irrespective of
occupancy. Provided, however, that after the improved property has
remained vacant and unoccupied for one full quarterly billing period,
the Borough may relieve the owner of the improved property from
further sewer rental and charges during continuance of vacancy or
nonuse, if all water connections and sources from which water is used
on the improved property shall be shut off and sealed or otherwise
secured against use during such period to the satisfaction of the
Borough Manager.
F. Reoccupied improved property. When a vacated improved property is
reoccupied, the owner shall give written notice to the Borough
Manager of reoccupancy and the date water to the improved property
was turned on. Sewer rental charges for the reoccupied improved
property shall be determined from the date of actual reoccupancy or
the date the water is turned on.
G. Failure to pay sewer rentals and charges. Upon the failure of any
person to pay in full any sewer rental, rate, charge or surcharge within
90 days after the due date for such bill, the Borough shall have the right
to terminate water and/or sewer service to the improved property. After
§ 190-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-23
1:184
§ 190-24. Tapping, connection and customer facility fees.
The following tapping, connection and customer facility fees are hereby
imposed upon all Borough users of the sewer system for each new building
sewer connected to the sewage collection system. No person shall connect
any dwelling unit and/or improved property to any part of the Borough
sewer system without first making application for and securing a permit, in
writing, from the Borough.
payment of all delinquent bills against such improved property, service
may be restored upon payment of all expenses which have been
incurred by the Borough in terminating and restoring such service.
A. Tapping fee.
(1) Borough shall have the power to establish by resolution adopted by
the Borough Council a tapping fee upon the owner of each dwelling
unit and/or improved property (other than such owner who is
subject to contractual or special agreements providing for the
payment of certain sums in lieu of a tapping fee) whose building
sewer is connected to the sewage collection system, regardless of
whether such connection is direct or indirect, including changing
the type of use of the improved property previously connected or
connecting one or more new uses of the type hereinafter referred
to through an existing connection, and regardless of whether such
improved property is connected through one or more building
sewers or that the building sewer is owned by the Borough or by
any owner than the Borough. The amount of gallons upon which the
tapping fee is calculated shall be obtained from § 190-20 of this
chapter.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall be charged separately, even though two or
more dwelling units are or will be connected through building
sewer to the sewage collection system of the Borough. The tapping
fee for a dwelling unit shall be based upon the average discharge
per dwelling unit per calendar quarter as determined from records
of the Borough.
(3) Every improved property shall be charged a tapping fee based upon
the actual or estimated sewage and/or industrial waste flows as
determined under § 190-20 of this chapter. Whenever actual
sewage or wastewater flows exceed estimates, an additional
tapping fee shall be charged.
(4) Where any dwelling unit and/or improved property connected to
the sewage collection system of the Borough shall be converted,
enlarged or remodeled or additional buildings shall be constructed
on the improved property and connected directly or indirectly to
the sewage collection system of the Borough, so as to create or
establish additional uses as classified in Subsection A(1) hereof, an
additional tapping fee determined in accordance with Subsection
§ 190-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:185
§ 190-25. Industrial pretreatment requirement fees.
In addition to the sewer rental charges and the tapping, connection and
customer facility fees, the Borough reserves the right to provide for the
recovery of costs from industrial users for the implementation of the
industrial pretreatment requirements established by this chapter. The
Borough may by resolution adopt charges and fees to include the following:
A(2) and (3) hereof for each additional use shall be payable to
the Borough by the owner of said dwelling unit and/or improved
property.
B. Connection fee and customer facility fee. In addition to the tapping fee,
the Borough reserves the right to establish and charge a connection fee
and/or customer facility fee. The connection fee shall relate to any costs
to the Borough relative to the connection sewer, while the customer
facility fee shall relate to any costs to the Borough relative to the
customer sewer.
C. Due date for tapping, connection and customer facility fees.
(1) Any tapping fee, connection fee and/or customer facility fee shall
be due and payable at the time application is made to the Borough
for a permit to connect to the sewage collection system of the
Borough, or upon the date other permit application is made to the
Borough to convert, enlarge or remodel any dwelling unit or
improved property or for any additional buildings to be constructed
on an improved property.
(2) Should any dwelling unit and/or improved property not connect to
the sewage collection system of the Borough as required by this
chapter, the Plumbing Code or any other applicable regulations of
the Borough, then the tapping fee, connection fee and/or customer
facility fee is due and payable when said connection is made by the
Borough. Any other fees and charges as a result of the Borough
making this connection are also due and payable at this time.
(3) Payment of tapping fees, connection fees and/or the customer
facility fees charged by the Borough pursuant to this chapter shall
be enforced by the Borough in any manner appropriate under law
at the time in effect.
(4) The Borough reserves the right from time to time to adopt
modification of or changes to its tapping fees, connection fees and
customer facility fees.
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
industrial pretreatment standards.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
§ 190-24 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-25
1:186
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures (SPCC plans) and
construction.
D. Fees for wastewater discharge permit application.
E. Fees for filing appeals.
F. Fees for consistent removal (by the sewage treatment plant) of
pollutants otherwise subject to categorical standards.
G. Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements herein.
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:187

ARTICLE IV
Sanitary Sewer Service
§ 190-26. Connection to sewage collection system.
A. Connection to existing sewage collection system. All sewers of
improved property in the Borough abutting on or adjoining any street,
alley, lane or other public highway in which a sanitary sewer of the
sewage collection system now owned by the Borough has been
constructed shall be required to connect said improved property to the
sewage collection system within 90 days of receiving written notice
from the Borough to make such connection.
B. Connection to new or extension to sewage collection system. All owners
of improved property in the Borough abutting on or adjoining any
street, alley, lane or other public highway in which a new sanitary sewer
and/or an extension to the sewage collection system is constructed shall
be required to connect said improved property to the sewage collection
system within 90 days of receiving written notice from the Borough to
make such connection.
C. Failure of improved property to connect to sewage collection system. If,
after the expiration of 90 days from the date of such written notice to
connect, any owner of an improved property abutting on or adjoining
any street, alley, lane or other public highway in which there is a
sanitary sewer of the sewage collection system shall have failed to
connect therewith as required by Subsection A or B above, the Borough
may give such owner 45 days written notice to make such connection,
from the date of receipt of such written notice, and upon failure of such
owner to make such connection within said forty-five-day period, the
Borough may make such connection and collect the cost thereof from
such owner by a municipal claim or in action in assumpsit. The written
notice shall be made by either personal service or by certified mail sent
to the last known address of said owner.
D. Connection of a double dwelling unit. An improved property which is a
double dwelling unit shall be connected to the sewage collection system
as provided by this chapter.
E. Determining location of sewage collection system. The owner of an
improved property to be connected and/or his contractor or plumber
acting as his duly authorized agent is solely responsible for determining
the precise depth of the sewage collection system prior to the
construction of any improved property or building sewer in the case of
existing improved property. The Borough assumes no responsibility for
any costs arising out of the failure of the owner or agent to determine,
prior to the construction of any improved property or building sewer,
the precise depth of the sewage collection system regardless of any
information that may be made available by the Borough.
§ 190-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:189
§ 190-27. Application for permit to connect to sewage collection
system.
F. Privatization of extraneous water. No person shall make connection of
roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to the sewage collection
system or to a building sewer which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to the sewage collection system.
G. Floor drains.
(1) Floor drains shall be permitted to be connected to the building
sewer only where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Borough
Manager that their connection is absolutely necessary and
imperative. Where such drains are permitted, arrangements shall
be made to maintain a permanent water seal in the traps, and such
drains shall be provided with check or backwater valves.
(2) Written permission shall be obtained from the Borough Manager
before any basement floor drain may be attached to the building
sewer; provided, however, that permission for a basement floor
drain shall not be granted until the owner has executed and signed
a written agreement in triplicate releasing the Borough from any
damage that may result from the basement being flooded by the
stoppage of the sewage collection system or the building sewer,
which agreement shall be filed with the Borough and the owner
shall at all times maintain one copy of same.
H. Testing of connection. The owner or his representative under § 190-29
shall notify the Manager at least 24 hours before actual connection and
testing of a building sewer into the sewage collection system is to be
accomplished. No such connection or testing shall be accomplished
except in the presence of the Manager, and shall be accomplished in a
manner satisfactory to said Manager. No portion of the building sewer
shall be covered until it has been inspected, tested and approved in
writing by the Manager. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before being so inspected, tested and approved, it shall be uncovered
for such inspection and testing at the cost and expense of the owner.
A. Application from improved property.
(1) All owners of improved property in the Borough who receive a
written notice to connect to the sewage collection system under
§ 192-26A or B shall be required to make an application, on a form
furnished by the Borough, for the construction of a building sewer
to serve the improved property. Such application shall require, as a
minimum, the owner of the improved property to indicate:
(a) Whether sanitary sewer and/or industrial waste will be
discharged through the building sewer.
§ 190-26 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-27
1:190
§ 190-28. Construction of building sewer to sewage collection
system.
(b) That the owner agrees to pay all lawful charges for sewage
and/or industrial waste discharged.
(c) That the owner will notify the Borough in writing upon change
of owner.
(d) That the building sewer will be continuous use for at least one
year.
(2) Owners of improved property who desire to discharge industrial
waste through the building sewer into the sewage collection system
may also be required to furnish additional information as required
in § 190-30C.
(3) The application must also contain any other information as may be
required by this chapter.
(4) The application must be signed by the owner of the improved
property, his duly authorized representative and all other persons
having interest of record in the improved property.
B. Issuance of permit. If the information contained on the application
described in Subsection A above is complete and satisfactory to the
Borough, and the appropriate fees as required by § 190-24 of this
chapter have been paid, the Borough will issue a permit for the
connection of the improved property to the sewage collection system.
C. Displaying permit. The permit required by this chapter shall be
prominently displayed at the site of work, at all times, during
construction of a building sewer and connection of a building sewer to
the sewage collection system.
A. Construction requirements. All building sewers, which consists of a
connection sewer and a customer sewer, shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the Plumbing Code
or any other applicable regulations of the Borough.
B. Connection sewer available. If the connection sewer is in place and
available for use, the owner of the improved property shall construct or
have constructed the customer sewer and connect it to the connection
sewer. The Borough shall be notified prior to such connection to provide
inspection of the customer sewer and the connection. All costs
associated with the construction of the customer sewer and the
connection are the responsibility of the owner of the improved property.
Said owner is also responsible for all other fees of the Borough relative
to this chapter.
C. Connection sewer not available. If the connection sewer is not in place,
the Borough shall construct the connection sewer or have the owner of
§ 190-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-28
1:191
the improved property construct the connection sewer along with the
customer sewer. If the Borough constructs the connection sewer, said
owner will be responsible for all fees provided for said connection
sewer in addition to all fees for said customer sewer as provided by this
chapter. The provisions for notification and inspection and the payment
of all costs and fees associated with the construction undertaken by
said owner shall be as set forth in Subsection B above.
D. Prohibited connections.
(1) No privy, vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be maintained at any time upon any improved property which
had been connected to the sewage collection system or which shall
be required under § 190-26A or B to be connected to the sewage
collection system.
(2) Upon connection to the sewage collection system, any existing
privy, vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in
existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Borough,
shall be cleansed and filled at the expense of the owner of such
improved property and under the direction and supervision of this
Borough; and any such privy, vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this
Borough, cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such
nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the
owners of such improved property.
(3) No privy, vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
at any time shall be connected to the sewage collection system.
(4) In the event of the failure by any owner of an improved property to
clean and fill any privy, vault, cesspool, sink hole, septic tank or
similar receptacle, the Borough may perform such work and collect
the costs thereof from such owner by a municipal claim, or in an
action in assumpsit.
E. Unlawful connections. If any owner or tenant of an improved property
should make any connection to the building sewer or the sewage
collection system without a permit from the Borough, or allow any
pollutant to be discharged into the building sewer or the sewage
collection system except as provided by this chapter or violate any of
the provisions with respect to this chapter, and shall after 10 days of
receipt of written notice from the Borough fail or neglect to abate such
condition, the Borough may, at its option, enter upon the improved
property; or the Borough may by appropriate legal action proceed to
compel said owner of said improved property to abate such condition.
In addition to any other remedies available, the Borough, upon failure
or neglect of said owner to comply with any provisions of this chapter,
may enter the improved property and at the owner's cost, disconnect
the said improved property from the sewage collection system and may
require the payment of a fee for reconnection and all costs and
§ 190-28 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-28
1:192
§ 190-29. Requirements for construction of building sewer.
expenses as a condition for reconnection. The Borough may file a
municipal lien against the improved property for any and all costs
incurred by the Borough in abating such condition, together with such
additional charges as may be permitted by applicable law.
F. Penalty for violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
subpart shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of constructing a building sewer, that is, shall or may be
physically connected to the sewage collection system or to construct
any other sewer plumbing within an improved property within the
jurisdiction of the Borough without first being registered by the
Borough to engage in said business.
B. Registration fee. The Borough reserves the right to establish and
charge a registration fee for such person engaged in the business of
constructing a building sewer or any other sewer plumbing within an
improved property within the jurisdiction of the Borough.
C. Annual registration requirement. Any such registration validly
obtained, and not otherwise revoked for cause as specified elsewhere in
this chapter, shall expire at the end of one calendar year. Such
registration may be renewed by the appropriate endorsement or
reissued provided that the person holding a valid registration makes
application or such renewal by not later than April 15, and provided
further that the registration holder has demonstrated by past
performance that he is qualified and capable of performing work
covered in accordance with good plumbing practice and the provisions
of this chapter, the Plumbing Code or any other applicable regulations
of the Borough.
D. Revoking of registration. Any registration provided for in this chapter
may at any time be revoked for incompetency, fraudulent use thereof,
giving false witness or any violation of this chapter, the Plumbing Code,
or any other applicable regulations of the Borough relative to
constructing a building sewer or sewer plumbing after a full and fair
hearing by the Borough Manager. After revocation for cause, no
registration shall be issued to such person until at least six months shall
have elapsed.
E. Nontransferability of registration. A registration issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable to any successor in
business.
§ 190-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-29
1:193
F. Bond/insurance requirement. No registration as described in this
section shall be issued until the person applying therefor shall have
given a bond in the sum of $1,000 and produced to the Borough
Manager evidence that he is completely covered by insurance in
connection with his construction work for property damage and public
liability. The public liability coverage shall not be less than $10,000 for
injury to any one person, and $20,000 total for any accident, and the
coverage for property damage shall be not less than $5,000 to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Northampton from any
and all claims and suits for damages to persons or property arising from
the negligence of any person, firm or corporation registered under the
provisions of this section or by agents, employees or workmen of such
registrations. Such registrations, with good and sufficient surety to the
satisfaction of the Northampton Borough Council, will pay the full costs
of restoration and repair for any and all damages which may happen or
be caused to any tree, street, pavement, sidewalk or sewer belonging to
said Borough, or to any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole or
wire of any public service company, whether said damages or injury
shall be inflicted by said registrant or by agents, employees or workmen
of the registrant, and conditioned also that said party shall save and
indemnify and keep harmless said Borough against all liability,
judgment, damages, costs and expenses which may, in any case, secure
against said Borough in consequences of the granting of such
registrant, and will fully and completely restore to its original condition,
to the satisfaction of the Borough Manager, and all streets, pavements
and sanitary sewers which may be opened or disturbed by said party,
and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions and provisions
of this chapter and with the conditions of any permit issued pursuant
thereto.
§ 190-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-29
1:194
ARTICLE V
Specific Regulation of Industrial Waste Discharges to Sewer System
§ 190-30. Discharge permits.
A. Significant industrial users. All significant users proposing to connect
to or discharge to the sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days before connecting to or discharging to the sewer
system. All existing significant industrial users connected to or
discharging to the sewer system shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 45 days after notification from the Borough. Following its
review of the information provided, including any additional
information which may be requested by the Borough, the Borough will
issue or deny the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit to the
significant user.
B. Other industrial users. Industrial users which are not significant
industrial users do not require a wastewater discharge permit, but are
required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter. If an
industrial user makes changes to processes, flows, wastewater
concentrations, wastewater characteristics or other changes which
result in the industrial user meeting the definition of significant
industrial user, the industrial user shall immediately upon becoming
aware that such a change has occurred or 90 days prior to such a
change if it is planned, notify the Borough and apply for a wastewater
discharge permit.
C. Permit applications.
(1) Significant users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Borough an application in the form
prescribed by the Borough, and accompanied by the fee prescribed
in the Borough's schedule of fees, at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or discharging to the sewer system. In support of the
application, the industrial user may be required to submit any or all
of, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
(a) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(b) SIC number or numbers according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Borough, as determined by a qualified analyst:
[1] Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
§ 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as
amended.
§ 190-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-30
1:195
[2] Sample results shall be accompanied by a signed
statement of the authorized representative that the
samples analyzed are representative of normal discharge
during the routine operation of the discharging facility.
(d) Each product by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production.
(e) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(f) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(g) Time and duration of wastewater of industrial waste
contribution.
(h) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(i) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all building sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(j) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(k) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Borough, state or national
pretreatment requirements (including local limits), or
categorical standards and a statement regarding whether or
not the categorical standards or pretreatment requirements
are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, how the
industrial user proposes to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements, including whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable
standard. If the applicant is a categorical industrial user, this
statement shall be signed by a certified professional.
(l) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet categorical standards or other pretreatment
requirements (including local limits), the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment shall be developed and submitted.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the application.
(n) The application shall be signed and attested to by an
authorized representative of the industrial user.
§ 190-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-30
1:196
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of data furnished, the Borough may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided them.
D. Confidentiality of applicants.
(1) All information required by the Borough in the permit application
shall be provided by the industrial user to the best of its ability.
(2) If information regarding raw materials, processes, production rate
or other manufacturing information is regarded as confidential by
the industrial user, each page of such confidential information shall
be marked "confidential" on the application form.
(3) Confidentiality shall not apply to information regarding the flow of
or the constituents in the industrial wastewater discharge.
(4) Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall be
handled as detailed in § 190-36 of this chapter.
E. Permit modifications. The wastewater discharge permit of a significant
user may be revised by the Borough when:
(1) Necessitated to protect public health, welfare and safety.
(2) In response to a change in process or discharge by the significant
industrial user.
(3) In response to a change in Borough, county, state or federal
regulations.
(4) In response to a change in the Borough's NPDES permit, or any
other permit, or a change in county, state or federal regulations
governing sludge disposal, air quality or water quality.
F. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of any Borough ordinance and all other
applicable regulations, charges and fees established by the Borough.
Permits may contain the following:
(1) Limitations on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics including, but not limited to, flow, pollutant
concentrations and mass limits.
(2) Limitations on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(3) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection,
sampling and monitoring facilities.
(4) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules.
§ 190-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-30
1:197
(5) Compliance schedule and reporting requirements.
(6) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(7) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Borough and affording
Borough access thereto.
(8) Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new discharge
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being discharged to
the sewer system.
(9) Requirements for notification of slug loads and accidental
discharges.
(10) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to insure
compliance with any Borough ordinance, or state and federal
regulations.
G. Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for such time period as the
Borough deems appropriate and in the best interest of the Borough, but
not to exceed five years. Any permit shall expire on a specific date as
established by the Borough. The significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the significant industrial user existing permit. The terms and conditions
of the permit may be subject to modification by the Borough during the
term of the permit as described in Subsection E above. The significant
industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its
wastewater discharge permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in the wastewater discharge
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
H. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
significant industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation
without the approval of the Borough.
I. Right of permit appeal.
(1) An industrial user may appeal the issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit, or any conditions as set forth in any such permit,
a notice of denial of a wastewater discharge permit or any
modification of a wastewater discharge permit. An appeal is subject
to the following requirements:
(a) The appeal must be made in writing to the Borough.
(b) The appeal must be made within 30 calendar days from the
date of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit, written
directions, or notice of denial, suspension, modification or
§ 190-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-30
1:198
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit being appealed
by the industrial user.
(c) The appeal must state the specific provision(s) of a wastewater
discharge permit or the specific directions or actions of the
Borough which are being contested.
(d) The appeal must state the reasons for the appeal of each
provision.
(e) The appeal may suggest alternate or revised provisions to
replace those appealed.
(2) Provisions mandated by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
compliance with categorical standards) shall not be appealed.
(3) An appeal shall be made to the Borough, and shall be reviewed by
the Manager.
(4) Within 30 days of receipt of the appeal, the Manager shall file a
written report with the Borough Council, setting forth the results of
the review by the Manager. The report shall contain, at a minimum:
(a) A summary of each item appealed, the appellant's reasons for
appeal, and the appellant's proposed remedies, if any.
(b) The finding of merit for each point, and the reason(s) for
finding.
(c) For each point found to be with merit, a proposed remedy and a
finding that the remedy is allowable under this chapter, and all
applicable federal, state and local rules and regulations and
laws.
(5) The Borough shall review the report and, at one or more regular or
special public meetings, take any additional testimony offered by
the industrial user, Manager, pretreatment coordinator or other
interested party. The Borough shall, within 45 days of the
conclusion of testimony, decide to:
(a) Grant the appeal or portions of the appeal, applying such
remedies as it deems proper.
(b) Deny the appeal.
(c) The decision by the Borough constitutes final administrative
action.
(6) If the Borough or any hearing board appointed by the Borough shall
have as a member any person who has a financial, legal or other
proprietary interest in the industrial user bringing the appeal, such
person shall excuse himself from any vote which shall determine
the decision of the body in regard to the appeal.
§ 190-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-31
1:199
§ 190-31. Compliance schedule.
A. Compliance schedule.
(1) If a compliance schedule is required to be contained or included
with the application for a wastewater discharge permit, or if under
any other circumstances a compliance schedule is required to be
submitted to the Borough, the following criteria shall govern the
preparation of the compliance schedule.
(a) The compliance schedule shall clearly show by line items or
clearly describe by numbered categories, all the major phases
or steps which the applicant reasonably believes will be
involved in order, within the shortest possible period of time:
[1] To place a new pretreatment facility or process into
operation and to achieve compliance on a consistent basis;
[2] To bring an existing facility or process into compliance on
a consistent basis; or
[3] To achieve compliance in some other respect or under
some other circumstance.
(b) Example. The line item phases or steps which could be involved
might include: a phase for the selection and retention of a
consulting engineer; a phase for the preparation of preliminary
design plans; a phase for the review and evaluation by the
Borough of the preliminary designs plans; a phase for the
preparation of final design plans; a phase for the preparation of
technical specifications, project manuals and bid documents; a
phase for the invitation and receipt of bids; a phase for the
acceptance of bids and the award and execution of contracts; a
phase for construction or installation; and a phase for testing
the facility or process.
(c) A commencement date and a completion date shall be assigned
to each line item phase or step, or to each numbered category
phase or step, referred to in Subsection A(1)(a). The period
from commencement to completion of a particular phase or
step shall be the shortest possible period of time. In no event,
however, shall any phase or step exceed nine months in
duration from commencement to completion. There shall be no
hiatus or interval between one phrase or step and the next.
(d) The compliance schedule shall show a final date by which
compliance will be achieved on a consistent basis.
(2) Under no circumstances, however, shall this final date be later than
any mandatory compliance date fixed by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for compliance with a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard; any mandatory compliance
§ 190-31 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-31
1:200
§ 190-32. Monitoring facilities, sampling and analysis.
date fixed by the Borough for compliance with a prohibition,
control, limit, flow equalization standard, pretreatment standard or
regulation issued or prescribed by the Borough; or any mandatory
compliance date fixed by a governmental agency of the state for
compliance with a prohibition, control, limit, standard or regulation
issued or prescribed by the agency.
B. Compliance schedule reports. If a compliance schedule is approved by
the Borough, the industrial user shall submit to the Borough periodic
compliance schedule reports. The content and frequency of these
reports shall be prescribed by the Borough.
A. Monitoring facsimiles location. The Borough may require a significant
industrial user to provide and operate at the significant industrial user's
own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the discharge from the significant industrial user.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the significant
industrial user's premises, but the Borough may, when such a location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the significant
industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street
or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. Monitoring facilities construction and maintenance. Whether
construction on public or private property, the monitoring facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the Borough's requirements and
all applicable local construction standards and specifications. There
shall be ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for transport. Construction shall
be completed within 90 days after construction plans have been
approved by the Borough, in accordance with this chapter. The
monitoring facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the significant industrial user.
C. Detailed plans. Detailed plans showing the intended facilities shall be
submitted to the Borough for review within the time period approved by
the Borough, and shall be acceptable to the Borough before
construction of the facility. The Borough shall notify the significant
industrial user, in writing, when the detailed plans are acceptable for
construction. Approval of the detailed plans by the Borough does not
relieve the significant user of responsibility to make modifications or
alterations, should such be necessary.
D. Sampling and analysis. All sampling and analysis performed in
compliance with wastewater discharge permit conditions or to prepare
the reports required by this chapter shall be accomplished using
techniques specified in 40 CFR, Part 136, or alternative procedures
approved by the Administrator, or using procedures described in
Standard Methods if no EPA-approved procedure exits. Unless
§ 190-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-32
1:201
§ 190-33. Administrative appeals.
otherwise required, all sampling should be performed during a normal
production day and should reflect the usual and typical wastewater
discharge of the user.
E. Reporting and resampling of discharge limit violations.
(1) If, upon receipt of valid sampling and testing results, a significant
industrial user becomes aware that a violation of discharge limits
has occurred, the significant industrial user shall, within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation, notify the Borough of this fact.
Within 30 days of becoming aware of this violation, the significant
industrial user shall also sample and analyze its discharge(s) for
each parameter found to be in violation and report the results of
the resampling and analysis to the Borough.
(2) Each significant industrial user shall have a duty, on receipt of
validity obtained sampling and analysis results, of inspecting the
results and determining if any wastewater discharge permit
condition has been violated. Failure to examine and compare
testing results with wastewater discharge permit conditions shall
not be a valid defense for failure to comply with these reporting
conditions.
A. Appeal of wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the
significant industrial user, may petition the Borough to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
Such an appeal shall be directed to the Sewer Committee of the
Borough Council for its review. Upon consideration of the petition, the
Sewer Committee shall make its recommendations to the Borough
Council, whose decision regarding the appeal will be final.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If Borough fails to act within 60 days following presentation of the
petition to the Sewer Committee, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial
review.
§ 190-32 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-33
1:202
§ 190-34. Inspections; pretreatment facilities; changes.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Continuation of permit during appeal. During the process of appeal, the
wastewater discharge permit shall remain in effect and shall be
enforced with the exception of those conditions specified in writing in
the appeal. Conditions imposed by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
categorical standards) shall not be waived. Conditions which, in the
opinion of the Borough, would constitute a hazard or pose a potential
threat of pollution if waived shall not be waived during an appeal.
A. Inspections. The Borough may inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and that the
user is in compliance with all requirements. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the
Borough or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to
all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying or in the performance of its duties.
The Borough and its agents shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry onto their premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
Borough will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of
performing their specific responsibilities.
B. Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter and
shall achieve compliance with all applicable categorical standards
within the time limitations as specified by the applicable categorical
standards. Any facility required for pretreatment shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Borough for review, and shall be acceptable to
the Borough before construction of the facility. The review of such plans
and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a
discharge which complies with the provisions of this chapter. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported and be acceptable to the Borough prior to
the industrial user's initiation of the charges. The review and
acceptance of plans and procedures by the Borough shall not be
considered as an approval regarding their efficacy, safety or reliability;
such considerations are solely the responsibility of the industrial user.
C. Change in operations.
§ 190-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-34
1:203
§ 190-35. Reports.
(1) Any industrial user contemplating or planning a change in the
manufacturing process, raw materials, auxiliary processes,
pretreatment processes or other changes which may result in
changes to wastewater character, composition, volume or rate of
flow, shall notify the Borough in writing at least 30 days prior to
making such a change, or, if the change is not planned, immediately
upon the decision to make such a change. If a change in
wastewater characteristics occurs without the knowledge of the
industrial user, the industrial user shall report the change
immediately upon becoming aware of it. The report shall include all
information necessary to determine the effect on the change of the
wastewater.
(2) The Borough may, on receipt of such a report:
(a) Continue an existing wastewater discharge permit in effect.
(b) Require application for a new wastewater discharge permit.
(c) Modify an existing wastewater discharge permit to reflect the
changed nature of the waste.
(d) Rescind and reissue an existing wastewater discharge permit
in order to make substantial changes in wastewater discharge
permit conditions.
(e) Revoke an existing wastewater discharge permit or require the
industrial user to cease or prevent the discharge.
(f) Take such other action as it deems appropriate.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) As soon as possible following the promulgation of a categorical
standard, the industrial user subject to such standards shall comply
with such categorical standard within the time frame prescribed by
the categorical standard.
(2) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated
categorical standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by § 190-30 of this
chapter, the industrial user shall, within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable categorical standard:
(a) Apply for a wastewater discharge permit; and
(b) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b). This information may be incorporated into the
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
§ 190-34 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-35
1:204
(3) An industrial user with an existing wastewater discharge permit
shall submit to the Borough within 180 days after the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard the information required by
40 CFR 403.12(b).
(4) A new source or an industrial user that becomes a categorical
industrial user through a change in facilities or processes shall
submit a report containing the information required by 40 CFR
403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge
from the regulated process or facility.
B. Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical standards, or in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the discharge of industrial
waste from processes regulated by categorical standards into the sewer
system, any industrial user subject to categorical standards shall
submit to the Borough a report indicating the nature and concentration
of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by categorical standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for those process units in the industrial user's facility which are
limited by such categorical standards. The report shall certify that the
information contained therein concerning wastewater constituents and
flows is representative of discharges during normal work cycles. The
report shall also state whether the applicable categorical standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation
and management practices and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the industrial user into compliance with the applicable categorical
standards, and including a schedule for completion of the required
actions in the form described in this chapter. Such a schedule shall not
have a compliance date later than that established for the applicable
categorical standard. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a certified
professional.
C. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall report to the Borough at least
twice a year, the date of the report to be as determined by the
Borough and contained in the wastewater discharge permit.
Reports may be required more frequently if deemed necessary by
the Borough.
(2) The reports required under this section shall contain, at a
minimum, the measured concentration of all pollutants regulated
by the wastewater discharge permit, a record of all measured daily
flows which exceeded the average daily flow value reported, and a
statement of accuracy and completeness signed and certified by
the authorized representative of the significant industrial user.
(3) For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, if
discharge limits are based on mass units per production unit, then
§ 190-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-35
1:205
§ 190-36. Confidential information.
production information regarding the regulated processes during
the reporting period shall be included in the report, along with flow
and concentration values, so that a determination of compliance or
noncompliance with categorical standards can be made.
(4) For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, the
certification of compliance with those standards, signed by a
certified professional.
A. Availability of information. Information and data on an industrial user
obtained from reports, questionnaires, wastewater discharge permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, and supported by
evidence acceptable to the Borough as to need for protection of
confidential material, the portion of the report that might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public but shall nevertheless be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to all Borough
ordinances, the NPDES permit, any state disposal system permit and/or
the programs under applicable categorical standards or for use by the
Borough, any state, the United States or any state or federal agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the industrial
user or the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
B. Industrial user notification. Before any information accepted by the
Borough as confidential is transmitted to any governmental agency by
the Borough, a notification to the industrial user shall be provided
listing the confidential information to be transmitted and the
governmental entity requesting such information.
C. Storage of records. The Borough shall maintain a secure place to store
records containing confidential information and shall insure that all
records marked as confidential are kept secure from casual or public
scrutiny.
(1) The Borough shall keep and maintain all records relating to the
administration and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment
requirements including, but not limited to, wastewater discharge
permit applications, investigations and calculations, wastewater
discharge permits, inspection reports, industrial users reports,
sampling results and enforcement activities, for a minimum of
three years. In cases of ongoing litigation, records shall be
maintained as long as they may be required.
§ 190-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-36
1:206
§ 190-37. Enforcement.
(2) All industrial users shall keep and maintain records of monitoring
activities and results, wastewater discharge permits and reports to
the Borough for a minimum of three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial
users has been notified of a longer retention period by the Borough.
A. Right to refuse. The Borough reserves the right to accept wastewater,
or combinations of wastewater, which are discharged in violation of the
terms or conditions of this chapter, or any written directions issued by
the Borough pursuant to the conditions of this chapter. The Borough
may take such steps as it deems necessary, as outlined in this chapter,
to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or pretreatment of
industrial wastes in order to comply with the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment regulations.
B. Revocation of permit.
(1) Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having its wastewater discharge permit revoked.
(a) Failure of an industrial user to factually report to the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge in
any application for wastewater discharge permit, or in any
reports required by this chapter.
(b) Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics as
required by this chapter.
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(d) Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
(2) Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system by a
significant industrial user without a wastewater discharge permit is
an unauthorized discharge as provided by this chapter, and is
subject to the penalties provided herein.
(3) Any industrial user notified of a revocation of its wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily
with the notice of revocation, the discharge shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge and the Borough shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, which may include immediate severance of the
connection between the building sewer and the sewage collection
system or discontinuance of water service, to prevent or minimize
§ 190-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:207
damage to the sewer system or endangerment to the environment
or any improved property.
C. Suspension of permit.
(1) The Borough may suspend the wastewater discharge permit when
such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Borough, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
interference or pass through, or causes the Borough to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit or any other national or state law,
rule, regulation or permit condition.
(2) Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily
with the notice of suspension, the discharge shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge and the Borough shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
connection between the building sewer and the sewage connection
system or discontinuance of water service to prevent or minimize
damage to the sewer system or endangerment to the environment
or any improved property or persons.
(3) If a wastewater discharge permit has been suspended as a result of
an unauthorized discharge, which discharge resulted in or
contributed to damages to the sewer system or to any person or
improved property, the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reinstated until such time as all such damages have been satisfied.
(4) The Borough shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit upon
submission of proof by the industrial user of the elimination of the
unauthorized discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the industrial user describing the causes of the unauthorized
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Borough within 15 days of the
date of occurrence.
D. Notice of violation. Whenever the Borough finds that any industrial user
has violated or is violating this chapter, its wastewater discharge
permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein,
the Borough may serve upon such industrial user a written notice
stating the nature of the violation, and requiring a response within a
specified time. Responses required of industrial users may include, but
are not restricted to, actions, plans, compliance schedules or written
explanations.
E. Show cause hearing.
(1) The Borough may direct any industrial user who causes or allows
an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system or who
§ 190-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-37
1:208
violates any condition or requirement of this chapter or its
wastewater discharge permit, to show cause before the Borough
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A
written notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the Borough regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action and directing the industrial user to show cause
before the Borough why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation if the industrial user is a corporation.
(2) The Borough may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence,
or may designate any of its members or any representative to:
(a) Issue in the name of the Borough notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Borough for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must
be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(4) After the Borough has received the evidence, it may, in writing,
direct the industrial user to take certain actions to correct the
unauthorized discharge or to achieve compliance. The actions
which may be directed include, but are not limited to:
(a) Installation of pretreatment facilities.
(b) Modification or additions to existing pretreatment facilities or
equipment.
(c) Initiation of management practices which are required to alter
the nature of the industrial waste being discharged.
(d) Development or implementation of SPCC plans or other
measures.
(e) Other measures found to be necessary to correct the
unauthorized discharge or other noncompliance.
§ 190-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:209
(f) The directed actions may be in the form of a schedule for
compliance setting dates by which certain actions shall be
taken.
(5) Failure of an industrial user to comply with written directions
issued pursuant to a hearing constituents a violation of this
chapter.
F. Administrative orders. The Borough may issue written directions as
described in Subsection E of this section without a show cause hearing
if the Borough determines that such directions are necessary to correct
conditions or remedy continuing violations of this chapter or any
wastewater discharge permit or other industrial pretreatment
requirements, the Borough or federal or state regulations.
G. Right of appeal of enforcement actions.
(1) An industrial user may appeal the enforcement actions enumerated
in Subsections B and C of this section. All appeals are subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The appeal must be made in writing to the Borough.
(b) The appeal must be made within 30 days from the date of
receipt by the industrial user of the notice of suspension or
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit.
(c) The appeal must either admit or deny the violations of this
chapter, or provisions mandated by federal or state
regulations, cited by the Borough in the suspension or
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit. In the event the
industrial user lacks sufficient information to either admit or
deny the alleged violation, the industrial user shall so state the
lack of such knowledge.
(d) The appeal must state the reasons for the appeal, and the
reasons why the suspension or revocation is improper.
(2) Provisions mandated by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
compliance with categorical standards) shall not be appealed,
except for an appeal alleging that such provisions have not be
violated.
(3) The Borough shall have the right to establish a fee for the filing of
any such appeal as shall be established by resolution adopted by
the Borough. Such fee shall be for the purposes of paying costs
incurred by Borough in the conducting of a hearing on such appeal.
(4) The Borough may require the posting of a bond by the industrial
user in the amount of $30,000, being the maximum fine for
violation of this chapter, multiplied by 30 days, being the minimum
number of days in which such alleged violation would continue
during proceedings in this appeal. In the event the appeal is
§ 190-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-37
1:210
§ 190-38. Violations and penalties.
denied, such bond shall be utilized for the purpose of payment of
any fine imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant
to § 190-38.
(5) Within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal, the Borough Council
shall conduct a public hearing. At such hearing, Borough Council
shall take testimony and examine evidence regarding the alleged
violation as set forth in the notice of suspension or revocation.
Parties shall have the right to representation by an attorney.
Witnesses shall be subject to cross examination. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. The industrial user shall have the right to
present witnesses and evidence, and offer testimony regarding
such alleged violation. All witnesses shall be sworn or affirmed. A
stenographic record of the proceedings shall be made. Such
hearing shall be otherwise conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Public Agency Law.
(6) Within 15 days of closing testimony, the Borough Council shall
issue a written decision either granting the appeal, or portions of
the appeal, applying such remedies as Borough Council deems
proper, or shall deny the appeal. The decision of Borough Council in
such appeal shall constitute final administrative action.
(7) If the Borough or any person or any member of Borough Council,
shall have as a member, any person who has a financial, legal or
other proprietary interest in the industrial user, bringing the
appeal, such person shall disclose any such interest, and shall
recuse himself from any participation in the hearing and from any
vote which shall determine the decision of the body in regard to the
appeal.
H. Civil actions. If a person violates the provisions of this chapter,
including local national or state pretreatment requirements,
categorical standards or any wastewater discharge permit or written
directions issued by the Borough, the Borough may commence an
action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Northampton County, or any other appropriate forum.
I. Injunctive relief. If any person causes or permits an unauthorized
discharge to occur or otherwise violates the conditions imposed by this
chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or written directions
issued by the Borough, or any national or state pretreatment
requirement, the Borough may commence an action in the Court of
Common Pleas of Northampton County, or any other appropriate forum,
for injunctive relief to stop the unauthorized discharge or other
violation or to require compliance with the applicable condition.
A. Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter may be find not less than $100 nor more than
§ 190-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-38
1:211
$1,000 for each offense. Each day during which a violation shall occur
or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition
to the penalties provided herein, the Borough may recover reasonable
attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit at law against the user who is found to
have violated this chapter.
B. Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document produced, filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than
six months or both.
§ 190-38 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-38
1:212
ARTICLE VI
Additional Resolutions
§ 190-39. Additional resolutions authorized.
The Borough shall, from time to time by resolution, adopt further rules
and regulations with respect the discharge of sewage and/or industrial
waste to the sewer system, and the construction, connection, operation,
maintenance, repair, alteration and inspection of building sewers, sanitary
sewers and other fixtures and appurtenances in the Borough, and the
determination, fixing and collection of rentals, charges and fees from users
of the sewer system.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:213
Chapter 198
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 135. Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
§ 190-39 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 190-39
1:214
ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal; Recycling
[Adopted 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 1178]
§ 198-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Northampton Municipal Solid
Waste Ordinance."
§ 198-2. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them except in those instances where the context
clearly indicated otherwise:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or combustible
materials.
COLLECTION SITE — The location and time for each customer in the
Borough at which collection services are performed, as hereinafter set
forth.
GARBAGE — The fruit and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and the residue from the
fruit trees located on the premises.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste which is within the definition of
"hazardous waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Solid Waste Management
Act, Act of July 2,1980, P.L. 380, No. 97.28
LIGHT COMMERCIAL — Any small business that pays a fee to the Borough
for collection. Examples include: insurance office, professional office,
investment office, small banks, etc.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, school,
church, institution, or corporation, or other lawful entity.
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice to the public or persons affected to be done by
newspaper of local distribution.
RECYCLABLE — Newsprint, telephone books, aluminum cans, amber, green
and clear glass, PET/HDPE plastic beverage containers, large appliances
(white goods), and bimetal cans.
REFUSE — Garbage, ashes, rubbish and riffraff as herein defined.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Borough.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family, double-family or apartment
dwelling, churches, convents, cemeteries, and buildings owned by the
municipality.
RIFFRAFF/BULK ITEM — All waste material which is too large for
collection in a twenty-gallon container. Examples include: furniture, toilets,
28.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:215
sinks, tubs. Will be limited to one item per week per resident. One bundle
construction debris per week not exceeding 50 pounds or three feet in
length.
RUBBISH — Paper, rags, street sweepings, dead animals, excelsior, straw,
boxes, old clothes, old shoes, leather scrap, oil cloth, carpet, grass, trash
and any and all other inflammable waste materials which result from the
ordinary conduct of housekeeping.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, ashes, rubbish, riffraff, hazardous waste, white
goods, and recyclable materials.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, hot water tanks,
stoves, dishwashers, washers, dryers, and will be picked up on a call to
the Borough Office. All Freon must be professionally removed and a sticker
applied stating that all Freon has been removed.
§ 198-3. Collection and disposal; violations and penalties..
A. Storage of municipal waste. It shall be the duty of every owner of
property and every person occupying any dwelling unit, premises or
place of business within the Borough where municipal solid waste is
produced and is accumulated, by his own expense and cost, to provide
and keep at all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all
municipal solid waste which may accumulate during the intervals
between collection of such municipal solid waste by an authorized solid
waste collector.
B. Storage on residential properties.
(1) Containers. All municipal solid waste accumulated by owners of
each property and/or the occupants of residential properties shall
be placed in containers for collection by an authorized collector.
The containers shall be durable, watertight, and made of metal or
plastic. Securely tied plastic bags may be used in cases where such
bags can be used without being torn open by domestic or wild
animals. The size of each such container shall not exceed a thirtygallon
capacity.
(2) Location of containers. Each municipal solid waste container shall
be located so as to be accessible to the collector at ground level and
at a point on the curbline of the street, or within no less than 10
feet of the public street or alley right-of-way from which collection
from a vehicle can be made, unless specific alternate arrangements
are made with the collector. Failure to place containers at such
locations may result in discontinuance of service. Said containers
shall be removed from the above collection locations immediately
after collection.
C. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial properties.
(1) Containers. Storage of municipal solid waste on commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be placed in the same
§ 198-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 198-3
1:216
type of containers as are required for residential properties except
where the accumulation for each commercial, institutional or
industrial property precludes their use, in which case such owner
or occupant shall make special arrangements with the authorized
collector for the storing of such additional quantities. Such special
arrangements shall include the following:
(a) The type of special bulk container to be furnished by the
collector and as may be approved by the Borough.
(b) The number of such containers shall be agreed to between the
collector and such owner or occupant of the commercial,
institutional or industrial property to be used in any collection
period.
(2) Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be located on such
premises at a place agreed upon by such owner or occupant of the
commercial, institutional and industrial property and the
authorized collector and shall not be unsatisfactory to the Borough.
Such locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and
exits of public or private buildings. Said containers shall be
removed from the above collection locations immediately after
collection.
D. Collection times.
(1) The set collection times within the Borough shall be, as follows:
(a) Monday: 1st Ward.
(b) Tuesday: 2nd Ward.
(c) Wednesday: 4th Ward and part of 3rd Ward (North of 10th
Street).
(d) Thursday: Remainder of 3rd Ward.
(2) Collection times may be modified by Borough Council, by
resolution, from time to time, by public notice.
E. Transportation of solid waste. Any person transporting solid waste
within the Borough shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles
or containers used in the transport of such solid waste.
F. Disposal of municipal solid waste.
(1) Designated facilities. All municipal solid waste produced, collected,
and transported from within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough
shall be, to the extent permitted by law, either recycled or disposed
of at Pennsylvania State-permitted disposal site(s) designated by
the collector.
§ 198-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-3
1:217
(2) If the Borough designates the disposal facilities as provided for
above, all authorized collectors and other interested persons shall
be informed by the Borough of the location and other information
pertaining to the designated disposal facilities to be used for the
disposal of municipal solid waste collected, transported, removed
and disposed of from within the Borough.
G. Exclusions.
(1) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person
not regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid
waste from hauling his own municipal solid waste on an irregular
and unscheduled basis, to a state-permitted disposal facility.
(2) The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the
storage, collection, transportation and disposal of municipal solid
waste and do not apply, therefore, to hazardous or residual solid
waste as defined by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act.29
H. Regulations. Borough Council may, by resolution, from time to time,
authorize a collection point or container for use of residents of the
Borough for depositing such items of municipal solid waste, refuse, and/
or solid waste as may be designated in said resolution. It shall be a
violation of this section for any person other than such other persons as
may be designated in the resolution authorizing the collection point or
container to deposit any item at the collection point or container and for
any person to deposit at such collection point or container any item
other than such item designated in the resolution authorizing the
collection point or container.
I. Collection reports. Solid waste collector is required to provide to the
Borough a monthly report for the mainstream solid waste collection and
a separate monthly report for the mainstream recyclable collection.
J. Violations and penalties; remedies.
(1) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600; and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Every violator of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such violation
shall continue and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this
section for each and every such separate offense.
(2) In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Borough may require the
owner or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of
solid waste and should said person fail to remove such solid waste
after 10 days following written notice, the Borough may cause the
solid waste to be collected and disposed of with the costs for such
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 198-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 198-3
1:218
§ 198-4. Recycling; violations and penalties.
actions to be charged to the owner or occupant of the property in
a manner provided by law; including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, costs and all municipal expenses expended to remediate the
foregoing.
K. Dumping and depositing of solid waste.
(1) Depositing on street, highways and alleys prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner, real estate occupier, lessee,
tenant, householder or other person or persons to deposit, store,
throw, place, dump or cause to be deposited, stored, thrown, placed
or dumped, any garbage, rubbish or refuse on any street, state
highway, federal highway or private alley or other public property
within the Borough.
(2) Penalty. Any person, who shall violate any provision of this
subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600; and/or to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days.
A. Borough of Northampton, Northampton County, Recycling Program.
The Borough hereby establishes and implements a source separation
and collection program for recyclable materials in accordance with Act
101 (the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act30). The source separation and collection program shall include the
following regulations:
(1) Designated materials for residential source separation.
(a) Designated recyclables for this program shall consist of the
following materials:
[1] Clear glass.
[2] Colored glass (green and brown).
[3] Plastic PET and HDPE (No. 1 and No. 2).
[4] Aluminum cans.
[5] Steel and bimetal cans.
[6] Newspaper.
(b) Designated materials for commercial industrial/institutional
source separation. Designated recyclables for this program
shall consist of the following materials:
[1] Clear glass.
30.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 198-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-4
1:219
§ 198-5. Collection fees and charges.
[2] Colored glass (green and brown).
[3] Plastic PET and HDPE (No. 1 and No. 2).
[4] Aluminum cans.
[5] Steel and bimetal cans.
[6] Corrugated paper.
[7] Leaf waste.
[8] High-grade office paper.
B. Administration. The Borough Council shall establish and promulgate,
by resolution, reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times
for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms
for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms
hereof and any other matters required to implement this section. The
Borough Council may inspect all containers, vehicles, equipment,
transfer stations, disposal sites books and records pertaining to
recycling, all authorized collectors, storers, processors and disposers
are subject to inspection by the Borough.
C. Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine, plus costs of
prosecution, of $600.
A. Imposed upon residents. The fees and payment intervals for collection
and disposal of solid waste and refuse within the Borough limits shall be
imposed upon the owner of each residential property, as provided in the
current fee schedule, which shall be amended and adopted by
resolution of Borough Council from time to time. Public notice of the fee
schedule shall be made by the Borough Council.
B. Collection of fees. All such owners shall pay collection fees at the
following rates:
(1) A base fee of $305 per year is due and payable on or before March
31 of the collection year.
(2) Early payment discount. The base fee shall be reduced $25 if paid
on or before February 15 of the collection year.
(3) Senior discount. Seniors who are of the age of 65, prior to the
commencement of the collection year, who also own and live in
their home, shall receive a discount of $30 from the base fee. Said
payment is due and payable on or before March 31 of the collection
year. Seniors who are entitled to receive said discount are also
entitled to the early payment discount, as set forth in Subsection
B(2) above.
§ 198-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 198-5
1:220
(4) If no payment is received on or before March 31, of the collection
year, such payment shall be considered delinquent and shall be
subject to collection procedures as set forth in Subsection C below.
(5) If a property becomes subject to delinquency of the fee imposed by
this section during a calendar year, said property will be assessed
an initial 10% penalty. Interest will be assessed upon delinquent
municipal claims at a rate of 10% per annum, and added to the
Borough's claim. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1203;
4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 120131]
(6) Fees to be added to the unpaid claims. The Borough hereby
approves the following fee schedule for the collection of the unpaid
claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claims. [Added
4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1201]
(a) Notice expense. A charge, not to exceed $50 plus postage,
shall be added to the unpaid claims for providing notice of
delinquency pursuant to § 7101 of the Act. The Borough may
hire a private company to perform this service and add the
amount of this charge to the unpaid claims.
(b) Legal fees.
Type Fee
Initial review and sending
first demand letter
$160
File lien and prepare
satisfaction
$250
Prepare writ of scire facias $250
Obtain reissued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under
Pa. R.C.P. 237.1
$30
Prepare motion for alternate
service
$250
Obtain vehicle identification
number (VIN) for mobile
home
$35
Prepare discovery in
preparation for trial
$100
Prepare pretrial
memorandum
$150
31.Editor's Note: The text of Subsection B(5) reflects the amendment found in Ord. No. 1203,
which amended Ord. No. 1201.
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:221
Type Fee
Prepare motion for judgment
for want of sufficient affidavit
of defense pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 7271
$150
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution and
resolve distribution issues
$400
Continue sheriff sale $50
Prepare petition to assess
damages
$50
Prepare petition for free and
clear sale
$400
Services not covered above At an hourly rate between $60
and $275 per hour
(c) Collection fees.
Type Fee
Bookkeeping fee for payment
plan of 3 months or less
$25
Bookkeeping fee for payment
plan of more than 3 months
$50
Guaranteed payoff fee $25
Handling fee for returned
check
Bank charge, if any
(7) Costs to be added to the unpaid claims. In addition to the fees set
forth in Subsection B(6) above, the reasonable and necessary outof-
pocket charges, costs, expenses, commissions and fees incurred
in collection, including, but not limited to, postage, title searches,
VIN searches, prothonotary fees and charges, and sheriff fees, shall
be added to the unpaid claims. [Added 4-16-2015 by Ord. No.
1201]
(8) Credit card and debit card charges. The Borough and any attorney
or private collector collecting the unpaid claims on behalf of the
Borough are hereby authorized to accept payment of the unpaid
claims by credit card or debit card. Where payment is made by
credit card or debit card, any fees charged by the credit card or
debit card company and/or the credit card or debit card servicing
agent shall be charged immediately to the credit card or debit card
used to make payment. This applies to credit card or debit card
§ 198-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 198-5
1:222
payments made by mail, telephone, over the internet, or in person.
[Added 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1201]
(9) Collection Procedures. The following collection procedures are
hereby established in accordance with the Act. [Added 4-16-2015
by Ord. No. 1201]
(a) At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in
connection with the collection of an unpaid claim account, the
Borough or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of such
intention to the property owner or other entity liable for the
account (the "property owner").
(b) If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days
prior to assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the Borough
or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by first-class
mail, a second notice.to the property owner.
(c) All notices required by this section shall be mailed to the
property owner's last known post office address as recorded in
the records or other information of the Borough or such other
address obtained by the Borough from the county tax
assessment office.
(d) Each notice as described above shall include the following:
[1] The type of municipal claim or other charge, the year that
it became due and the amount owed, including penalty and
interest;
[2] A statement of the Borough's intent to impose or assess
attorney fees no earlier than 30 days after receipt of the
first notice, or no earlier than 10 days after receipt of the
second notice;
[3] The manner in which the assessment or imposition of
attorney fees may be avoided by payment of the account;
and
[4] The place of payment for accounts and the name and
telephone number of the Borough's representative
designated as responsible for collection matter.
(10) Related action. The proper officials of the Borough are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they
may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this section.
[Added 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1201]
(11) Appointment of Solicitor. The Borough appoints Michelle R.
Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the limited purpose of collecting
the unpaid claims and hereby authorizes her, and attorneys under
her supervision, to sign any and all documents, including municipal
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:223
claims and liens, on behalf of the Borough. [Added 4-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 1201]
(12) Inconsistent ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
conflicting with any of the provisions of this section are hereby
repealed insofar as same affects this section. [Added 4-16-2015
by Ord. No. 1201]
(13) Effective date. This section shall become effective immediately
upon adoption. [Added 4-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1201]
C. Enforcement of collection.
(1) All bills for solid waste collection and recycling shall be due and
payable as set forth in the preceding Subsection B. Any payment
deemed delinquent pursuant to Subsection B shall be a municipal
lien on such property charged with the payment thereof and the
proper officers of the Borough are authorized and directed to do all
things and to take any action provided by law to enforce collection
of delinquent fees established and imposed and otherwise to carry
out the provisions of this section. In addition, the Borough may
recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and any other
expense of the costs of collection of the fees imposed hereunder.
(2) It is the intention of Borough Council that each separate provision
of this article shall be independent of all other provisions herein
and it is further the intention of said Council that if any of the
provisions herein of this article be declared to be invalid all of the
other provisions hereof shall remain valid and in force.
§ 198-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 198-5
1:224
Chapter 203
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 125.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:225

ARTICLE I
Catasauqua Creek Study Area
[Adopted 2-5-1998 by Ord. No. 1086]
§ 203-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance of
the Borough of Northampton."
§ 203-2. Statement of findings.
The Council of the Borough of Northampton finds that:
§ 203-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Catasauqua Creek Study Area by minimizing the
damages described in § 203-2A of this article by provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public
health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of the people of the Borough and all the
people of the commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
A. Control accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage recharge of groundwaters where appropriate.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in
the Borough and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures which are constructed in the Borough.
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:227
§ 203-4. Statutory authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of
the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, the Stormwater
Management Act and the Borough Code.32
§ 203-5. Applicability.
A. This article shall only apply to those areas of the Borough which are
located within the Catasauqua Creek Study Area as delineated on an
official map available for inspection at the Borough office. A map of the
Catasauqua Creek Study Area is included in Appendix A (Part 2I) for
general reference.33
B. This article shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the activities listed in this
section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction involved with any of these activities are
specifically not required by this article, but shall continue to be
regulated under existing laws and ordinances.
C. This article contains only those stormwater runoff control criteria and
standards which are necessary or desirable from a total watershed
perspective. Additional stormwater management design criteria (i.e.,
inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system details, etc.) which represent
sound engineering practice may be regulated either by separate
stormwater ordinance provisions or as part of the general
responsibilities of the Borough Engineer.
D. The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
regulated by this article, except those which meet the waiver
specifications presented thereafter:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
E. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in Subsection
D(5) and (6), which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting the
provisions of this article. Development plans qualifying for this waiver
32.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq., respectively.
33.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-5
1:228
§ 203-6. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this article do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 203-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CATASAUQUA CREEK STUDY AREA — The area comprised of the
Catasauqua Creed Watershed and Lehigh River Subbasin 4 (six unnamed
creeks and 27 direct drainage subareas). See map in Appendix A (Part 2I).35
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh of Northampton County
Conservation District, as appropriate.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (formerly
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources).
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration
(e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in computing stormwater management
control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
would still be regulated by § 13 of the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act34 and other Borough ordinance provisions, as
applicable. For development taking place in stages, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with this
criteria. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
constructed as part of or for the proposed regulated activity. Any areas
which may be designed to initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel,
crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.) shall be considered impervious
areas for the purpose of waiver evaluation. No waiver shall be provided
for regulated activities as defined in Subsection D(5) and (6) of this
section.
34.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.13.
35.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-7
1:229
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development site, the
contents of which are established in § 203-14 of this article.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit or seepage trench.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting runoff
from the site to the mainstream.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other conveyance
in a Dual Release Rate or Conditional No Detention I subarea used as a
reach in the Catasauqua Creek study area hydrologic model. In Conditional
No Detention II subareas, the main channel is the Lehigh River.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 203-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-7
1:230
flow and slope. Open channels may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Northampton, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
NPDES REGULATIONS — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Regulations.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service, U. S. Department of
Agriculture (formerly the Soil Conservation Service).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stream runoff at a given
location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Catasauqua Creek Study
Area for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been calibrated to reflect actual
flow values by adjusting key model input parameters.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using a
standardized runoff coefficient (rational "C"), acreage of tract and rainfall
intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the
entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational formula is stated as follows: Q
= ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second,
"C" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (See Appendix C, Part 2I36), "i" is
the rainfall intensity in inches per hour and "A" is the area of the tract in
acres.
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for modeling purposes to connect the subareas and transport flows
downstream.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact upon
proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed by this
article as specified in § 203-5.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to protect downstream areas.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-fiveyear
return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to recur on
the average once every 25 years.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
36.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-7
1:231
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage for a given time interval) and based on outflow being a
unique function of storage volume.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in
Appendix B (Part 2I)37 of this article or identified by the Borough or Borough
Engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters or drainage,
but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Lehigh and Northampton Counties for the Catasauqua
Creek Study Area as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act
167), as amended, and known as the Stormwater Management Act.38
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot ownership.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 203-8. Stormwater management general requirements.
A. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded flow in
natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities or open channels consistent with this article.
B. The existing points of concentrated drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without written approval of the affected
property owner(s).
37.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Borough offices.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 203-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-8
1:232
§ 203-9. Stormwater management districts.
C. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this article. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated
and discharged onto adjacent property, the downstream must document
that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm
will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they are
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas.
D. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a
one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Borough, there shall be
provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the line of
such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on calculations made
in conformance with § 203-11 of this article for the one-hundred-year
return period runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot
above the design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall
prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures and any alterations
which may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of
the easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure
proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the
one-hundred-year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the
applicable Township floodplain regulations.
E. Any drainage facilities required by this article that are located on state
highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning equation.
G. Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed and
provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and at all
points of discharge.
H. Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume controls
for stormwater management where geology and soils permit. Areas of
suitable geology for volume controls shall be determined by the
Borough. Documentation of the suitability of the soil for volume
controls shall be provided by the applicant. Volume controls shall be
acceptable in areas of suitable geology where the soils are designated
as well-drained in the County Soil Survey. Other soils may be acceptable
for use of volume controls based on site-specific soils.
§ 203-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-9
1:233
A. Mapping of stormwater management districts. To implement the
provisions of the Catasauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh River
Subbasin 4 Stormwater Management Plan, the Borough is hereby
divided into stormwater management districts consistent with the
Catasauqua Creek Release Rate Map presented in the plan. The
boundaries of the stormwater management districts are shown on an
official map which is available for inspection at the Borough Office. A
copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A
(Part 2I) for general reference.39
B. Description of stormwater management districts. Three types of
stormwater management districts may be applicable to the Borough,
namely Conditional No Detention I Districts, Conditional No Detention
II Districts and Dual Release Rate Districts, as described below:
(1) Conditional No Detention I Districts. Within these districts, the
capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities (as defined in
§ 203-7 of this article) must be calculated to calculated to
determine if adequate capacity exists. For this determination, the
developer must calculate peak flows assuming that the site is
developed as proposed and that the remainder of the local
watershed is in the existing condition. The developer must also
calculate peak flows assuming that the entire local watershed is
developed per current zoning and that all new development would
use the runoff controls specified by this article. The larger of the
two peak flows calculated will be used in determining if adequate
capacity exists. If adequate capacity exists to safely transport
runoff form the site to the main channel (as defined in § 203-7 of
this article), these watershed areas may discharge
postdevelopment peak runoff without detention facilities. If the
capacity calculations show that the local runoff conveyance
facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall either use a
100% release rate control or provide increased capacity of
downstream elements to convey increased peak flows consistent
with § 203-10M of this article. Any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas tributary
to the improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified
in § 203-10C of this article. By definition, a storm drainage problem
area associated with the local runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist.
(2) Conditional No Detention II Districts. Within these districts, the
capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities must be calculated
in the same manner as the Conditional No Detention I Districts. In
this case, however, adequate capacity must be demonstrated from
the site to the Lehigh River. After determining if adequate capacity
exists, the developer shall use either no detention, a 100% release
39.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-9 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-9
1:234
§ 203-10. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
rate or provide capacity improvements as detained in Subsection
B(1) of this section, Conditional No Detention I Districts.
(3) Dual release rate districts. Within this district, the two year
postdevelopment runoff must be controlled to 30% of the
predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the ten-, twentyfive-
and one-hundred-year post-development runoff must be
controlled to 100% of the predevelopment peak.
A. Any stormwater management controls required by this article and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release
rate criteria for each of the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and one-hundredyear
return period runoff events consistent with the calculation
methodology specified in § 203-11 of this article.
B. The exact location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (e.g., road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical
feature is the downstream limit of the subarea and the subarea
boundary is drawn from that point upslope to each topographic divide
along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
C. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
article shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates.
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual (April 1990). Permissible velocities for
selected channels are presented in Appendix C (Part 21) of this
article.40
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must have sufficient
40.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-10
1:235
capacity to pass or convey the increased flows associated with
the twenty-five-year return period runoff event, except for facilities
located within a designated floodplain area which must be capable
of passing or conveying the one-hundred-year return period runoff.
Any facilities which constitute stream enclosures per DEP Chapter
105 regulations shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year
return period runoff.
D. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
designed for up to a 100% release rate so long as the total runoff from
the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
E. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate; provided, that
the overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
F. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a conditional no detention
subarea, in no event shall a significant portion of the site area subject to
the release rate control be drained to the discharge point(s) located in
the no detention subarea.
G. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site
which has significant areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the
design release from the site will be the lesser of:
(1) The total development site runoff times the applicable release rate;
or
(2) The existing peak flow actually leaving the site.
H. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
I. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria.
J. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase the rate or volume of runoff discharged from the
site are not subject to the release rate provisions of this article.
§ 203-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-10
1:236
K. No harm option.
(1) For any proposed development site not located in a conditional no
detention district, the developer has the option of using a less
restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the developer
can provide that no harm would be caused by discharging at a
higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan. Proof of no harm
would have to be shown from the development site through the
remainder of the downstream drainage network to the confluence
of the creek with the Delaware River. Proof of no harm must be
shown using the capacity criteria specified in Subsection C of this
section if downstream capacity analysis is a part of the no harm
justification.
(2) Attempts to prove no harm based upon downstream peak flow
versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the following
provisions:
(a) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated Penn
State Runoff Models for the for the Catasauqua Creed
Watershed and the watersheds associated with several
unnamed creeks. For the Conditional No Detention II areas,
the PSU-IV peak flow values will be used. These flow values
would be supplied to the developer by the Borough Engineer
upon request.
(b) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system
as documented by a developer may be used by the developer
only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified
capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped
acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(c) Developer-processed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
Subsection M of this section.
(3) Any no harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per §§ 203-12 through 203-18.
L. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
§ 203-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-10
1:237
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis
using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection
of the downstream watershed areas. Hydrologic model refers to the
calibrated version of the Penn State Runoff Model as developed for the
stormwater management plan.
M. Capacity improvements.
(1) In certain instances, primarily within the conditional no detention
areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more stringent levels
of runoff control than those based upon protection of the entire
watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove that it
would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve the
capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu of runoff
controls on the development site. Peak flow calculations are to be
done assuming that the local watershed is in the existing condition
and then assuming that the local watershed is developed per
current zoning and using the specified runoff controls. Any capacity
improvements would be designed using the larger of the above
peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in Subsection C of
this section. All new development in the entire subarea(s) within
which the proposed developed site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
(2) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement a
modified no harm option which proposed specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
N. Waiver of runoff control based on minimum additional impervious cover.
Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in § 203-5D(4)
and (5) of this article, which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting the runoff
control provisions of this article. For developments which are to take
place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this criteria. Predevelopment
impervious cover is that which is in place as of the effective date of this
article. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
constructed as part of or for the proposed development. Any
postdevelopment areas which may be designed to initially be
semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.) shall
be considered impervious areas for the purposes of waiver evaluation.
Any semipervious predevelopment areas shall be considered pervious
areas for purposes of waiver evaluation unless demonstrated otherwise
by the applicant.
§ 203-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-10
1:238
§ 203-11. Calculation methodology.
O. Compatibility with NPDES requirements. Any proposed regulated
activity for which a permanent stormwater quality control detention
basin is required under the NPDES regulations shall use the more
stringent runoff control criteria between this article and the NPDES
requirements.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex methodology.
B. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this article shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin. For basins designed using the rational
method technique, the design hydrograph for routing shall be either the
Universal Rational Hydrograph or the modified rational method
trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes detention volume.
C. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one-foot
freeboard, measured to the invert of the emergency spillway, above the
maximum pool elevation associated with the two-through-twenty-fiveyear
runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall be provided above the
maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year runoff event. The twothrough-
one-hundred-year storm events shall be controlled by the
primary outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be
designed to pass the entire one-hundred-year return frequency storm
peak flow rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the top
of basin. The spillway should function to control overflows in the event
of a complete blockage of the basin outlet system. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of
the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and
may be required to pass a storm greater than the one-hundred-year
event.
D. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches; provided, that as much of
the site runoff as practical is directed to the detention facilities.
E. Type II twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution.
(1) All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods to be used consistent with this article are
taken from the "PennDOT Intensity — Duration — Frequency Field
Manual (May 1986)" for Region 4:
§ 203-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-11
1:239
Return Period
24 Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1 year 2.40
2 years 3.00
5 years 3.60
10 years 4.56
25 years 5.52
50 years 6.48
100 years 7.44
(2) A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix C (Part 2I).41
F. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration and return periods
and the Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix
C (Part 2I).42
G. Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C (Part
2I).43
H. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix C (Part 2I).44
I. Proposed volume controls shall be designed with sufficient storage
volume for a one-hundred-year return period event. The storage volume
shall equal or exceed the volume of the Universal Rational Hydrograph
for the drainage area to the volume control.
J. All predevelopment calculations for a given discharge direction shall be
based on a common time of concentration considering both on-site and
off-site drainage areas. All postdevelopment calculations for a given
discharge direction shall be based on a common time of concentration
considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
K. The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C (Part 2I).45 Pipe
capacities shall be determined by methods acceptable to the Borough
Engineer.
41.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
42.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
43.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
44.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
45.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-11 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-11
1:240
§ 203-12. Drainage plan required.
For any of the regulated activities of this article, prior to the final approval
of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity, the owner,
subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan for approval.
§ 203-13. Exemptions.
§ 203-14. Drainage plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
L. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of
stormwater management facilities according to this article may not be
the same criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam
Safety Program.
A. Impervious cover. Any regulated activity which would create 10,000
square feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this article. This criteria shall
apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take
place in stages (i.e., the impervious cover associated with the total
development shall be used to compare to the waiver minimum, not
merely the individual stage impervious cover). Predevelopment
impervious cover is that which is in place as of the effective date of this
article. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
constructed as part of or for the proposed regulated activity. Any areas
designed to initially be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.,
shall be assumed to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to
the waiver criteria.
B. Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
Borough prior to the effective date of this article is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this article; provided, that the
approved drainage plan included design of stormwater facilities
consistent with ordinance provision in effect at the time of approval. If
significant revisions are made to the drainage plan after both the
preliminary plan approval and the effective date of this article,
preparation of a new drainage plan, subject to the provisions of this
article, shall be required.
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
§ 203-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-14
1:241
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site
drainage areas impacting the project including topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
areas.
(4) Other physical features including existing drainage swales,
wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh
or Northampton County Soil Survey latest edition, as applicable.
(7) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
C. Stormwater management controls.
(1) All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map and
described, including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches. When these structures are used, the locations of
septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
control device or method must be shown.
D. Maintenance program. A maintenance program for all stormwater
management control facilities must be included. This program must
include the proposed ownership of the control facilities, the
maintenance requirements for the facilities and the financial
responsibilities for the required maintenance.
§ 203-14 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-15
1:242
§ 203-15. Plan submission.
§ 203-16. Drainage plan review.
A. For regulated activities specified in § 203-5D(1) and (2):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Borough Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(2) Three copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(3) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) One copy to the Borough Council.
(b) One copy to the Borough Engineer.
(c) One copy to the Joint Planning Commission.
B. For regulated activities specified in § 203-5D(3) and (4), the drainage
plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Borough Building
Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 203-5D(5) and (6):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Joint
Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP permit
application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of DEP's
rules and regulations.
(2) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
D. For all regulated activities under § 203-5 that propose to disturb more
than five acres of land, an NPDES permit application for discharge of
stormwater associated with construction activity shall be submitted to
the Lehigh or Northampton County Conservation District, as
applicable.
A. The Borough Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with the adopted Catasauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh River
Subbasin 4 Stormwater Management Plan as embodied by this article
and against any additional storm drainage provisions contained in
Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land Development, or Chapter 250,
Zoning, as applicable.
B. The Joint Planning Commission shall provide an advisory review of the
drainage plan for consistency with the Catasauqua Creek Watershed
and Lehigh River Subbasin 4 Stormwater Management Plan.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 203-5D(1) and (2), the JPC shall
provide written comments to the Borough, within a time frame
§ 203-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-16
1:243
§ 203-17. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the Borough Engineer) shall require a resubmission
of the modified drainage plan consistent with § 203-15 subject to review per
§ 203-16 of this article.
§ 203-18. Hardship waiver procedure.
consistent with established procedures under the Municipalities
Planning Code, as to whether the drainage plan has been found to be
consistent with the stormwater management plan.
D. For regulated activities specified in § 203-5D(5) and (6), the JPC shall
notify DEP whether the drainage plan is consistent with the stormwater
management plan and forward a copy of the review letter to the
Borough and developer.
E. The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land development
[regulated activities § 203-5D(1) and (2)] or building permit application
[regulated activities § 203-5(3) and (4)] if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan as
determined by the Borough Engineer.
A. The Borough Council may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged
that the provisions of this article (Act 167)46 inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing on
an application form promulgated by the Borough and accompanied by
the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the Borough. A
copy of the completed application form shall be provided to each of the
following: Borough, Borough Engineer, Borough Solicitor and Joint
Planning Commission. The application shall fully document the nature
of the alleged hardship.
B. The Borough may grant a waiver; provided, that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or
other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and
that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
this article in the Stormwater Management District in which the
property is located.
46.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 203-16 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-18
1:244
§ 203-19. Schedule of inspections.
§ 203-20. Fee to defer costs of review.
A fee shall be established by the Borough to defer Borough costs for
drainage plan review and processing.
§ 203-21. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this article shall at a minimum cover:
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of this article, including the no harm provision
and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
(4) The waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver that
will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
C. In granting any waiver, the Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of Act 167 and this article.
A. The Borough Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of the
installation of the permanent stormwater control facilities and the
completed installation.
B. If at any stage of the work the Borough Engineer determines that the
permanent stormwater control facilities are not being installed in
accordance with the approved development plan, the Borough shall
revoke any existing permits until a revised development plan is
submitted and approved as required by § 203-17 of this article.
A. The review of the drainage plan by the Borough Engineer.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements
required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions,
regulated by this article, correct violations and assure the completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs.
§ 203-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-22
1:245
§ 203-22. Maintenance responsibilities.
The maintenance responsibilities for permanent stormwater runoff control
facilities shall be determined based upon the type of ownership of the
property which is controlled by the facilities.
§ 203-23. Right-of-way.
Upon proper presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property with the Borough to investigate or ascertain the condition of the
subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this article.
A. Single-entity ownership. In all cases where the permanent stormwater
runoff control facilities are designed to manage runoff from property in
a single-entity ownership as defined below, the maintenance
responsibility for the stormwater control facilities shall be with the
single-entity owner. The single-entity owner shall enter into an
agreement with the Borough which specifies that the owner will
properly maintain the facilities consistent with accepted practice as
determined by the Borough Engineer. The agreement shall provide for
regular inspections by the Borough and contain such provisions as
necessary to ensure timely correction of any maintenance deficiencies
by the single entity owner. A single entity shall be defined as an
individual, association, public or private corporation, partnership, firm,
trust, estate or any other legal entity empowered to own real estate.
B. Multiple ownership.
(1) In cases where the property controlled by the permanent
stormwater control facilities shall be in multiple ownership (i.e.,
many individual owners of various portions of the property), the
developer shall dedicate the permanent stormwater control
facilities to the Borough for maintenance. The developer shall pay a
fee to the Borough corresponding to the present worth of
maintenance of the facilities in perpetuity. The estimated annual
maintenance cost for the facilities shall be based on a fee schedule
provided by the Borough Engineer and adopted by the Borough.
The fee schedule must be reasonable.
(2) In certain multiple-ownership situations, the Borough may benefit
by transferring the maintenance responsibility to an individual or
group of individuals residing within the controlled area. These
individuals may have the permanent stormwater control facilities
adjacent to their lots or otherwise have an interest in the proper
maintenance of the facilities. In these instances, the Borough and
the individual(s) may enter into a formal agreement for the
maintenance of the facilities. The Borough shall maintain
ownership of the facilities and be responsible for periodic
inspections.
§ 203-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-24
1:246
§ 203-24. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
article, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Borough shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within
the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of
this article. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and resort by
the Borough from pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which the regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this article.
§ 203-25. Enforcement.
Any person found by the Borough to have violated any provision of this
article shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Article V of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and/or § 15 of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Management Act (Act 167).47
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 203-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-25
1:247

ARTICLE II
Hokendauqua Creek Watershed and Lehigh River Sub-Basin 3
[Adopted 5-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1148]
§ 203-26. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hokendauqua Creek
and Lehigh River Sub-Basins Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
§ 203-27. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, changes the
natural hydrologic patterns, destroys aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream communities,
reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to
the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the people of
the municipality and all of the people of the commonwealth, their
resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).48
F. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
48.Note: These provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4 Ordinance Provisions and are
not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES Phase II regulations.
§ 203-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-28
1:249
§ 203-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-Basins
Watershed by minimizing the damages and maximizing the benefits
described in § 203-27 of this article by provisions designed to:
§ 203-29. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority
of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the Stormwater Management Act, and the Borough Code.50
§ 203-30. Applicability.
This article shall only apply to those areas of the municipality which are
located within the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in
the municipality and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management BMPs that are implemented in the municipality.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning, design and management.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.49
49.Note: These provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4 Ordinance Provisions and are
not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES Phase II regulations.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 203-28 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-30
1:250
Watershed(s) as delineated on an official map available for inspection at the
municipal office. A map of the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Subbasins
Watershed(s) at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for general
reference. [Municipalities subject to the NPDES Phase II regulations must
ensure that all of the ordinance provisions required to meet the MS4
NPDES requirements apply across the entire municipality.] The following
activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be governed by this
article:
§ 203-31. Exemptions.
A. Land development.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
G. Regulated earth disturbance activities.51
A. Impervious cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined
in § 203-30E and F, which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover, is exempt from the drainage plan
preparation provisions of this article. All of the impervious cover added
incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000 square feet shall be
subject to the drainage plan preparation provisions of this article. If a
site has previously received an exemption and is proposing additional
development such that the total impervious cover on the site exceeds
10,000 square feet, the total impervious cover on the site proposed
since the original ordinance date must meet the provisions of this
article.
(1) The date of the municipal ordinance adoption of the original
Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance shall be the starting point
from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future
subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be
cumulatively considered.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with these criteria.
(3) Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
additional indoor living spaces, decks, patios, garages, driveways,
51.Note: These provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4 Ordinance Provisions and are
not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES Phase II regulations.
§ 203-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-31
1:251
§ 203-32. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this article do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 203-33. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, including exemption and
waiver provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration
storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or
for the proposed regulated activity.
(4) Any additional areas proposed to initially be gravel, crushed stone,
porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed to be impervious for the
purposes of comparison to the exemption criteria. Any existing
gravel, crushed stone or hard-packed soil areas on a site shall be
considered as pervious cover for the purpose of exemption
evaluation.
B. Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
municipality prior to the effective date of this article is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this article, except as cited in
Subsection C provided that the approved drainage plan included design
of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently
proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions
in effect at the time of approval and the approval has not lapsed under
the Municipalities Planning Code.52 If significant revisions are made to
the drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of this article, preparation of a new drainage plan, subject
to the provisions of this article, shall be required. Significant revisions
would include a change in control methods or techniques, relocation or
redesign of control measures or changes necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the original drainage plan.
C. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, property, and
state water quality requirements. These measures include adequate
and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the site.
These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
D. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§ 203-30E and F.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 203-31 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-33
1:252
or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such
actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality
of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
§ 203-34. Word usage.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 203-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and natural processes, at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, measures
or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and quality impacts
from the regulated activities listed in § 203-30, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN — Documentation, included as part of a drainage plan, detailing the
proposed BMPs, how they will be operated and maintained and who will be
responsible.
BIORETENTION — Densely vegetated, depressed features that store
stormwater and filter it through vegetation, mulch, planting soil, etc.
Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated, or discharged.
Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of
species diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
BUFFER —
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
STREAMSIDE BUFFER — A zone of variable width located along a
stream that is vegetated and is designed to filter pollutants from runoff.
A.
§ 203-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-35
1:253
CAPTURE/REUSE — Stormwater management techniques such as cisterns
and rain barrels which direct runoff into storage devices, surface or
subsurface, for later reuse, such as for irrigation of gardens and other
planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no pollutant
discharge results, water quality performance is superior to other
noninfiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate minerals,
such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a sedimentary rock composed
of more than 50% by weight of carbonate minerals that underlies soil or
other unconsolidated, superficial material.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the land
surface. It is characterized by internal drainage, varying magnitude, and an
unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh or Northampton County
Conservation District, as applicable.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS — Constructed wetlands are similar to wet
ponds (see below) and consist of a basin which provides for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water level, planted
with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed wetlands must have
adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well as soils and water
table which allow for maintenance of a permanent pool of water). In these
cases, the permanent pool must be designed carefully, usually with shallow
edge benches, so that water levels are appropriate to support carefully
selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The depth and time distribution of precipitation from
a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., one-hundredyear
storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in computing
stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at the appropriate release
rate.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER — A required isolation
distance from a special geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed to
reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to stormwater management
activities.
B.
§ 203-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-35
1:254
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this article.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE — See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
quantity and quality management controls to be used for a given
development site, including a BMP operations and maintenance plan, the
contents of which are established in § 203-45.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice,
or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES — Those uses actually attained in the water body on or
after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the water
quality standards (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1).
FILL — Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste
materials.
FILTER STRIPS — See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST — A written request for a waiver alleging
that the provisions of this article inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. A hardship waiver does not apply to and is not available from the
water quality provisions of this article and should not be granted.
HOTSPOT LAND USES — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic substances
than typically found in stormwater runoff. These land uses are listed in
§ 203-39P.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Soils are classified into four HSGs (A,
B, C and D) to indicate the minimum infiltration rates, which are obtained
for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their
§ 203-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-35
1:255
group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS
offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less permeable as the
HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER) — A surface which
prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE — A practice designed to direct runoff into the
ground, e.g., French drain, seepage pit, seepage trench or bioretention
area.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by depressions,
sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills, underground drainage
and caves. Karst is usually formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestones
or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOADING RATE — The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as
modified by the weighting factors in § 203-42B, compared to the base area
of the infiltration system.
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting runoff
from the site to the main stem.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A development approach that promotes
practices that will minimize postdevelopment runoff rates and volumes,
thereby minimizing needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features,
minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of
impervious surfaces and protecting natural depression storage.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.53
C.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 203-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-35
1:256
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other conveyance
used as a reach in the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins
hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MARYLAND STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — A stormwater design
manual written by the Maryland Department of the Environment and the
Center for Watershed Protection. As of January 2004, the manual can be
obtained through the following web site: www.mde.state.md.us.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES (MD/
MM) — Site design practices in which careful limits are placed on site
clearance prior to development allowing for maximum retention of existing
vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum disturbance and compaction
of existing soil mantle and minimum site application of chemicals
postdevelopment. Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance setback criteria
from buildings as well as related site improvements such as walkways,
driveways, roadways, and any other improvements. These criteria may vary
by community context as well as by type of development being proposed.
Additionally, MD/MM also shall include provisions (e.g., deed restrictions,
conservation easements) to protect these areas from future disturbance and
from application of fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of North Northampton, Lehigh or Northampton
County (as applicable), Pennsylvania.
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS) — U.S.
Department of Agriculture (formerly the Soil Conservation Service).
NO-HARM OPTION — The option of using a less-restrictive runoff quantity
control if it can be shown that adequate and safe runoff conveyance exists
and that the less-restrictive control would not adversely affect health, safety
and property.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A structural mechanism designed to remove
free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from stormwater runoff.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
OWNER — One with an interest in and often dominion over a property.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a
given location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
modeling technique adapted to each watershed for the Act 167 Plans. The
§ 203-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-35
1:257
model was calibrated to reflect actual flow values by adjusting key model
input parameters.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION — The determination of the depth
to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high water table and the soil
permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site through the use
of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas, the
location of special geologic features must also be determined along with
the associated buffer distance to the possible infiltration area. See Appendix
G.54
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the public for
human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or regularly
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the
year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109.)
QUALIFIED GEOTECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL — A licensed professional
geologist or a licensed professional engineer who has a background or
expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using a
standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'), acreage of tract and rainfall
intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the
entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method formula is stated as
follows: Q = ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per
second, "c" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix C55), "i" is
the rainfall intensity in inches per hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in
acres.
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for watershed runoff modeling purposes to connect the subareas and
transport flows downstream.
RECHARGE VOLUME (REv) — The portion of the water quality volume
(WQv) used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites
(see § 203-39J).
54.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-35
1:258
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact upon
proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed by this
article as specified in § 203-30.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Earth disturbance
activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one acre or more with
a point source discharge to surface waters or to the municipality's storm
sewer system or earth disturbance activity of five acres or more, regardless
of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part
or during any stage of a larger common plan of development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases throughout the
watershed.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-fiveyear
return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to recur on
the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross-section such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS — Chambers which provide
storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect sediment, debris and
associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic cleanout.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the ground
surface.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve number."
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features, including
but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces,
lineaments, joints, faults, caves, pinnacles and geologic contacts between
carbonate and noncarbonate bedrock which may exist and must be
identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being
considered.
§ 203-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-35
1:259
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM — A program that
identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning up potential
spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary equipment
available to appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations; protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A method of routing or moving an
inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention structure. The method
solves the mass conservation equation to determine an outflow hydrograph
as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in
Appendix B of this article or identified by the municipality or municipal
engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters, or drainage,
but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER FILTERS — Any number of structural mechanisms such as
multi-chamber catch basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters, and so forth,
which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and remove pollutants
prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic maintenance
and cleanout.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishes" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect
the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to
prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 203-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-35
1:260
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Lehigh and/or Northampton County for the Hokendauqua
Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins Watershed as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
"Stormwater Management Act."56
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff. See also "vegetated swale."
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL AND
INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002 — The report
written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration in
carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The report
is available at the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS — Racks, screens or other similar devices
installed in a storm drainage system to capture coarse pollutants (trash,
leaves, etc.).
VEGETATED BUFFERS — Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater as
sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated earthen area, possibly coupled
with the use of level spreading devices. Vegetated buffers should be situated
on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities and extended
residence times.
VEGETATED ROOFS — Vegetated systems installed on roofs that generally
consist of a waterproof layer, a root-barrier, drainage layer (optional),
growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated roofs store and eventually
evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall; overflows may be provided
for larger storms.
56.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 203-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-35
1:261
VEGETATED SWALES —
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS — Any number of commercially available
devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture sediment, oil, grease,
metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual rainfall volume (see § 203-39B).
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS — Basins that provide for necessary stormwater
storage as well as a permanent pool of water. To be successful, wet ponds
must have adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well as soils
and water table which allow for maintenance of a permanent pool of water)
and must be able to support a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid
creation of mosquito and other health and nuisance problems.
§ 203-36. Stormwater management requirements.
Vegetated earthen channels designed to convey stormwater. These
swales are not considered to be water quality BMPs.
A.
Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen channels designed to treat
stormwater while slowly infiltrating, evapotranspirating, and conveying
it. Swales should be gently sloping with low flow velocities to prevent
erosion. Check dams may be added to enhance performance.
B.
A. All regulated activities in the municipality shall be subject to the
stormwater management requirements of this article.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unobstructed flow
in natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities, recharge facilities, water quality facilities, pipe systems or
open channels consistent with this article.
C. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the
affected property owner(s).
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this article. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated
and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document
that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge to the point of predevelopment
flow concentration to the stream reach or otherwise prove that no harm
will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
§ 203-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-36
1:262
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, whether they are
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas.
E. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a
one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the municipality, there shall
be provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the line
of such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unobstructed flow of storm runoff based on calculations
made in conformance with § 203-42 for the one-hundred-year return
period runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the
design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations, which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure proper
runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the onehundred-
year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable
municipal floodplain regulations.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning Equation.
G. Postconstruction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and
maintained to meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law and
implementing regulations, including the established practices in 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 and the specifications of this article as to prevent
accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of
discharge.
H. No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities
shall commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this article.
I. Techniques described in Appendix F (Low-Impact Development) of this
article57 are encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this article and the state water quality
requirements.
J. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and
geology permit, consistent with the provisions of this article and, where
appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D.58
57.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-37
1:263
§ 203-37. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
§ 203-38. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 203-39. Postconstruction water quality criteria.
A. All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainage ways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102 and Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities. Written approval by
DEP or a delegated County Conservation District shall satisfy this
requirement.
B. An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for
any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. A DEP NPDES Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction
Activities Permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities
under Pa. Code Chapter 92.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
§ 203-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-39
1:264
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a drainage plan which
demonstrates compliance with this article. This article provides
standards to meet NPDES permit requirements associated with
construction activities and MS4 permit requirements.
B. The Water Quality Volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The
WQv shall be calculated two ways. First, WQv shall be calculated using
the following formula:
WQv = (c)(P)(A)/12
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method postdevelopment runoff coefficient for
the two-year storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity
Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff volume
from predevelopment to postdevelopment for the two-year return
period storm. The effect of closed depressions on the site shall be
considered in this calculation. The larger of these two calculated
volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and treated, except
that in no case shall the WQv be permitted to exceed 1.25 inches of
runoff over the site area. This standard does not limit the volume of
infiltration an applicant may propose for purposes of water quantity/
peak rate control.
C. The WQv shall be calculated for each postdevelopment drainage
direction on a site for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious
cover and no proposed disturbance during development may be
excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
D. If an applicant is proposing to use a dry extended detention basin, wet
pond, constructed wetland or other BMP that ponds water on the land
surface and may receive direct sunlight, the discharge from that BMP
must be treated by infiltration, a vegetated buffer, filter strip,
bioretention, vegetated swale or other BMP that provides a thermal
benefit to protect the high quality waters of the Hokendauqua Creek
and Lehigh River Sub-basins from thermal impacts.
E. The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be
treated with infiltration or two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in
Subsection O, except for minor areas on the periphery of the site that
cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
F. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant
demonstrates that the fill is stable and otherwise meets the infiltration
BMP standards of this article.
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-39
1:265
G. The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site
from published sources. Any apparent boundaries between carbonate
and noncarbonate bedrock shall be verified through more detailed site
evaluations by a qualified geotechnical professional.
H. For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed where an
applicant intends to use infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall conduct a
preliminary site investigation, including gathering data from published
sources, a field inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a
minimum of two percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G.59 This
investigation will determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal
high water table, soil permeability and location of special geologic
features, if applicable. This investigation may be done by a certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO), except that the location(s) of
special geologic features shall be verified by a qualified geotechnical
professional.
I. Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMPs must meet the
following criteria:
(1) Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal
to two feet.
(2) Depth to seasonal high water table below the invert of the BMP
greater than or equal to three feet; except for infiltration of
residential roof runoff where the seasonal high water table must be
below the invert of the BMP. (If the depth to bedrock is between
two and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal high water
table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the depth
to seasonal high water table is required.)
(3) Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 Pa. Code § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G60) greater than or equal to 0.5 inch/
hour and less than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
(4) Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Fifteen feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations; except for residential development where the
required set back is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet
upgradient from building foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields; except for residential
development where the required setback is 25 feet from septic
system drainfields.
59.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-39 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-39
1:266
(d) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(e) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from existing or potential
future wells, foundations and drainfields on neighboring
properties will be met; except for one- and two-family
residential dwellings where the required setback is 40 feet,
unless documentation is provided to show that all setbacks
from existing or potential future wells, foundations and
drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
J. For entirely noncarbonate sites, the Recharge Volume (REv) shall be
infiltrated unless the applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to
infiltrate the REv for reasons of seasonal high water table, permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances; or except as provided in
Subsection U.
(1) The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25)*(I)/12
Where:
REv = Recharge Volume in acre-feet
I = Impervious area in acres
(2) The preliminary site investigation described in Subsection H is
required and shall continue on different areas of the site until a
potentially suitable infiltration location is found or the entire site is
determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For infiltration areas
that appear to be feasible based on the preliminary site
investigation, the additional site investigation and testing as
outlined in Appendix G61 shall be completed.
(3) If an applicant proposes infiltration, the municipality may
determine infiltration to be infeasible if there are known existing
conditions or problems that may be worsened by the use of
infiltration.
(4) The site must meet the conditions listed in Subsection I.
(5) If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall
infiltrate that portion of the REv that is feasible based on the site
characteristics. If none of the REv can be infiltrated, REv shall be
considered as part of the WQv and shall be captured and treated as
described in Subsection O.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-39
1:267
(6) If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to
be captured and treated.
K. In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to us
infiltration BMPs, the preliminary site investigation described in
Subsection H shall be conducted. For infiltration areas that appear
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the applicant shall
conduct the additional site investigation and testing as outlined in
Appendix G.62 The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed loading
rate, each weighted as described in § 203-42, along with the buffer from
special geologic features, shall be compared to the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D63 to determine if the site is recommended for
infiltration. In addition to the recommendation from Appendix D, the
conditions listed in Subsection I are required for infiltration in
carbonate areas. Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as
calculated in Subsection J, but are not required to use infiltration BMPs
on a carbonate site even if the site falls in the "Recommended" range on
the chart in Appendix D. Any amount of volume infiltrated can be
subtracted from the WQv to be treated by noninfiltration BMPs. If
infiltration is not proposed, the full WQv shall be treated by two
acceptable BMPs, as specified in Subsection O.
L. If a site has both carbonate and noncarbonate areas, the applicant shall
investigate the ability of the noncarbonate portion of the site to fully
meet this article to meet the requirements for REv for the whole site
through infiltration. If that proves infeasible, infiltration in the
carbonate area as described in Subsection K or two other
noninfiltration BMPs as described in Subsection O must be used. No
infiltration structure in the noncarbonate area shall be located within
50 feet of a boundary with carbonate bedrock, except when a
preliminary site investigation has been done showing the absence of
special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration
area.
M. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the
postdevelopment two-year runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80%
or more of the predevelopment runoff volume for the carbonate portion
of the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the
predevelopment infiltration volume.
N. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance
and compaction except as necessary for construction of infiltration
BMPs.
O. If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the
WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in series for each
discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
62.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
63.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-39 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-39
1:268
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and
concentrated flow shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an
impervious area is to be drained across a pervious area as one BMP,
the length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the
length of impervious area. In no case may the same BMP be employed
consecutively to meet the requirement of this section. Acceptable BMPs
are listed below along with the recommended reference for design.
Best Management Practice
Design Reference
Numbers
BioretentionA 4, 5, 11, 16
Capture/reuseB 4, 14
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Dry extended detention ponds 4, 5, 8, 12, 18
Minimum disturbance/minimum
maintenance practices
1, 9
Significant reduction of existing
impervious cover
N/A
Stormwater filtersA (sand, peat, compost,
etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated buffers/filter strips 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Vegetated roofs 4, 13
Vegetated swalesA 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water quality inletsD 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
Wet detention ponds 4, 5, 6, 8
NOTES:
A This BMP could be designed with or without an infiltration
component. If infiltration is proposed, the site and BMP will be
subject to the testing and other infiltration requirements in this
article.
B If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv, then it is the only
BMP required because of this BMPs superior water quality
performance.
C See table below.
D Water quality inlets include such BMPs as oil/water separators,
sediment traps/catch basin sumps, and trash/debris collectors in
catch basins.
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-39
1:269
NumberDesign Reference Title
1 "Conservation Design For Stormwater Management — A
Design Approach to Reduce Stormwater Impacts From Land
Development and Achieve Multiple Objectives Related to
Land Use," Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control, The Environmental Management
Center of the Brandywine Conservancy, September 1997.
2 "A Current Assessment of Urban Best Management Practices:
Techniques for Reducing Nonpoint Source Pollution in the
Coastal Zone," Schueler, T. R., Kumble, P. and Heraty, M.,
Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, 1992.
3 "Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings," Federal
Highway Administration, Chen, Y.H. and Cotton, G.K.,
Hydraulic Engineering Circular 15, FHWA-IP-87-7, McLean
Virginia, 1988.
4 "Draft Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,"
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
January 2005.
5 "Evaluation and Management of Highway Runoff Water
Quality," Federal Highway Administration, FHWA-PD-96-032,
Washington, D.C., 1996.
6 "Evaporation Maps of the United States," U.S. Weather
Bureau (now NOAA/National Weather Service) Technical
Paper 37, Published by Department of Commerce,
Washington D.C., 1959.
7 "Georgia Stormwater Manual," AMEC Earth and
Environmental, Center for Watershed Protection, Debo and
Associates, Jordan Jones and Goulding, Atlanta Regional
Commission, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001.
8 "Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts," Federal Highway
Administration, FHWA HDS 5, Washington, D.C., 1985
(revised May 2005).
9 "Low Impact Development Design Strategies An Integrated
Design Approach, Prince Georges County, Maryland
Department of Environmental Resources, June 1999.
10 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual," Maryland
Department of the Environment, Baltimore, Maryland, 2000.
11 "Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas," Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, 1998.
12 "Recommended Procedures for Act 167 Drainage Plan
Design," LVPC, Revised 1997.
§ 203-39 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-39
1:270
NumberDesign Reference Title
13 "Roof Gardens History, Design, and Construction,"
Osmundson, Theodore. New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
1999.
14 "The Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting," Texas Water
Development Board, Austin, Texas, Third Edition, 2005.
15 "VDOT Manual of Practice for Stormwater Management,"
Virginia Transportation Research Council, Charlottesville,
Virginia, 2004.
16 "Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook," Virginia
Department of Conservation and Recreation, Richmond,
Virginia, 1999.
17 "Water Resources Engineering," Mays, L.W., John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 2005.
18 "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical Report
55, US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, 1986.
19 U.S. EPA, Region 1 New England website (as of August 2005)
http://www.epa.gov/NE/assistance/ceitts/stormwater/techs/
html
P. Stormwater runoff from hotspot land uses shall be pretreated. In no
case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in Subsection O.
(1) Acceptable methods of pretreatment are listed below.
Hotspot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Vehicle maintenance and
repair facilities, including
auto parts stores
Water quality inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
Spill prevention and response program
Vehicle fueling stations Water quality inlets
Spill prevention and response program
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-39
1:271
Hotspot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Storage areas for public
works
Water quality inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
Spill prevention and response program
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
Outdoor storage of
liquids
Spill prevention and response program
Commercial nursery
operations
Vegetated swales/filter strips
Constructed wetlands
Stormwater collection and reuse
Salvage yards and
recycling facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Fleet storage yards and
vehicle cleaning
facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Facilities that store or
generate regulated
substances*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Marinas* BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Certain industrial uses
(listed under NPDES)*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
NOTES:
* Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program
(2) Design references for the pretreatment methods, as necessary, are
listed below. If the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the municipality that the proposed land use is not a hotspot, then
the pretreatment requirement would not apply.
§ 203-39 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-39
1:272
§ 203-40. Stormwater management districts.
Pretreatment Method Design ReferenceA
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
4, 11
Stormwater collection and reuse (especially
for irrigation)
4, 14
Stormwater filters (sand, peat, compost,
etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated swales 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water quality inlets 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
NOTE:
A These numbers refer to the Design Reference Title Chart in
Subsection O above.
Q. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hotspot land use areas.
R. Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be placed in or on a special
geologic feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be
discharged into existing on-site sinkholes.
S. Applicants shall request, in writing, public water suppliers to provide
the Zone 1 Wellhead Protection radius, as calculated by the method
outlined in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Wellhead Protection regulations, for any public water supply well
within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback distances specified
in Subsection I, infiltration is prohibited in the Zone I radius as defined
and substantiated by the public water supplier in writing. If the
applicant does not receive a response from the public water supplier,
the Zone I radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
T. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the
regulated activities must be managed to prevent the physical
degradation of receiving waters from such effects as scour and
streambank destabilization, to satisfy state water quality requirements,
by controlling the two-year postdevelopment runoff to a 30% release
rate.
U. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative
methods for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this section, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law including but not
limited to the Clean Streams Law.
A. Mapping of stormwater management districts. To implement the
provisions of the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-40
1:273
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, the municipality is hereby
divided into stormwater management districts consistent with the
Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins Release Rate Map
presented in the plan update. The boundaries of the stormwater
management districts are shown on an official map which is available
for inspection at the municipal office. A copy of the official map at a
reduced scale is included in Appendix A for general reference.64
B. Description of stormwater management districts. Two types of
stormwater management districts may be applicable to the
municipality, namely Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts and
Dual Release Rate Districts, as described below.
(1) Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts. Within these
districts, the capacity of the "local" runoff conveyance facilities (as
defined in § 203-35) must be calculated to determine if adequate
capacity exists. For this determination, the developer must
calculate peak flows, assuming that the site is developed as
proposed and that the remainder of the local watershed is in the
existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows,
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this article. The larger of the two peak flows calculated
will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists. If adequate
capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site to the main
channel (as defined in § 203-35), these watershed areas may
discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without detention
facilities. If the capacity calculations show that the "local" runoff
conveyance facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall
either use a 100% release rate control or provide increased
capacity of downstream elements to convey increased peak flows
consistent with § 203-41P. Any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas tributary
to the improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified
in § 203-41D. By definition, a storm drainage problem area
associated with the "local" runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist. Sites in these districts are
still required to meet all of the water quality requirements in
§ 203-39.
(2) Dual Release Rate Districts. Within these districts, the two-year
postdevelopment peak discharge must be controlled to 30% of the
predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the ten-, twentyfive-
and one-hundred-year post development peak runoff must be
controlled to the stated percentage of the predevelopment peak.
Release rates associated with the ten- through one-hundred-year
events vary from 50% to 100%, depending upon location in the
watershed. [For the Monocacy Creek and Nancy Run Watersheds,
64.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-40 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-40
1:274
§ 203-41. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
the original Single Release Rate Districts become Dual Release
Rate Districts due to the channel protection standard requiring
developments to meet a two-year 30% release rate.]
A. Applicants shall provide a comparative pre- and postconstruction
stormwater management hydrograph analysis for each direction of
discharge and for the site overall to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this article.
B. Any stormwater management controls required by this article and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release
rate criteria for each of the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundredyear
return period runoff events consistent with the calculation
methodology specified in § 203-42.
C. The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (e.g., road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical
feature is the downstream limit of the subarea and the subarea
boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic divide
along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
D. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
article shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
E. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
§ 203-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-41
1:275
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
designed for up to a 100% release rate so long as the total runoff from
the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
F. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate, provided that
the overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
G. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a Conditional/Provisional No
Detention subarea, the size of the predevelopment drainage area on a
site may not be changed postdevelopment to create potentially adverse
conditions on downstream properties except as part of a "no harm" or
hardship waiver procedure.
H. No portion of a site may be regraded between the Hokendauqua Creek
and Lehigh River Sub-basins Watershed and any adjacent watershed
except as part of a "no harm" or hardship waiver procedure.
I. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site
which has areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the design
release from the site will be the lesser of: (a) the applicable release rate
flow assuming no closed depression(s); or (b) the existing peak flow
actually leaving the site. In cases where (b) would result in an
unreasonably small design release, the design discharge of less than or
equal to the release rate will be determined by the available
downstream conveyance capacity to the main channel calculated using
Section 306.D. and the minimum orifice criteria.
J. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity
criteria in Subsection D and the detention criteria in § 203-42.
K. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention
ponds shall be designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied
to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond discharge direction. All
site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of
whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that
time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series
where only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated
release rate.
L. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
§ 203-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-41
1:276
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The impact area
includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
M. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged
from the site compared to predevelopment are not subject to the
release rate provisions of this article.
N. "No harm" water quantity option. For any proposed development site
not located in a Conditional/Provisional No Detention District, the
developer has the option of using a less-restrictive runoff control
(including no detention) if the developer can prove that special
circumstances exist for the proposed development site and that "no
harm" would be caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate than that
specified by the plan. "Special circumstances" are defined as any
hydrologic or hydraulic aspects of the development itself not
specifically considered in the development of the plan runoff control
strategy. Proof of no harm would have to be shown from the
development site through the remainder of the downstream drainage
network to the confluence of the creek with the Delaware or Lehigh
River. Proof of no harm must be shown using the capacity criteria
specified in Subsection D if downstream capacity analysis is a part of
the no harm justification.
(1) Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon downstream peak flow
versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the following
provisions:
(a) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five- and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated PSRM
Model for the Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Subbasins
or as calculated by an applicant using an alternate
method acceptable to the municipality. The flow values from
the PSRM Model would be supplied to the developer by the
municipality upon request.
(b) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system
as documented by a developer may be used by the developer
only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified
capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped
acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(c) Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
Subsection P.
§ 203-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-41
1:277
§ 203-42. Calculation methodology.
(2) Any no harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per §§ 203-43 through 203-49.
Developers submitting "no harm" justifications must still meet all of
the water quality requirements in § 203-39.
O. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined based on the required
release rate at the point of discharge.
P. Capacity improvements.
(1) In certain instances, primarily within the Conditional/Provisional
No Detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more
stringent levels of runoff control than those based upon protection
of the entire watershed. In these instances, if the developer could
prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to
relieve the capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then
the capacity improvements could be provided by the developer in
lieu of runoff controls on the development site. Peak flow
calculations shall be done assuming that the local watershed is in
the existing condition and then assuming that the local watershed
is developed per current zoning and using the specified runoff
controls. Any capacity improvements would be designed using the
larger of the above peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in
Subsection D. All new development in the entire subarea(s) within
which the proposed development site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
(2) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement a
modified "no harm" option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex methodology.
B. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D65 shall be calculated as follows:
65.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-42
1:278
Area tributary to infiltration BMP
Base area of infiltration BMP *100%
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
All disturbed areas to be made impervious: weight at 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious: weight at 50%
All undisturbed pervious areas: weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: weight at 100%
C. Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration system.
(1) The effective soil thickness in the Recommendation Chart for
Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock
in Appendix D66 is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the
thickness factor based on soil permeability (as measured by the
adapted 25 Pa. Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G), as
follows:
Permeability Range* Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hour 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hour 1.0
NOTE:
* If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 Pa.
Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G) falls on a break
between two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor
shall be used.
(2) Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 inches per hour or
less than 0.5 inch per hour, as measured by the adapted 25 Pa.
Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G, are not recommended
for infiltration.
D. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this article shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin using the storage indication method or
other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph
for routing shall be either the Universal Rational Hydrograph or the
Modified Rational Method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes
66.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-42
1:279
detention volume. Use of the Modified Rational hydrograph shall be
consistent with the procedure described in Section "PIPE.RAT" of the
Users' Manual for the Penn State Urban Hydrology Model (1987).
E. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall be routed using the storage indication method.
F. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below
the lowest outlet invert.
G. Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv
shall assume that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet
is full at the beginning of design event routing for the purposes of
evaluating peak outflows.
H. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one-foot
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation associated with the twothrough
twenty-five-year runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall be
provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool
elevation to the invert of the emergency spillway. The two- through onehundred-
year storm events shall be controlled by the primary outlet
structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be designed to
pass the one-hundred-year return frequency storm peak basin inflow
rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the top of basin.
The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any offsite areas
tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of
the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and
may be required to pass a storm greater than the one-hundred-year
event.
I. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches. Designs where a lesser
size orifice would be required to fully meet release rates shall be
acceptable with a three-inch orifice, provided that as much of the site
runoff as practical is directed to the detention facilities. The minimum
three-inch diameter does not apply to the control of the WQv.
J. Runoff calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods to be used consistent with this article may be
taken from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 Version 2.1, 2004 or the PennDOT
Intensity - Duration - Frequency Field Manual "PDT-IDF) (May 1986) for
Region 4.
(1) The following values are taken from the PDT-IDF Field Manual:
§ 203-42 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-42
1:280
Return Period
(years)
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1 2.40
2 3.00
5 3.60
10 4.56
25 5.52
50 6.48
100 7.44
(2) A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix C.67
K. Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1, 2004 or the
Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C.68
L. Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C.
M. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix C.
N. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach
which may include one or all of the flow types below:
(1) Sheet flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS
average velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or
the modified kinematic wave travel time equation (equation 3-3,
NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave
travel time equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50
feet for designs using the Rational Method and limited to 150 feet
for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex method.
(2) Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from
the watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure
3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
(3) Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning Equation. Bankfull flows shall be used
for determining velocities. Manning 'n' values shall be based on the
table presented in Appendix C.69
67.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
68.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
69.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-42
1:281
§ 203-43. Drainage plan required.
For any of the regulated activities of this article, prior to the final approval
of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit,
or the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance activity, the
owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan and
receive municipal approval of the plan.
§ 203-44. Drainage plan exemptions.
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in
§ 203-31.
§ 203-45. Drainage plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
(4) Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated using the Manning Equation assuming full flow and the
Manning 'n' values from Appendix C.
O. If using the Rational Method, all predevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
If using the Rational Method, all postdevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
P. The Manning Equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C or other appropriate
standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities shall be
determined by methods acceptable to the municipality.
Q. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of
stormwater management facilities according to this article may differ
from the criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam
Safety Program.
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
(3) The name and address of the project site, the name and address of
the owner of the property and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the drainage plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
§ 203-42 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-45
1:282
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site
drainage areas impacting the project including topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
area.
(4) Other features including flood hazard boundaries, existing
drainage swales, wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas
of natural vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines. The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh
or Northampton County Soil Survey, as applicable, latest edition.
Any hydric soils present on the site should be identified as such.
(7) An overlay showing geologic types, boundaries and any special
geologic features present on the site.
(8) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(11) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
(12) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(13) An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that
would provide municipal ingress to and egress from a public rightof-
way.
(14) A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site
and all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary
that would be affected by the project.
(15) The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the
project and all private water supply wells within 100 feet of the
project.
C. Stormwater management controls and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on
a map and described, including:
§ 203-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-45
1:283
§ 203-46. Plan submission.
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches. When these structures are used, the locations of
septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
BMPs shall be shown.
(3) All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration
on a site.
(4) All details and specifications for the construction of the stormwater
management controls and BMPs.
D. The BMP operations and management plan, as required in §§ 203-53
through 203-59, describing how each permanent stormwater BMP will
be operated and maintained and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance. A statement must be
included, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater
BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or removed without approval
by the municipality.
E. An Environmental Resources Site Design Assessment that describes the
following:
(1) The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious cover
avoid disturbance of significant environmental resources and
preserve existing site hydrology.
(2) An assessment of whether alternative grading and impervious
cover site design could lessen the disturbance of significant
environmental resources and/or make better use of the site
hydrologic resources.
(3) A description of how the proposed stormwater management
controls and BMPs serve to mitigate any adverse impacts on
environmental resources on the site. Significant environmental
resources considered in the site design assessment include, but are
not limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric
soils, floodplains, riparian vegetation, native vegetation and special
geologic features.
A. For regulated activities specified in § 203-30A and B:
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
municipal secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
§ 203-45 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-46
1:284
§ 203-47. Drainage plan review.
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(2) Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(3) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) One copy to the municipal governing body.
(b) One copy to the municipal engineer.
(c) Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except
for drainage plans involving less than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover.
(4) Drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover shall be submitted by the developer
(possibly through the municipality) to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission as part of the preliminary plan submission. The Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission will conduct an advisory review of the
drainage plan for consistency with the Hokendauqua Creek and
Lehigh River Sub-basins Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
The LVPC will not review details of the Erosion and Sedimentation
Plan or the BMP operations and maintenance plan.
(a) Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(b) The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and
the municipality, within a time frame consistent with
established procedures under the Municipalities Planning
Code, as to whether the drainage plan has been found to be
consistent with the stormwater management plan.
B. For regulated activities specified in § 203-30C and D, the drainage plan
shall be submitted by the developer to the municipal building permit
officer as part of the building permit application.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 203-30E, F and G:
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of
DEP's rules and regulations and the NPDES regulations.
(2) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
D. Earthmoving for all regulated activities under § 203-30 shall be
conducted in accordance with the current federal and state regulations
relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
§ 203-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-47
1:285
§ 203-48. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the municipality) shall require a resubmission of
the modified drainage plan consistent with § 203-46 subject to review per
§ 203-47 of this article.
§ 203-49. Hardship waiver procedure.
A. The municipality shall review the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, for consistency with the adopted
Hokendauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-basins Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan as embodied by this article and with any
permits issued by DEP. The municipality shall also review the drainage
plan against any additional storm drainage provisions contained in the
municipal subdivision and land development or zoning ordinance, as
applicable.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
drainage plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, is
approved.
C. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
(regulated activities, § 203-30A and B) or building permit application
(regulated activities, § 203-30C and D) if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan.
D. The municipality may require an "as-built" survey of all stormwater
BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
A. The municipality may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that
the provisions of this article inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and accompanied by
the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the municipality.
A copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the following:
municipality, municipal engineer, municipal solicitor and Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of
the alleged hardship.
B. The municipality may grant a waiver provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally
§ 203-47 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-49
1:286
§ 203-50. Schedule of inspections.
created by the provisions of this article in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located;
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this article, including the "no
harm" provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(4) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue; and
(5) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship
waiver.
C. In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
article. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still manage
the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as
is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
D. For regulated activities described in § 203-30A and B, the Borough of
Northampton shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the municipality.
E. For regulated activities in § 203-30C, D, E, F and G, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver requests
on behalf of the municipality.
F. The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of this
article.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation District) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this article, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits issued by the municipality or
other approvals issued by the municipality until the deficiencies are
corrected.
§ 203-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-51
1:287
§ 203-51. General fees and expenses.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of the drainage
plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, to defray review
costs incurred by the municipality. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 203-52. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this article shall at a minimum cover:
§ 203-53. Stormwater BMP operations and maintenance plan
requirements.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
§ 203-54. Responsibilities for operation and maintenance of BMPs.
A. The review of the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, by the municipality.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements
required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit
provisions, regulated by this article, correct violations, and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
§ 203-51 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-54
1:288
§ 203-55. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is
granted in writing by the municipality.
§ 203-56. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 203-57. Stormwater management easements.
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention areas and
other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 203-56.
§ 203-58. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
B. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix E of this article.70
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the
municipality to be reasonable or necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the
municipality.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Lehigh or Northampton County, as
applicable, within 90 days of approval of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof.
(2) Operations and Maintenance Agreements under § 203-56.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 203-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-58
1:289
§ 203-59. Municipal Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance
Fund.
§ 203-60. Prohibited discharges.
(3) Easements under § 203-57.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require the applicant to pay a specified amount to
the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount
may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operation and
maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater except as provided in
Subsection B below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on the municipality finding that
the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute pollution to surface
waters of the commonwealth are listed below.
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents
or other compounds.
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
§ 203-58 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-60
1:290
§ 203-61. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 203-60B
above:
§ 203-62. Roof drains.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
§ 203-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-63
1:291
§ 203-63. Alteration of BMPs.
§ 203-64. Right of entry.
§ 203-65. Notification.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP without the written approval of the municipality
unless it is part of an approved maintenance program.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
municipality.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials and with the consent of the
landowner, duly authorized representatives of the municipality may
enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to
inspect the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of
the stormwater BMPs or to investigate or ascertain the condition of the
subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this article.
B. In the event that the landowner refuses admission to the property, duly
authorized representatives of the municipality may seek an
administrative search warrant issued by a Magisterial District Judge to
gain access to the property.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(4) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
(5) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
(6) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(7) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(8) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(9) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
§ 203-63 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-65
1:292
§ 203-66. Public nuisance.
§ 203-67. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 203-68. Violations and penalties.
further advise that should the violator fail to take the required action
within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
municipality or designee and the expense thereof, together with all
related lien and enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this article. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. The violation of any provision of this article is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this article.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipality or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) Payment of all municipal fees, costs and expenses related to or
arising from the violation has been made.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this article.
§ 203-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-68
1:293
§ 203-69. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this article may appeal using the appeal
procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.71
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the municipality as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating
this article to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
E. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 203-68 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 203-69
1:294
Chapter 210
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 190.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Water — See Ch. 240.
§ 203-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-69
1:295

ARTICLE I
Warrants of Survey
[Adopted 6-9-1966 by Ord. No. 711 (Ch. 21, Part 1B, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-1. Street plan required for construction or installation of
certain structures.
Hereafter no building shall be erected, no walls set, no sidewalk, curbing
or gutter located, installed or constructed, along the streets, alleys or lanes
of the said Borough unless lines and grades along said streets, lanes or
alleys shall have been given by the Borough Engineer or Surveyor from the
official final plan for the street, lane or alley in accordance with this article
or by another registered land surveyor or engineer in such cases where, by
ordinance, Borough Council has placed this responsibility with the property
owners involved and has officially adopted a final plan for the street or
streets involved.
§ 210-2. Application for warrant.
It shall be the duty of every owner or builder before the erection of any
foundation for any building or wall, sidewalk, curbing or gutter on any of
the streets, lanes or alleys, to make application to the Borough Secretary
for a warrant of survey. Said warrant to be issued to the Borough Engineer
and requiring him within the period of five days from the time such warrant
may be delivered to him or the adopted final plan of the street, lane, or alley
is made available to him, whichever comes later, to give such grades and
lines as may be described in said warrant of survey. And when the provisions
of said warrant of survey shall have been executed, said Borough Engineer
shall endorse the same, together with the date of its execution, and when
such warrant is so endorsed and dated, it shall be sufficient authority for
such owner or builder to proceed with the erection and construction on such
building or wall, sidewalk, curbing or gutter as may be set forth in said
warrant.
§ 210-3. Curb grades given only by block.
A. Curb grades shall be given by the Borough Engineer or Surveyor only
for an entire street block; that is, for all lots from one street intersection
to the next street intersection, or from one street intersection to an
alley intersection only for the construction of curbing throughout the
length of the block.
B. No line and grade for curbing shall be given for any individual lot or
number of adjacent lots in one street block, except when that lot or total
combination of lots lies between two lots, both of which have curbing,
on the true line and grade, at the effective date of this article.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:297
§ 210-4. Lines and grades furnished only in relation to streets.
The lines and grades to be given by the Borough Engineer or Surveyor at
the expense of the Borough under the provisions of the warrant of survey
shall be only for such lines and grades that affect or are affected by public
streets, lanes or alleys. All surveys of lots and staking out of buildings must
be done at the expense of the person or persons carrying out such work.
§ 210-5. Fees. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
The Borough Secretary shall receive, for the use of the Borough, from every
owner or builder before issuing a warrant of survey to him, such fees as
shall be established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 210-6. Waiver of fees.
No charge shall be made by the Borough Secretary for the issuing to any
applicant a warrant of survey directed to the Borough Engineer, requiring
him to give grades and lines for the reconstructing of sidewalks,
reconstruction of curbing or relaying of gutters, but the same shall be
issued free of charge.
§ 210-7. Suspension pending plan adoption.
The Borough Council reserves the right, to be exercised by resolution of
Council, to suspend the giving of line and grade along any Borough street,
lane or alley that is proposed for construction or reconstruction by the
Borough, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any other duly
authorized governmental agency, firm or other party until the final plans for
said construction or reconstruction are officially adopted by the Borough
Council.
§ 210-8. Remedies; violations and penalties. [Amended 7-18-1974
by Ord. No. 860; 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Remedies. In any case where a property owner shall fail, neglect or
refuse to reconstruct or remove any sidewalk, curbing or gutter placed
in violation of any of the provisions of this article, after notification by
the Borough to reconstruct or remove such sidewalk, curbing or gutter
within the time specified in the notice, the Borough shall have the
authority to cause such removal or reconstruction to be done, and
collect the cost of such work, with 10% additional, to be collected from
such property owner in the manner authorized by law.
B. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-8
1:298
ARTICLE II
Utility Installations and Appurtenances
[Adopted 11-10-1966 by Ord. No. 714 (Ch. 21, Part 1C, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-9. Requirements for placement.
Whenever any person, partnership, corporation or municipal authority
installs or renews any device or fixture known as a gas or water service
control box for an individual service, fire hydrant, utility pole, or any other
underground conduit, device or fixture which shall extend to or above
ground level, said device or fixture must be located inside the curbline
of the abutting or adjacent street and no part or extremity of the control
box, fire hydrant, utility pole, or other device or fixture shall come any
closer than six inches as measured from an imaginary line drawn vertically
from a point six inches back of the inside curbline; provided, however, that
service manholes shall not be installed or maintained between street line
and curbline at any intersection for a distance of 35 feet from the respective
intersecting street lines.
§ 210-10. Installation or renewal of underground service.
Whenever any person, partnership, corporation or municipal authority
installs or renews any underground service in, under or through a public
street, said service shall be installed or renewed between the main or feeder
and the curbline in a line at right angles to the street line at that point.
§ 210-11. Abandonment of underground installations.
Whenever any person, partnership, corporation, public utility, or municipal
authority abandons any main, feeder, service or underground installation
of any kind, in any public street, lane, alley or highway, it shall be the
responsibility of that person, partnership, corporation, public utility or
municipal authority to physically remove completely said abandoned main,
feeder, service or underground installation of any kind from all street and
alley intersections for a distance of 35 feet from the respective intersecting
street lines and shall maintain current plans showing description, location,
depth, etc., of all abandoned installations that have not been removed;
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall restrict, impair, or
modify the Borough's right to order the removal of all or any part of any
particular underground installation that is abandoned.
§ 210-12. Location of new utility mains; extensions and replacement
of existing mains.
The location of new utility mains, extensions and replacements of existing
gas and water mains and all other underground utilities shall be governed
by the following:
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-12
1:299
§ 210-13. Depth and location; maps and plans of underground
installations; approval for encroachment in streets.
A. On the streets, lanes or alleys running generally north and south, gas
mains shall be installed along a line, parallel to the street line and 1/3
the width of the paved roadway, lane or alley measured from the
westerly curbline. Water mains shall be installed along a line parallel to
the street line and 1/3 the width of the paved roadway, lane or alley
measured from the easterly curbline.
B. On streets, lanes or alleys running generally east and west, water mains
shall be installed along a line parallel to the street line and 1/3 the
width of the paved roadway measured from the northerly curbline. Gas
mains shall be installed along a line parallel to the street line and 1/3
the width of the paved roadway measured from the southerly curbline.
C. In no instance shall any gas or water main, or any other utility cable,
conduit, or service running generally parallel to any sanitary sewer
main, trunk line, or service lateral be installed, constructed, or
relocated directly over or less than five feet away from said sanitary
sewer installation, whether existing or proposed; provided, however,
that the distance away from the proposed or existing sanitary sewer
installation shall exceed five feet in all instances when, for example, the
sanitary sewer line would be excavated for construction or
reconstruction then the distance between the sanitary sewer location
and the other utility installation shall be such that the undisturbed soil
from the bottom of that excavation to the nearest part of the other
utility line shall form no more than a forty-five-degree angle with the
bed of the sanitary sewer excavation. In such instances where it may be
necessary for any other underground utility conduit to cross a sanitary
sewer main, trunk line, or service lateral it shall cross at right angles to
the sanitary sewer installation or be suitably encased in such a manner
across the sanitary sewer as to permit reconstruction of the sanitary
sewer without requiring special supports which support shall be
supplied and maintained by the owning utility if needed.
A. Whenever any underground utility main, conduit, or service is installed,
constructed, replaced, or renewed or repaired in or on a public street, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or user of the main, conduit
or service to record such current engineering data as may be required
to identify and ascertain the depth and location of all said mains,
conduits or services. Elevations and locations shall be tied into
landmarks, monuments, or other permanent improvements wherever
they may be located.
B. Every person, partnership, corporation, public utility or municipal
authority having any active or inactive underground installation in,
under or through any public street, lane or alley, shall be obliged to
maintain accurate, completely detailed, and up-to-date maps and/or
plans of said installation or installations and shall be responsible for
notifying the Borough Manager, in writing, not later than January 15 of
§ 210-12 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-13
1:300
§ 210-14. Borough's right to schedule installation of utility mains
or trunks.
The Borough of Northampton reserves the right to schedule the installation
of utility mains or trunks in newly ordained or opened streets by the
establishment of a certain practical order of priority and reserves the right
to prohibit the installation of service laterals or any individual service
conduits or lines from the principal mains or trunks if in the judgment of
the Borough this will interfere with the laying of other utilities' mains or
conduits.
§ 210-15. Exceptions to certain requirements.
Reasonable exceptions to the requirements of §§ 210-9, 210-10 and 210-12
may be granted by the Borough Manager upon show of sufficient cause.
§ 210-16. Nonexclusive rights or privileges.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as a grant of any exclusive right or
privilege unto any company or utility or to prevent a grant of similar rights
or privileges to other utilities or companies.
each year, and whenever else it may be advisable or necessary, of
the name, address and phone number of the person or office where
said maps and plans may be checked or verified, and where precise
descriptions, locations and depths of all active and abandoned
underground installations may be secured.
C. Every person, partnership, corporation, public utility or municipal
authority having a network of active or inactive installations or more
than one single installation in, under or through Borough streets, lanes
or alleys shall, not later than January 1, 1967, and at five-year intervals
thereafter, or annually if Borough Council requires, deliver to the
Borough Manager an up-to-date general system plan of all active
underground installations within the Borough.
D. No person, partnership or corporation other than an already authorized
public utility or municipal authority shall encroach or construct an
installation, on, under, over or through any public street, lane or alley
without having first received the approval, by ordinance, of the
Borough Council.
E. Every person, partnership or corporation other than an already
authorized public utility or municipal authority having any installation
in, under or through any public street, lane or alley and said installation
or encroachment has not been authorized in writing or by other formal
action of Borough Council shall file an accurately detailed plan of same
with the Borough Manager not later than January 1, 1968. The filing of
said plan shall not serve to legalize any construction or encroachment
and the Borough reserves the right to require abandonment and/or
complete removal of same at no expense to the Borough at any time.
§ 210-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-16
1:301

ARTICLE III
Assessments for Street Construction
[Adopted 9-16-1968 by Ord. No. 737 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-17. Method of assuring payment of street paving costs.
No ordinance laying out, ordaining and opening any street or street
extension hereinafter enacted shall have effect until the Borough is assured
of the payment for all street construction costs by abutting owners by either
of the following, whichever shall apply:
A. Whenever the abutting lands are subdivided into individual lots as
shown on the current County Assessment Maps in accordance with a
duly recorded plan of lots more than 10 years old, then the Borough
Engineer shall certify: the total street construction costs involved
including design and supervision; the respective lot frontages abutting
said street; and the names of the owners of record of these lots, to the
Borough Secretary. The Borough Secretary shall then give notice of
assessment of street paving costs by certified mail to each affected
abutting owner for his proportionate share of the total costs on the
front-foot basis and each owner shall have 30 days from the date of
receipt of the notice within which to pay the Borough said costs;
otherwise, the costs shall be immediately entered as a lien against the
abutting property.
B. Whenever the street or the lands abutting said street shall be owned by
an individual owner, or were owned by a single owner, be it an
individual, firm or corporation, as of January 1, 1968, then the owner
shall enter into a written agreement with the Borough providing for
either:
(1) The immediate payment of the lump sum cost of street construction
as determined by the Borough Engineer on the date of the passage
of the ordinance ordaining said street;
(2) A judgment note covering the total frontage abutting any street in
the amount of the estimated cost of the street construction as
determined by the Borough Engineer. Upon payment of any portion
of the street construction costs to the Borough by the owner, the
Borough will release an equivalent portion of the judgment note;
provided, however, that the remaining or unpaid value of the
estimated street construction costs shall be increased by 6% as of
January 1 of each successive year after the street is ordained to
reflect increased street construction costs; or
(3) Post a bond in the total value of the street construction as
determined by the Engineer at the time of the street paving.
§ 210-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-18
1:303
§ 210-18. Assessment monies to be used only for street
construction.
Any and all monies paid by any owner in accordance with § 210-17B(1) or
(2) hereof shall be deposited by the Borough in an escrow fund for the
construction of said street, and for no other purpose whatsoever.
§ 210-19. Provisions not to invalidate prior agreements.
No part of this article shall serve to impair, change or invalidate any prior
existing written agreement between the Borough and any owner.
§ 210-20. Inapplicability. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. This article shall not apply to any street or portion of a street
hereinafter ordained that meets all of the following requirements:
(1) Has been opened to and used by vehicular traffic for 20 years or
more.
(2) Appears on the Rathbun and Weirbach plan of the Borough streets.
(3) Has at least one residence or commercial structure on land
abutting and within 150 feet of said street or portion of a street
between any two streets previously ordained and opened or that
meet the other three requirements of this section and intersect said
street.
(4) Has been recognized by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for annual Liquid Fuels Tax grants for at least six
years prior to the adoption of this article.
B. Provided, however, that the Borough reserves the right to assess street
opening and construction costs in accordance with the other provisions
of this article for the opening and construction of any street or portion
of a street that otherwise meets the requirements of this section but
where the location of the street right-of-way line may be in dispute and
the owner of the abutting land refuses to dedicate the land in dispute
for a consideration of $1 plus the out-of-pocket dedication costs.
§ 210-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-20
1:304
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-3-1988 by Ord. No. 1004 (Ch. 21, Part 4, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — A natural person, partnership, corporation, association,
or any other legal entity.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 210-22. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice.
§ 210-23. Responsibility for removal from roofs.
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, may be required
to remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any
accumulation of snow and ice on said building or other structure which is
liable to fall on any sidewalk, roadway, or other public way.
A. Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting
or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be
removed or cleared away, snow and/or ice from a path of at least 30
inches in width from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts
on said building or lot of land.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
C. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection B hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe; and shall, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path in said
sidewalk of at least 30 inches in width.
D. In the event a fire hydrant is located on the sidewalk, all snow must be
removed within a thirty-inch radius to provide access.
§ 210-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-23
1:305
§ 210-24. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on
or immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any roadway or loading or
unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow and
ice may be mounded by the Borough of Northampton on public cartways
incident to the clearing of sidewalks in business districts.
§ 210-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-26. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Code Enforcement Officer, or any official so designated by the Borough
Manager.
A. Such work shall be completed within a reasonable time, but not later
than 24 hours after notification by the Code Enforcement Officer or
Police Department.
B. In the event removal is not possible, it will be necessary to rope off or
barricade the dangerous area.
§ 210-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-26
1:306
ARTICLE V
Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 9-7-1989 by Ord. No. 1016 (Ch. 21, Part 1A, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-27. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 210-28. Permit required to make opening or excavation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any of the streets in the Borough of Northampton without first
securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 210-29. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of
the streets in the Borough of Northampton shall make application to the
Borough of Northampton in writing for that purpose. Such application shall
be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough of Northampton and
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed
opening or excavation, and the approximate size or depth thereof, and shall
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough of Northampton and the
laws of the commonwealth in relation thereto, and that the applicant shall
well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough of Northampton
from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments,
costs and charges for or by any reason of the proposed opening or
excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner
therefrom, or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith,
or from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 210-30. Permit fee. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048;
7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1168]
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough of Northampton, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley,
or cartway which involves cutting, breaking, or disturbing the surface
thereof. In this article, the term "opening" shall have essentially the
same meaning as "excavation."
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or municipal authority.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 210-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-30
1:307
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council, to cover
the cost of inspection and other incidental services in connection therewith.
When application shall be made to open or excavate any longitudinal
opening or excavation in excess of 10 square feet, before any permit shall
be issued so to open or excavate, the applicant shall pay in addition to such
minimum fee, an additional fee for each 50 feet, or fraction thereof, to be
opened or excavated upon such street.
§ 210-31. Issuance of permits restricted.
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services
or the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where
such opening or excavation is to be made. No permits will be issued from
November 1 to March 30. The only exception will be emergency excavations
approved by the Borough Manager.
§ 210-32. Information contained on permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the
opening or excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size or
depth thereof and the time within which the work for which the permit is
granted is to be completed.
§ 210-33. Permit approval/disapproval.
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been filled. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval together with reasons therefor shall be given to the applicant.
§ 210-34. Responsibility to contact utilities.
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the
Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, § 1 et seq., as amended or
supplemented from time to time.72 It shall be the permittee's responsibility
to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities in compliance
with said Act. A partial list of utilities providing services in the Borough of
Northampton and their office addresses may be obtained from the County
Recorder of Deeds.
§ 210-35. Refilling of opening or excavation; restoration of surface;
responsibility for defects. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048;
7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1168]
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Borough of
Northampton shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or
excavation in such a manner as to prevent any settling thereafter, and
shall restore the surface within 120 days after the original excavation to
the same condition as it was before the opening or excavation, and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Department
72.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 210-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-35
1:308
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are hereby
adopted as specifications of the Borough of Northampton for restoration
of surfaces of streets in the Borough of Northampton. As restored, the
surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface
covering as the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening.
If within two years after the restoration of the surface as herein provided,
defects shall appear therein, the applicant shall reimburse the Borough of
Northampton for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving,
plus an additional 20% service charge.
§ 210-36. Responsibility of permit holder for certain work; right of
Borough to do certain work; charges therefor.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by or
for the person to whom or which the permit has been issued at his or its
expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this article
and to the supervision and approval of the designated official, provided
that the Borough Manager may, if he deems it necessary to the proper
performance of the work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and
the backfilling of all excavations therein shall be done by the Borough of
Northampton in which event the applicant shall pay the actual cost of the
work performed by the Borough of Northampton, plus an additional 20%
service charge to the applicant.
§ 210-37. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory work;
completion of incomplete work.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 100 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses, or any
other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or construction
shall have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express written approval of
the Borough Manager and permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated
by him, and shall be done only in a method approved by him.
[Amended 7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 1168]
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified
2A stones and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers
§ 210-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:309
§ 210-38. Emergency openings. [Amended 7-16-2009 by Ord. No.
1168]
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus, to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than
48 hours after commencement, and that all other provisions of this article
are fully complied with.
shall not exceed eight inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to
within 10 inches of the surface.
F. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining
paving within 48 hours and maintained for a period of 90 days.
G. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete and
the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square feet.
H. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same, to keep the street in a safe and passable condition,
both day and night, by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and
all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted under and
subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Borough of
Northampton from any loss in damages, or otherwise whatsoever,
which may or shall be occasioned any time by the said excavation, or by
any leak, explosion or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit, or
any other matter placed in the said excavation.
I. The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when the
opening or excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is
done, when backfilling work is completed, when the temporary paving
has been installed and when the street has been permanently restored
so that inspections may be made.
J. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Code Enforcement Office, be unsatisfactory, and the
same shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within
the time fixed, or in the event that the work for which the permit was
granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Borough of
Northampton, the Borough of Northampton may proceed to correct
such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed,
and charge the cost thereof, plus 20% to the applicant.
§ 210-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-39
1:310
§ 210-39. Restrictions regarding trees and shrubbery.
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its
contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the
legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations and conditions as
the Borough of Northampton may prescribe.
§ 210-40. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done
prior to street improvement and not until five years thereafter;
exception.
The Borough of Northampton shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Borough of Northampton about
to be paved or improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough of Northampton, and all such persons and utility companies shall
make all water, gas, telephone or electric connections, as well as any repairs
thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said street within 30 days
from the giving of such notice, unless such time is extended in writing for
cause shown by the Borough of Northampton. A no-fee permit will be issued
for work performed prior to street improvements. New paving shall not be
opened or excavated for a period of five years after the completion thereof,
except in case of emergency. Any other exception must have approval of
Borough Council.
§ 210-41. Permittee responsibilities for future relocation of work.
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at its own cost and expense.
§ 210-42. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new water, sewer, gas main or electric, telephone or other utility line
shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main or line
shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough of Northampton until
the plan therefor shall have been first filed with the Borough and such plan,
and the exact location of such main or line, approved by him. The Borough
of Northampton shall not approve the locating of any such main or line at a
depth of less than 30 inches from the surface of the street unless they shall
be convinced that locating the same at a depth of more than 30 inches from
the surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 210-43. Bond required.
A. No company, corporation or association shall dig up any street or alley
without first giving to the Borough of Northampton a bond with some
acceptable trust or surety company as surety in the sum of $10,000 per
street cut, conditioned for the faithful performance of these provisions
and also for any and all damages, claims, demands, suits, costs and
§ 210-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-43
1:311
§ 210-44. Payment for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough of Northampton under the
provisions hereof shall be made by the person made liable therefor under
the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such
person by the Borough of Northampton. Upon failure to pay such charges
within such time, the same shall be collectable by the Borough of
Northampton by civil action.
§ 210-45. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
counsel fees occasioned or arising from the digging up, opening or
closing of said streets and alleys.
B. In lieu of posting a $10,000 bond for each street cut a company,
corporation or association can provide an annual bond to the Borough
of Northampton for $100,000. This annual bond will cover any and all
street cuts made between January 1 and December 31.
§ 210-43 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-45
1:312
ARTICLE VI
Curb and Sidewalk Specifications
[Adopted 5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 1139]
§ 210-46. Definitions.
In this article, the following words shall have the meanings hereby ascribed
thereto, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street located outside the cartway, and shall
include paved footway, unpaved grassplot, curb and gutter.
STREET — Includes any public street, lane, alley or way in the Borough of
Northampton.
§ 210-47. Notification of property owners to grade, construct, drain,
pave or repave sidewalks.
Every owner of property which abuts any street in the Borough of
Northampton shall, upon notice from the Borough Council, grade,
construct, drain, pave or repave the sidewalk in the manner stipulated in
such notice, in compliance with the provisions of this article, and within the
time specified in such notice. Property owners have the option or hiring a
contractor to do the required curbing and sidewalk work or to do the work
themselves.
§ 210-48. Responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
It shall be the full responsibility of every owner of property which abuts any
street to keep the sidewalk in a safe condition at all times.
§ 210-49. Curbing and sidewalk specifications.
All curbing and sidewalk must be in strict accordance with Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation Form 408 specifications.
Concrete shall have a minimum twenty-eight-day strength of 3,000 psi
(Class A). The Borough Inspector shall have the authority to require a slip
for each load of concrete which states the strength of the concrete from the
supplier.
A. Curbing specification.
(1) Standard curbing shall be a minimum of 18 inches in depth, seven
inches in width at the top, eight inches in width at the bottom, and
placed on suitable, unfrozen native ground. If unsuitable, curb shall
be placed on compacted 2A stone, replacing the excavated
unsuitable material.
(2) All curbs must be backfilled and tamped with either 2-A Modified
Stone or 2-B Stone to a depth of 14 inches unless otherwise stated
by the Borough Inspector.
§ 210-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-49
1:313
§ 210-50. Permits.
A permit is required prior to the replacement or installation of any curbing
and sidewalk that is located within the right-of-way of any street within the
Borough of Northampton. The permit fee shall be as established from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council, and shall be paid to the Borough
at the time that the permit is issued. If there is 15 linear feet or less of
curbing or 50 square feet or less of sidewalk, there is no charge for the
permit. The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to issue said permits
and to collect the appropriate permit fee. In the case of new construction,
there shall be a separate permit issued for each lot. Permits are valid for a
period of 30 days unless extended or renewed by the Borough Manager.
(3) All curbs shall have all voids and holes filled in with concrete.
(a) Minor curb repair not to exceed two linear feet is permitted
with approved patching material.
(4) All street and road cuts necessary for the installation of curbing
must be restored to the original condition by the property owner or
their agent unless otherwise directed by the Borough Inspector.
(5) Removal of forms on curbing shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
specifications.
(6) All newly installed curbing shall be cured in conformance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
specifications.
(7) Form or saw contraction joints at 10 feet intervals. Place 3/4 inches
pre-molded expansion joint material conforming to the crosssectional
area of the curb where indicated and at the end of the
workday.
B. Sidewalk specifications.
(1) All sidewalks shall be of no less than four inches in depth of
concrete and shall be no less than 10 feet in length with a
construction joint every five feet. All sidewalks shall have no less
than five inches of tamped 2-A modified stone or 2-B stone
underneath the sidewalk.
(2) Sidewalk width shall be five feet unless the right-of-way width
along a street shall be less than five feet. If the right-of-way width is
less than five feet, then the width of the sidewalk shall conform
with the right-of-way width.
(3) Expansion joints shall be installed between curbs and sidewalks
where sidewalks abut curbs, opposite expansion joints in adjacent
curb, and between the sidewalk and rigid structures.
§ 210-49 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-51
1:314
§ 210-51. Inspections.
Inspections by the Borough are required before and after backfilling curbs
and pouring sidewalks for each permit issued.
§ 210-52. Workmanship.
All curbing and sidewalks shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner
to assure good appearance and in the event that it is not installed in such
manner the Borough Inspector can require the replacement of the curbing
and sidewalk.
§ 210-53. Special provisions.
§ 210-54. Warning and protective devices; liability of property
owner or their agent.
It shall be the duty of every property owner or their agent who is grading,
constructing, draining, paving or repaving the sidewalk abutting his
property, to provide and maintain adequate guards, barriers and lights to
prevent accidents, and such owner or their agent shall assume all risks and
liability for all damages by reason of such work, and by reason of any failure
to properly fill such area.
§ 210-55. Provision of alternate passage around obstructions;
watercourses to be kept open.
Whenever any obstruction is made by either excavation or otherwise, under
or across any part of any footway or sidewalk for any purpose whatever,
a safe and convenient passage shall be provided around or over the same
for public travel, and the watercourses kept open for the free passage of
surface waters.
§ 210-56. Authority of Borough to do work; collection of cost plus
10%.
If any property owner shall neglect to comply with any of the provisions of
this article, the Borough shall have the authority to do the grading, paving,
repairing, curbing and/or guttering, or in the case of improper work, to have
A. Handicapped ramps. When constructing new curbing and sidewalk at a
street intersection or when reconstructing both curbing and sidewalk at
a street intersection, handicapped ramps shall be provided for the safe
and convenient movement of physically handicapped persons in
accordance with the Federal Highway Safety Act of 1983 including any
subsequent amendments. The handicapped ramps shall be installed in
accordance with the latest design standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
B. The curbing and handicapped ramps may be poured monolithically
upon approval of the Borough Manager.
§ 210-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-56
1:315
the work redone at the expense of the owner and the Borough may collect
the cost of any work done plus 10% additional together with all charges and
expenses, from the owner in a manner provided by law.
§ 210-57. Exceptions to curbing and sidewalk requirements.
The curbing and sidewalk shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of this article. In the event that any property owner would
desire to have an exception to these regulations, the property owner must
appeal in writing to Borough Council listing the section of this article
for which he wishes to have an exception and stating the reasons for
the exception. Any exception to the regulations must be approved by the
majority of Borough Council at a public Council meeting.
§ 210-58. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
shall upon conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
cost of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-56 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 210-58
1:316
Chapter 215
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 125.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 203.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 210-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-58
1:317

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Authority
§ 215-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate subdivision and land development
within the Borough of Northampton, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
§ 215-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Northampton Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 215-3. Jurisdiction. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
This chapter shall apply to and have jurisdiction over:
A. Subdivision. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.
B. Land development. Any of the following activities:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(b) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
(3) "Land development" does not include development which involves:
(a) The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:319
§ 215-4. Exemptions. [Added 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
§ 215-5. Authority of Borough Planning Commission.
All plans shall be submitted to the Borough of Northampton Planning
Commission for approval. The Borough Planning Commission report shall
only be a recommendation to the Borough, and the decision of the Borough
Council shall be final.
§ 215-6. Authority of County Planning Commission.
All plans shall be sent to the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-
Northampton Counties for their review prior to approval by the Borough
Planning Commission. If a report is not received within 30 days from
the date the application is forwarded to the Joint Planning Commission
of Lehigh-Northampton Counties, the Borough Planning Commission may
proceed to act without their comments. The Joint Planning Commission
report shall only be a recommendation to the Borough, and the decision of
the Borough Council shall be final.
(b) The addition of an accessory building, including farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(c) The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract
or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
§ 215-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-6
1:320
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 215-7. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meaning indicated:
§ 215-8. Definitions. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — Property bounded on one side by a street and on the other three
sides by a street, railroad right-of-way, waterway, unsubdivided area, or
other definite barrier.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
minimum required front yard distance between any building to be erected
and an adjacent right-of-way.
CARTWAY (PAVEMENT WIDTH) — The portion of a street right-of-way
intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
A. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include
the singular.
B. Words in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The words "person," "developer," "subdivider," and "owner" include a
corporation, unincorporated association, a partnership, or other legal
entity, as well as an individual.
D. The word "building" includes structure and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
E. The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:321
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The maps, charts, and textual material adopted
by the Borough Council of Northampton Borough in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and designated, as a whole
and in its several parts, as the Comprehensive Plan for the continuing
development of Northampton Borough.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the
material removed in excavation.
DESIGNATED BOROUGH OFFICIAL — The Borough official charged by the
Borough Council with the responsibility of administering the subdivision
application submission procedure.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DOUBLE OR REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and
having frontage on two generally parallel streets with vehicular access from
only one street.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or
kitchenette) and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure designed as a unit
for occupancy by not more than one family for living and sleeping purposes.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use
of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the
owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall
have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent
with the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
§ 215-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-8
1:322
FEASIBILITY REVIEW — An initial submission of maps and materials, by
the developer, prior to submission of a preliminary plan which analyze the
natural characteristics of the proposed subdivision or land development
tract as they relate to the development potential of the tract. The
developer's proposed general development concept for the tract shall also
be included in this submission.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in
elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of
higher elevation on the final grade. The material used to make a fill.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this chapter,
the floodway and approximated floodplain, as defined in the Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map and Floodway Data Table prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land such
as streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewer systems, storm drainage systems,
and water supply systems that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable lots.
JOINT PLANNING COMMISSION — The Joint Planning Commission of
Lehigh and Northampton Counties, Pennsylvania.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
A lowland area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject
to partial or complete inundation.
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source. For the purpose of this chapter, the
one-hundred-year floodplain as defined in the Flood Insurance Study
for the Borough of Northampton prepared by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
(2)
A.
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:323
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot (as shown
on the plan), excluding space within all streets and within all permanent
drainage easements, but including the areas of all other easements.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough Council to insure that improvements will be kept in good
condition for a period of 18 months after completion of construction,
installation and dedication, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements,
and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
MARKER — A metal pin preferably a reinforcing rod of at least 3/4 inch
outside diameter and at least 30 inches in length.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 215-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-8
1:324
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches in diameter or square. It is recommended that the bottom sides or
radius be at least two inches greater than the top to minimize movements
caused by frost. The monument should contain a copper or brass dowel and
be at least 30 inches in length.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."73
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Northampton.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Borough map adopted by ordinance showing exact
locations of existing and proposed lines for public streets, watercourses and
public grounds, including widenings, narrowings, extensions, diminutions,
opening or closing of same for the entire Borough.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has a one-percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough Council to guarantee that the proper construction of
improvements be made by the developer as a condition for the approval
of the plan, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements, and similar
collateral or surety agreements.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact plan, with professional engineer's
seal affixed and prepared for official recording as required by this chapter
to define property rights, streets and other proposed improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative plan, in lesser detail than a final plan,
showing proposed streets and lot layout and such other information as
required by this chapter.
PLAN, RECORD — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements of the Joint Planning Commission and the Borough Planning
Commission and which is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder
of Deeds.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary and most important use of a lot, parcel or
structure.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
73.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:325
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et
seq.74
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Northampton. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall
not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
RESUBDIVISION — Any remapping of land, limited to changes in lot lines
on approved final plans or recorded plans as specified in this chapter.
Other remapping shall constitute a new subdivision of land. (See also
"subdivision.")
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, sidewalk, or for other public or semipublic purposes.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface
water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of that area of the watershed located upstream from the
subject tract, as permitted by Chapter 250, Zoning.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, CENTRALIZED — A sanitary sewage
collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a
system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, commonly called
a "package treatment plant," generally serving a single land development,
subdivision, or neighborhood, and operated by a governmental agency,
governmental authority, public utility company, or a developer.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-LOT — Any structure designed to treat
sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a major portion
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
74.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 701 et seq.
§ 215-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-8
1:326
of a municipality or municipalities, and operated by a governmental agency,
governmental authority, or public utility company.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives sewage or
industrial waste and is designed and constructed to provide for sludge
storage, sludge decomposition, and to separate solids from the liquid,
through a period of detention, before allowing the liquid to be discharged.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from a
point 4 1/2 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 1/2 foot
above the center line of the road surface.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL CHARACTERISTIC TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil
to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its engineering
properties.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. Streets are
further classified according to the functions they perform:
ARTERIAL — A street serving a large volume of comparatively highspeed
and long-distance traffic, including all facilities classified as main
and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
A.
COLLECTOR — A street which, in addition to providing access to
abutting properties, intercepts local streets to provide a route giving
access to community facilities and/or other collector and arterial streets
(streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall generally be
considered collector streets).
B.
LOCAL — A street used primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street intersecting another street at one end,
and terminating in a vehicular turning circle at the other.
D.
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:327
STREET LINE — The limit of a street right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A registered surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TILE ABSORPTION FIELD — A system of open-jointed or perforated pipes
laid in the upper strata of the soil to distribute sewage effluent into the soil
for absorption and vaporization.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
TRACT — A contiguous land area unbroken by a public street,
distinguishable in its ownership from all adjacent areas, and large enough
to be capable of subdivision or land development according to the
requirements set forth in this chapter.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek, channel or ditch for water whether natural or man-made.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, CENTRALIZED — A system
for supplying and distributing water from a common source to two or
HALF (PARTIAL) — A street, generally parallel and adjacent to a
property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required
for improvement and use of the street.
E.
MARGINAL ACCESS — A local street, parallel and adjacent to a major
street (but separated from it by a reserve strip) which provides access
to abutting properties and control of intersections with the major
street.
F.
SERVICE (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
G.
§ 215-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-8
1:328
more dwellings and/or other buildings, generally serving a single land
development, subdivision, or neighborhood, and operated by a
governmental agency, governmental authority, public utility company, or a
developer.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-LOT — A system for
supplying and distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from
a source located on the same lot.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A system for
supplying and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and
other buildings, generally serving a major portion of a municipality or
municipalities, and operated by a governmental agency, governmental
authority, or a public utility company.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface-water resources within the Borough of
Northampton.
§ 215-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:329

ARTICLE III
Submission Procedures
§ 215-9. Review by commissions.
Hereafter, subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by
the Borough Planning Commission and the Joint Planning Commission of
Lehigh-Northampton Counties and shall be approved or disapproved by the
Borough Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures specified
in this article and in other articles of this chapter, and in accordance with
Article V of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.75
§ 215-10. Feasibility review submission.
§ 215-11. Feasibility review. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Feasibility review maps and materials shall be submitted for all
proposed subdivisions and land developments, for purposes of
discussion between the Borough Planning Commission and the
developer and for the information of the Joint Planning Commission of
Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
B. Four copies of all feasibility review maps and materials as set forth in
§ 215-17 shall be submitted to the designated Borough official.
C. The designated Borough official shall refer two copies of the feasibility
review maps and materials to the Borough Planning Commission for its
review and recommendations and two copies of feasibility maps and
materials to the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton
Counties.
D. One copy of all feasibility review maps and materials as set forth in
§ 215-17 shall be submitted by the developer to:
(1) The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) The Northampton County Conservation District.
A. When feasibility review maps and materials have been submitted to the
Borough Planning Commission, the data presented will be reviewed by
the Borough Planning Commission at its next regular meeting,
providing that submission has occurred no less than 15 days prior to
such scheduled meeting.
B. The Borough Planning Commission shall review the feasibility review
data to determine the development potential of the site as indicated by
the natural features analysis presented. The general development
concepts of the developer will be reviewed to determine their
compatibility with the development potential of the site. Also, the
feasibility review stage is designed to offer the developer an
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-11
1:331
§ 215-12. Submission of preliminary plans.
opportunity to informally discuss his plans for the proposed subdivision
or land development with the Borough Planning Commission.
C. No recommendations shall be made by the Borough Planning
Commission until the Commission has received and considered the
written reports of the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-
Northampton Counties, and, where applicable, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Northampton County
Conservation District. However, if the Joint Planning Commission report
is not received within 30 days after the application was forwarded to
the Joint Planning Commission, the Borough Planning Commission may
make recommendations to the developer without having received and
considered the Joint Planning Commission report.
D. Within 60 days of submission of feasibility review maps and materials to
the Borough Planning Commission, the Commission shall make any
recommendations to the developer which it deems necessary or
advisable in the public interest in order to provide an acceptable
subdivision or land development plan for the site.
E. Within five days after such meeting, the Planning Commission secretary
shall send written notice of the Commission's recommendations to the
following:
(1) Borough Council.
(2) Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
(3) The developer or his agent.
F. Within 12 months after completion of this feasibility review by the
Borough Planning Commission, the developer shall submit a
preliminary plan.
A. Preliminary plans and all required supplementary data for all proposed
subdivisions and land developments shall be submitted to the
designated Borough official and the Joint Planning Commission of
Lehigh-Northampton Counties by the developer.
B. If the preliminary plan submission complies with § 215-18 of this
chapter, the designated Borough official shall acknowledge such
compliance, by immediate issuance, to the developer, of a preliminary
subdivision plan receipt. Copies of this receipt shall also be sent to the
Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
C. Upon receipt of a subdivision or land development plan by the Borough,
the designated Borough official shall forward a copy to the Joint
Planning Commission of Lehigh and Northampton Counties for review
and report according to Section 502 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.76
§ 215-11 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-12
1:332
D. Official submission of a preliminary plan to the Borough Planning
Commission shall comprise:
(1) Submission of three copies of a completed preliminary subdivision
or land development application.
(2) Submission of four black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper
of the preliminary plan which shall fully comply with the provisions
of this chapter as set forth in § 215-18.
(3) Submission of three copies of all required supplemental
information as set forth in § 215-18.
(4) The designated Borough official shall refer one application, one
plan print, and one copy of the supplemental information to the
Borough Engineer and one application, two plan prints, and one
copy of the supplemental information to the Borough Planning
Commission for recommendations as to changes, alterations and
modifications.
E. Official referral of a preliminary plan by the designated Borough official
to the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties
shall comprise:
(1) Submission of a completed preliminary subdivision or land
development application.
(2) Submission of two black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper
of the preliminary plan, which shall fully comply with the provisions
of this chapter.
(3) Submission of one copy of all required supplemental information as
set forth in § 215-18.
F. Official submission of a preliminary plan to other agencies by the
developer shall comprise the following:
(1) One print of the preliminary plan and one copy of all required
supplemental information as set forth in § 215-18 shall be
submitted by the developer to both the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the Northampton County Conservation
District, and each public utility or municipal authority involved in
providing utility service to the proposed development.
(2) Additional prints of the preliminary plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the respective agencies in each of the following
circumstances:
(a) Whenever the property being subdivided or developed abuts a
State Legislative Route, one print of the preliminary plan shall
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502.
§ 215-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-12
1:333
§ 215-13. Review of preliminary plans. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
be submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is
located in more than one municipality or located adjacent to
another municipality, one print of the preliminary plan shall be
submitted for each additional or adjacent municipality, to the
respective municipalities.
A. By the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
(1) Within 25 days of the date of official submission, the staff of the
Joint Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to
determine its conformance with regional plans and priorities, and
shall recommend such changes and modifications as it may deem
necessary or advisable in the public interest.
(2) The Joint Planning Commission shall coordinate its review with the
appropriate state and county agencies, such as the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and the County Conservation
District; and adjacent municipalities (when they are affected).
(3) Within five working days after the preliminary plan is reviewed by
the Joint Planning Commission staff, written notice, including
changes and modifications, if any, recommended by the Joint
Planning Commission, shall be sent to:
(a) The designated Borough official for referral to the Borough
Planning Commission.
(b) The Borough Engineer.
(c) The engineer, surveyor, or land planner of the developer.
(d) The developer or his agent.
(4) The review of the preliminary subdivision or land development plan
by the Joint Planning Commission shall constitute the County
planning agency review set forth in Section 502 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.77
B. By the Borough Planning Commission.
(1) When a preliminary plan has been officially submitted, such plan
shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission for
review at its next regular monthly meeting, provided that such
official submission has occurred no less than 10 calendar days prior
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502.
§ 215-12 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-13
1:334
§ 215-14. Submission of final plan.
to such regular meeting. The Planning Commission may hold a
public hearing on the preliminary plan at this time.
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to
determine its conformance with the standards contained in this
chapter and other applicable Borough ordinances and shall require
or recommend such changes and modifications as it deems
necessary.
(3) No decision shall be made by the Borough Planning Commission
with respect to a preliminary plan until the Borough Planning
Commission has received and considered the written report of the
Joint Planning Commission; provided, however, that if the Joint
Planning Commission shall fail to report thereon within 30 days
after the plan was forwarded to the Joint Planning Commission,
then the Borough Planning Commission must act within 90 days
and notify the applicant within 15 days following its decision.
(4) During the review of the preliminary plan, the Planning
Commission shall also consider the written report of the Borough
Engineer while making its decision.
(5) Within five days after the meeting(s) at which the preliminary plan
is reviewed by the Planning Commission, the action taken by the
Planning Commission in approving or disapproving the preliminary
plan, together with the findings and reasons upon which the action
is based, shall be given, in writing, to the following:
(a) The Borough Council.
(b) The Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton
Counties.
(c) The Borough Engineer.
(d) The developer or his agent.
(6) The action of the Borough Planning Commission shall be noted,
together with the date of action and signature of the chairman on
three sets of plans. These plans then shall be distributed as follows:
(a) Two sets to the developer or his agent.
(b) One set to be filed in the office of the Borough.
A. Within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plan, a final
subdivision or land development plan and all required supplemental
data shall be submitted to the designated Borough official. An extension
of time may be granted by the Borough Planning Commission upon
written request. Otherwise, the plan submitted may be considered as a
new preliminary plan.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-14
1:335
B. The final plan shall conform in all significant respects to the preliminary
plan as previously reviewed by the Borough Planning Commission and
the Joint Planning Commission, but shall incorporate all modifications
required by the Borough Planning Commission in its review of the
preliminary plan. The Borough Planning Commission may, however,
accept a final plan modified so as to reflect any substantial changes
which have occurred on the site of the proposed subdivision, or in its
surroundings, since the time of preliminary plan review.
C. Referral of a final subdivision or land development plan to the Joint
Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties by the
designated Borough official shall be required only when the final plan
departs substantially from the preliminary plan.
D. The final plan may be submitted in sections or stages, each covering a
reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the
reviewed preliminary plan, in accordance with the regulations set forth
in § 215-19F. In the case of the final subdivision or land development
plan which is to be submitted in sections or stages over a period of
years, the time between submission of applications for final approval of
each stage or section shall be no greater than 12 months.
E. If the final plan submission complies with § 215-19 of this chapter, the
designated Borough official shall acknowledge such compliance by
immediate issuance, to the developer, of a final subdivision plan receipt.
Copies of this receipt shall also be sent to the Borough Council and the
Joint Planning Commission of the Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
F. Official submission of a final plan to the Borough Planning Commission
shall comprise:
(1) Submission of three copies of a completed final subdivision and
land development application.
(2) Submission of four black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper
of the final plan, which shall fully comply with § 215-19,
Subsections A through D, of this chapter.
(3) Submission of three copies of all required supplemental
information as set forth in § 215-19E.
(4) Submission of two copies of all offers of dedication, and covenants
governing the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open
space, which shall bear the certificate of approval of the Borough
Solicitor as to their legal sufficiency.
(5) The designated Borough official shall refer one copy of a complete
final subdivision and land development application, one print of the
final plan, and one copy of all required supplemental information to
the Borough Engineer. He shall refer one copy of a complete final
subdivision or land development application, two prints of the final
plan, one copy of all supplemental information and offers of
§ 215-14 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-14
1:336
§ 215-15. Review of final plan. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
dedication and covenants governing undedicated open space to
the Borough Planning Commission. The remaining print of the
final plan and other required information shall be referred to the
Borough Council for their information.
G. Official referral of a final plan by the designated Borough official to the
Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties (where
applicable) shall comprise:
(1) Submission of one copy of completed final subdivision or land
development application.
(2) Submission of two black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper
of the final plan which shall fully comply with the provisions of this
chapter as set forth in § 215-19, Subsections A through D, of this
chapter.
(3) Submission of one copy of all required supplemental information as
set forth in § 215-19E.
H. Official submission of a final plan to other agencies (where applicable)
by the developer shall comprise the following:
(1) One print of the final plan which complies with § 215-19E of this
chapter shall be submitted by the developer to both the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Northampton County Conservation District.
(2) Additional prints of the final plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the respective agencies in each of the following
circumstances:
(a) Whenever the property being subdivided or developed abuts a
State Legislative Route, one print of the final plan shall be
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(b) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is
located in more than one municipality or located adjacent to
another municipality, one print of the final plan shall be
submitted, for each additional or adjacent municipality, to the
respective municipalities.
A. By the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh-Northampton Counties
(where applicable).
(1) Within 25 days after date of official submission, the staff of the Joint
Planning Commission shall review the final plan to determine its
conformance with regional plans and priorities, and shall
recommend such changes and modifications as it may deem
necessary or advisable in the public interest.
§ 215-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-15
1:337
(2) The Joint Planning Commission shall coordinate its review with
appropriate state and county agencies, such as the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and the Northampton County
Conservation District; and adjacent municipalities (when they are
affected).
(3) Within five working days after staff review, copies of the plan
review will be forwarded to the following individuals:
(a) The designated Borough official for referral to the Borough
Planning Commission.
(b) The Borough Engineer.
(c) The engineer or the surveyor of the developer.
(d) The developer or his agent.
B. By the Borough Planning Commission:
(1) When a final plan has been officially submitted, such plan shall be
placed on the agenda of the Borough Planning Commission for
review at its next regular meeting, provided that such official
submission has occurred no less than 10 days prior to such regular
meeting. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing at
this time if the final plan departs substantially from the preliminary
plan.
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the final plan to determine
its conformance with the standards contained in this chapter, with
other applicable Borough ordinances, and with such changes and
modifications which the Planning Commission required in
connection with approval of the preliminary plan. During the
review of the final plan, the Planning Commission shall also
consider the written report of the Borough Engineer and the Joint
Planning Commission (where applicable).
(3) When a final plan has been reviewed by the Joint Planning
Commission, no decision shall be made by the Borough Planning
Commission until such time as the Commission has received and
considered the written report of the Joint Planning Commission;
provided, however, that if the Joint Planning Commission shall fail
to report thereon within 30 days after the plan was forwarded to
the Joint Planning Commission, then the Borough Planning
Commission may act without having received and considered such
report.
(4) Where an earthmoving permit is required (see § 215-29), final
approval shall not be granted until such permit is granted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 215-15 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-15
1:338
(5) Where a revision to the official sewerage plan of the Borough is
necessary in order to accommodate the proposed development (see
§ 215-24), the final plan shall not be approved until a plan revision
has been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and officially adopted by the Borough.
(6) Within 85 days after official submission of a final plan the Planning
Commission shall take action by recommending approval or
disapproval of the final plan.
(7) Within five days after the meeting at which the final plan is acted
on by the Borough Planning Commission, the action taken by the
Commission in approving or disapproving the final plan, together
with the findings and reasons upon which such action is based,
shall be given in writing, to the following:
(a) The Borough Council.
(b) The Joint Planning Commission.
(c) The Borough Engineer.
(d) The developer or his agent.
(8) The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted together with
the date of action and signatures of its chairman and secretary on
the final plan. Copies of the final plan, with the appropriate
endorsement of the Borough Planning Commission, shall be
distributed as follows:
(a) Two copies to the developer.
(b) One copy to be filed in the office of the Borough.
(9) The Planning Commission shall endorse an approved final plan as
follows:
"Approved (date) , by the Northampton Planning
Commission.
____________________, Chairman
____________________, Secretary"
C. By the Borough Council.
(1) The action of the Borough Council shall be noted together with the
date of action and signatures of its President and Borough
Secretary on the final plan. Copies of the final plan, with the
appropriate endorsement of the Borough Council, shall be
distributed as follows:
(a) Two copies to the developer;
(b) One copy to be filed in the office of the Borough.
§ 215-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-15
1:339
§ 215-16. Plans exempted from standard procedure.
(2) The Borough Council shall endorse an approved final plan as
follows:
"Approved (date) , by the Borough Council.
____________________, Council President
____________________, Secretary"
A. In the case of any proposed residential subdivision which does not, and
will not in the future, involve more than a total of five lots and does not
involve the provision of any new street or easement of access (i.e., one
where all proposed lots will have frontage on an existing public street),
the following procedure may be followed:
(1) The developer shall prepare and submit feasibility review maps and
materials according to the procedures set forth in § 215-11 and
standards set forth in § 215-17.
(2) When no major incompatibility is found between the development
potential of the site and the developer's general concept plan for
the site, the Planning Commission may authorize the preparation of
a plan application which meets the requirements for final plans as
set forth in § 215-19 as well as those requirements for
supplementary data in § 215-18F and G which are applicable to the
specific subdivision or land development.
(3) The plan shall be submitted and reviewed according to the
procedures set forth in § 215-15 of this chapter.
(4) The plan may be granted final approval by the Borough Planning
Commission and shall be recorded according to the requirements
set forth in this section.
B. In the case of boundary line adjustments between adjoining property
owners where no new lots are involved and in the case of tracts to be
used exclusively for agricultural purposes, the following procedures
may be followed:
(1) Upon a written request to the Planning Commission, the
Commission may exempt the above mentioned cases from the
normal submission and plan preparation requirements as set forth
in Articles III and IV hereof.
(2) The written request for exemption shall be accompanied by a plan
of the proposed adjustment or subdivision which will enable the
Planning Commission to determine that it will not result in a lot
which does not conform with the minimum requirements of
Chapter 250, Zoning, and does not prevent the logical development
of the remaining tract. The plan will meet the following
requirements:
§ 215-15 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-16
1:340
(a) The plan will be a clear and legible reproduction of the Tax
Map illustrating the area which includes the adjustment or
subdivision.
(b) The plan will illustrate the existing and proposed lot lines, the
existing streets in the area, and the existing structures on the
properties involved.
§ 215-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-16
1:341

ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 215-17. Feasibility review.
Before submission of the preliminary plan by the developer, maps and
materials will be submitted by the developer to the Planning Commission,
which will enable the Commission to determine the potential of the
proposed subdivision or land development tract for development and the
general feasibility of the developer's plans for the tract. The feasibility
review submission will include the following maps and materials:
A. A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided,
drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet and
showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or pattern,
to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal boundaries,
and recorded subdivision plans existing within 2,000 feet of any part of
the property.
B. A map illustrating an analysis of natural drainage patterns and water
resources within the proposed subdivision tract including delineation of
streams, natural drainage swales, ponds and lakes, wetland, floodplains
subject to a fifty-year and a one-hundred-year flood frequency, and
permanent and seasonal high water table areas.
C. A map illustrating an analysis of types of soils present within the
proposed subdivision tract based on the County Soil Survey of the U.S.
Natural Resources Conservation Service. The map should include
delineation of prime agricultural soil areas, aquifer recharge soil areas,
unstable soils, soils most susceptible to erosion, soils most suitable for
urban development, and soils suitable for on-lot sewage disposal.
D. A map illustrating an analysis of the topography within the tract
including a delineation of slope areas under 5%, between 5% and 15%,
and over 15%.
E. A map illustrating the characteristics of rock formations underlying the
tract including delineating aquifers (specifically those locally subject to
pollution) and shallow bedrock areas.
F. A map delineating additional significant physical features within the
proposed subdivision tract, such as woodland areas, large trees, rock
outcroppings, and scenic views.
G. Where feasible and legible, the analysis involved in Subsections A
through F may be illustrated on one or a combination of composite
maps. The combined impact of the natural characteristics of the tract
upon the development potential of the tract will be clearly illustrated on
the map or maps.
§ 215-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-17
1:343
§ 215-18. Preliminary plans. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
H. A letter of intent and a sketch of the proposed subdivision or land
development tract explaining and illustrating the developer's general
development concepts for the tract.
A. The preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision shall be clearly and
legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
B. The original drawing and all submitted prints shall be made on sheets of
one of the following sets of dimensions:
(1) Eighteen inches by 24 inches.
(2) Twenty-four inches by 36 inches.
(3) Thirty-one inches by 42 inches.
C. If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
illustrating relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on
each sheet.
D. The preliminary plan shall illustrate the following data:
(1) Name and address of record owner.
(2) Name of developer if different from owner.
(3) Name of the proposed subdivision.
(4) Name of the municipality or municipalities within which
subdivision is proposed.
(5) Names of all adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the names of owners
of all adjacent unplotted land with the Tax Map, block and lot
number.
(6) Name, address, license number, and seal of registered engineer or
surveyor responsible for the subdivision plan.
(7) North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date including the
month, day and year that the original drawing was completed, and
the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for
each revision.
(8) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000
feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone
or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal
boundaries, and recorded subdivision plans existing within 2,000
feet of any part of the property.
§ 215-17 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-18
1:344
(9) Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided, showing
bearings and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the
property.
(10) Tax Map sheet, block, and lot numbers within the proposed
subdivision tract from the County Tax Assessor's office.
(11) The zoning district or districts within which the proposed
subdivision is located.
(12) All existing buildings or other structures within the proposed
subdivision tract.
(13) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not
constructed), on or adjoining the tract, including names, right-ofway
widths, cartway (pavement) widths and approximate grades.
(14) All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, or other man-made
features within the proposed subdivision tract and within 200 feet
of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision tract.
(15) Location, width, and purpose of existing easements and utility
rights-of-way within 200 feet of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision tract.
(16) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for land
with average natural slope of 5% or less, and at intervals of not
more than five feet for land with average natural slope exceeding
5%. Location and elevation of the data to which contour elevations
refer shall be the closest United States Coast and Geodetic
established benchmark, where available.
(17) The full plan of proposed development, including:
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names.
(c) Building setback lines along each street.
(d) Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(f) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and
parcels.
(g) Water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewers (and other drainage
facilities), with the size and material of each indicated, and any
proposed connections with existing facilities.
§ 215-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-18
1:345
(h) Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for
public or common use, with any conditions governing such use.
(i) Location, width, and purpose of proposed utility easements
and rights-of-way.
(j) Copies of the proposed deed restrictions, protective and
restrictive covenants referenced to the preliminary plan map.
E. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data unless the Borough Planning Commission has
determined that the submission of such data is not necessary.
(1) Preliminary profiles, typical cross-sections and specifications for
proposed street, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water system
improvements.
(2) A storm drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract which
conforms to design requirements for storm drainage set forth in
§ 215-26.
(3) A plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation in accordance
with the erosion and sediment control standards set forth by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection in the "Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual." Copies of the
Department's erosion and sedimentation control rules and
regulations are available for examination in the Borough Offices.
An application for an earthmoving permit shall be submitted to the
Northampton County Conservation District, together with the
erosion control plan where the earthmoving activity affects 25 or
more acres.
(4) A landscape plan, if determined to be necessary by the Borough
Planning Commission, and according to the standards set forth in
§ 215-29B(5), Tree preservation and planting.
(5) A plan for providing utility service according to the standards set
forth in § 215-27 and applicable state and federal regulations; the
plan should set forth the location and width of utility easements,
the proposed installation location of all utility systems including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, electric and
communication lines, gas mains, and the placement of
streetlighting fixtures.
(6) In the case of subdivision or land development plans to be
developed in stages or sections, over a period of time, a map
delineating each stage or section of the proposed subdivision or
land development consecutively numbered so as to illustrate
phasing of development and a schedule indicating the approximate
time for which applications for final approval of each stage or
section are intended to be filed.
§ 215-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-18
1:346
§ 215-19. Final plan. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
(7) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of
the Water and Power Resources Board and/or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
(8) Certification of water supply systems. If water is to be provided by
means other than private wells owned and maintained by the
individual owners of lots within the subdivision or development,
applicants shall present evidence to the Borough Council that the
subdivision is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide
cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public
Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever
is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
(9) Certification of sewage disposal systems.
(a) Public. When sewage disposal service to the proposed
subdivision is to be provided by an existing public system, the
developer shall submit two copies of a letter from the agency,
authority or utility stating that it can adequately serve the
subdivision.
(b) Centralized. When the subdivision is to be served by a
centralized sewage disposal system, the developer shall submit
two copies of a letter from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection which evaluates the proposed
system in relation to the state's minimum requirements.
Pennsylvania Utility Commission approval will be required
where applicable.
(10) Certification of on-lot sewage systems. When sewage disposal
service for the proposed subdivision is to be by the individual on-lot
sewage disposal system, the developer shall submit two copies of a
letter from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection which reports the Department's findings as to the
feasibility of using on-lot sewage disposal systems.
A. The final plan shall conform to the standards and data requirements set
forth for preliminary plans in § 215-17, Subsections A through E, of this
chapter.
B. It shall not be necessary to resubmit supporting maps and data
submitted with the preliminary plan, provided there has been no
change.
C. The following additional data shall be illustrated on the final plan:
§ 215-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-19
1:347
(1) The latest source of title to the land as shown by the deed, page
number and book of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(2) The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided with
accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearing to 30
seconds. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey
in the field, to an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 5,000
feet. The tract boundary shall be subsequently closed and
balanced. The boundary(ies) adjoining additional unplatted land of
the subdivider (for example, between separately submitted final
plan sections), however, are not required to be based upon field
survey, and may be calculated. The location and elevation of all
boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be indicated, along
with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided.
In addition, the engineer or surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of
the survey, the drawn plan, and the placement of the monuments.
(3) The following data for all proposed and existing streets:
(a) The name, proposed name, or number of the street.
(b) The cartway width and cartway edge (curblines) of the street.
(c) The right-of-way width and right-of-way lines of the street.
(4) Block and/or lot numbers and a statement of the total number of
lots.
(5) All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in feet if straight and if
curved by designating length of arc and radius (in feet) and central
angle (in degrees, minutes, and seconds). All internal angles within
the lots shall be designated to within 30 seconds.
(6) The proposed building setback or the proposed placement of each
building.
(7) All easements or rights-of-way, where provided for or owned by
public utility companies and any limitations on such easements or
rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately
identified on the plan, and easements shall either be shown or
specifically described on the plan. Easements should be located in
cooperation with the appropriate public utilities. The exact location
of all utility lines shall also be shown.
(8) Such private deed restrictions as may be imposed upon the
property as a condition of sale, together with a statement of any
restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to the
land being subdivided.
(9) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots or parcels
with reference to restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as
covenants in the deed for the lots or parcels contained in the
§ 215-19 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-19
1:348
subdivision and if covenants are recorded, including the book and
page number of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(10) If the subdivision proposes a new street intersection with a State
Legislative Route, the occupancy permit number(s) shall be
indicated for all such intersections.
(11) The location and elevation of all existing and proposed street
monuments as required by § 215-30E.
(12) A certification of ownership, acknowledgment of plan and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plan, and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner of the property and
notarized.
(13) A certification for approval of the plan by the Borough Planning
Commission shall be presented.
(14) Space shall be left, preferably adjacent to the municipal
certification, in which the review stamp of the Joint Planning
Commission may be applied.
(15) Space shall be left along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that
the County Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge receipt and
recording of the plan when it is presented.
(16) If the final plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing the relative location of the several sections shall be drawn
on each sheet.
D. The final plan shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) A plan showing:
(a) Location, size, and invert elevation of all sanitary sewer, water
distribution, and storm drainage systems and the location of all
manholes, inlets, and culverts.
(b) Final profiles, cross-sections, and specifications for proposed
streets, sanitary sewers, water distribution systems, and storm
drainage systems shall each be shown on one or more separate
sheets.
(2) A letter from each public utility or Borough Authority involved in
providing utility service to the development site confirming that the
developer has entered into an agreement with the appropriate
utility or authority to provide utility service in the development. In
the case of electrical service, the letter will confirm that an
agreement has been entered into providing for an underground
electric system in accordance with the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission Investigation Docket No. 99, as amended from time to
time, or has obtained a waiver to allow overhead facilities from said
Utility Commission.
§ 215-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-19
1:349
(3) A completed and executed copy of the subdivision improvements
agreement as agreed upon by the developer and the Borough.
§ 215-19 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-19
1:350
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 215-20. Application of standards.
§ 215-21. General standards.
§ 215-22. Block and lot design standards.
A. The design standards and requirements outlined in this article will be
utilized by the Borough Planning Commission in determining the
adequacy of all plans for proposed subdivisions and land developments.
B. Development shall be planned, reviewed, and carried out in
conformance with all Borough, county, state and other applicable laws
and regulations.
C. Whenever other Borough ordinances or regulations impose more
restrictive standards and requirements than those contained herein,
such other regulations shall be observed.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
Land with unsafe or hazardous conditions such as open quarries,
unconsolidated fill, or steep slopes shall not be subdivided unless the
subdivision plan provides for adequate safeguards which are approved
by the Borough Planning Commission.
B. Consideration shall be given to applicable provisions of the Borough
and Regional Comprehensive Plans, emphasizing future school sites,
recreation sites, water supply and sewage treatment systems, highway
alignments, and other public facilities. However, consideration must be
given to the need for the facilities and utilities mentioned above,
whether or not they are proposed as part of a Comprehensive Plan.
C. The development of the proposed subdivision shall be coordinated with
adjacent existing development so that the area as a whole may develop
harmoniously.
A. Block layout.
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(a) Provisions of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(b) Borough zoning requirements.78
(c) Topography.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 215-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-22
1:351
(d) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, including the reduction of intersections
with arterial streets.
B. Block length.
(1) Residential blocks shall ordinarily be no less than 500 feet in length
or no more than 1,800 feet in length.
(2) In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
(3) Where practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets shall
not be less than 1,000 feet long.
C. Block depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except:
(1) Where reverse frontage lots are required; or
(2) Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of property, in which case the Borough
Planning Commission may approve a single tier of lots.
D. Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial and industrial,
and planned residential developments may vary from the elements of
design detailed above if required by the nature of the use. In all cases,
however, adequate provision shall be made for traffic circulation, offstreet
parking, and loading areas.
E. General lot design standards.
(1) Within the requirements of Chapter 250, Zoning, the size, shape
and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the type of
development and use contemplated.
(2) Insofar as practical, side lot liens shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(3) Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather
than cross them in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
(4) Generally, the depth of residential lots shall be not less than one
nor more than three times their width.
(5) Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall
be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for off-street parking, on-site loading and
unloading, setbacks, landscaping, etc.
(6) If, after subdividing, there exists remnants of land, they shall be
either:
(a) Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
§ 215-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-22
1:352
(b) Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the Borough.
F. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots shall have direct access to an existing or proposed public
street, or to a private street if it meets the street design
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Double or reverse frontage lots may be required to provide
separation of residential development from arterial streets or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography or other natural
features of the proposed subdivision tract.
(3) All residential reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a
minimum depth of 75 feet, measured along the shortest distance
from the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate right-of-way, have a
planting screen easement of at least 10 feet in width, across which
there shall be no right of access.
G. Lot access.
(1) Residential lots having direct access to an arterial street shall be
avoided whenever possible. Where direct access to an arterial
street cannot be avoided, adequate turnaround space shall be
provided behind the right-of-way line.
(2) Where access is permitted to a state road or highway, authorization
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation must be
proven by the display of a valid highway occupancy permit.
Driveways to single-family residences shall intersect streets at
angles of no less than 60°. All other driveways or access roads shall
intersect streets at right angles, where practicable, and in no case
less than 75°.
(3) Widths of access roads or driveways shall be in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) Access roads for multifamily residential, mobile home parks
and all nonresidential subdivisions shall be no less than 20 feet
in width, shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the street line and
shall be clearly defined by use of curbing.
(b) Driveways for single-family residential subdivisions shall be no
less than 10 feet in width but shall not exceed 20 feet in width
at the street line.
(4) To provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, access road and
driveway entrances shall be rounded at the following minimum
radii:
(a) Access road entrances for multifamily residential
developments, mobile home parks, and all nonresidential
subdivisions shall be rounded at a minimum radius of 30 feet.
§ 215-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-22
1:353
§ 215-23. Street design standards.
(b) Road entrances for single-family residential subdivisions shall
be rounded at a minimum radius of 20 feet.
(5) Access road grades or driveway grades shall not exceed the
following:
(a) Seven percent when access is to an arterial street.
(b) Ten percent when access is to a collector or local street.
(6) The center line of an access road or driveway at the point of access
to a street shall not be located closer to a street intersection than
the following distances:
(a) For single-family residential subdivisions:
[1] One hundred fifty feet if intersecting is an arterial street.
[2] One hundred feet if either street is a collector street.
[3] Seventy-five feet if both streets are local streets.
(b) For multifamily residential developments, mobile home parks,
and all nonresidential subdivisions:
[1] Three hundred feet if either street is an arterial street.
[2] Two hundred feet if either street is a collector street.
[3] One hundred fifty feet if both streets are local streets.
(7) The center line of an access road or driveway shall not intersect a
street within 500 feet of an interchange with a limited access
highway.
A. General requirements.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to the road and highway
plans of the state, county and Borough. Streets shall be designed to
provide adequate vehicular access to all lots or parcels and with
regard for topographic conditions, projected volumes of traffic, and
further subdivision possibilities in the area.
(2) The street system of a proposed subdivision or land development
shall be designed to create a hierarchy of street functions which
includes collector and local streets.
(3) The street system of a proposed subdivision or land development
shall be designed so as to minimize street intersections and
pedestrian-vehicular conflict points.
(4) Proposed local streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic and excessive speeds. However, the developer shall
§ 215-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-23
1:354
give adequate consideration to provision for the extension and
continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from
adjoining properties.
(5) Where, in the opinion of the Borough Planning Commission, it is
desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, streets
shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
Distances between access points to adjoining property shall be
based on block length standards set forth in § 215-22B.
(6) Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of improper width or
alignment, the Borough Planning Commission may require the
dedication of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the
alignment.
(7) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial traffic street, the Borough Planning Commission may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, or other
such treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with the arterial street,
and separation of local and through traffic. Where a subdivision
borders on or contains a limited-access highway or a railroad rightof-
way, the Borough Planning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land, as for
park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or
industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
(8) Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) shall be
approved only if they meet the street design and improvement
standards set forth in this chapter (see § 215-38).
(9) If the lots in the development are large enough for resubdivision, or
if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable access and street
openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
B. Street width requirements.
(1) Street right-of-way widths, pavement widths, and the provision of
curbs and sidewalks in proposed subdivisions shall conform to the
general standards as set forth in the table and diagrams on the
following pages.
(2) The general standards set forth in Subsection B(1) may be modified
by the Borough Planning Commission upon the recommendation of
the Borough Engineer or the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when an analysis of proposed development
densities, provisions for off-street parking, and projected traffic
volumes indicate a need for such modification. The burden of proof
shall be upon the developer to justify the adequacy of rights-of-way
§ 215-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-23
1:355
or cartway widths which are less than those set forth in Subsection
C(2)(a).
C. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street center lines are deflected more than 5° within 500
feet, connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) Horizontal curves shall be designed to produce the following
minimum sight distances:
(a) Local streets: 150 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial streets: 600 feet.
(3) A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be required between curves on
collector and arterial streets and between a curve and a street
intersection where one of the intersecting streets is a collector or
an arterial street.
D. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center line grade on all streets of 0.75%.
(2) Unless approval is obtained from the Borough Planning
Commission upon recommendation from the Borough Engineer,
center-line grades shall not exceed the following:
(a) Local streets: 10%.
(b) Collector streets: 8%.
(c) Arterial streets: 6%.
(3) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas.
Such leveling areas shall have a minimum length of 75 feet
(measured from the intersection of the center lines), within which
no grade shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
E. Vertical curves.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1%.
(2) Vertical curves shall be designed to produce the following minimum
sight distances:
(a) Local streets: 150 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial streets: 600 feet.
F. Street intersections.
§ 215-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-23
1:356
(1) Streets shall intersect at right angles whenever practicable. When
local streets intersect collector or arterial streets, the angle of
intersection at the street center lines shall in no case be less than
75°. No two streets shall intersect with an angle of intersection at
the center lines of less than 60°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be prohibited.
(3) Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall
either intersect with a common center line or their center lines
shall be offset according to the following standards:
(a) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 150 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when all three streets involved are
local streets.
(b) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 400 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when one or more of the streets
involved is a collector street.
(c) The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 1,000 feet
between center lines measured along the center line of the
street being intersected when one or more of the streets
involved is an arterial street.
(4) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with
a minimum radius of:
(a) Twenty feet for intersections involving only local streets.
(b) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street.
(c) Forty feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
(5) Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with) curb
arcs at intersections.
(6) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections.
Within such triangles, no object greater than 2 1/2 feet in height
and no other object that would obscure the vision of the motorist
shall be permitted. Such triangles shall be established from a
distance of:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the point of intersection of the center
lines of two streets where both are local streets.
(b) One hundred feet from the point of intersection of the center
lines of two streets where one is a collector street.
(c) One hundred fifty feet from the point of intersection of the
center lines of two streets where one is an arterial street.
§ 215-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-23
1:357
(7) Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs within the
proposed building setback line, such portion shall be shown on the
final plan of the subdivision, and shall be considered a building
setback line.
G. Culs-de-sac.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties.
(2) Any dead-end street which is constructed for future access to an
adjoining property or because of authorized stage development,
and which is open to traffic and exceeds 200 feet in length, shall be
provided with a temporary, all-weather turning circle. The turning
circle shall be completely within the boundaries of the subdivision
and the use of the turning circle shall be guaranteed to the public
until such time as the street is extended.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
1,000 feet in length or shall not furnish access to more than 25
dwelling units.
(4) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
paved turning circle. The turning circle may be offset to the left but
turning circles offset to the right shall be discouraged.
(a) If parking will be prohibited on the turning circle, the minimum
radius to the pavement edge or curbline shall be 40 feet, and
the minimum radius of the right-of-way line shall be 50 feet.
(b) If parking will be permitted on the turning circle, the minimum
radius to the pavement edge or curbline shall be 50 feet, and
the minimum radius of the right-of-way line shall be 60 feet.
(5) The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%,
and the grade of the turning circle shall not exceed 5%.
H. Half streets.
(1) The dedication of new half streets at the perimeter of a new
subdivision is prohibited.
(2) The subdivider shall provide the entire required right-of-way, or as
much thereof as is possible, within his property, along all existing
streets which traverse or abut the property.
I. Street names and street signs.
(1) Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Borough and in the postal district, irrespective
§ 215-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-23
1:358
§ 215-24. Sanitary sewage disposal. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
of the use of the suffix "street," "road," "avenue," "boulevard,"
"drive," "way," "place," "court," "lane," etc.
(3) All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Planning Commission.
(4) Street signs shall be provided at the intersection of all streets. The
type, height, and design shall be approved by the Commission.
A. The developer shall provide the most effective type of sanitary sewage
disposal consistent with the natural features, location, and proposed
development of the site. The following types of sanitary sewage disposal
are listed in order of preference:
(1) Connection to a public sanitary sewage disposal and treatment
system.
(2) Provision by the developer of centralized sanitary sewage disposal
and treatment system, to be in accordance with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Capped sewers with temporary, approved on-lot facilities.
(4) On-lot sewage disposal systems consisting of septic tank with tile
field.
B. Connection to a public sanitary sewer system shall be required where
such a system can feasibly be provided to the proposed subdivision
tract and where such a system can adequately fulfill the sewage
disposal needs of the subdivision or land development.
C. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not yet accessible to the site,
but is planned for extension to the subdivision within a ten-year period,
the developer shall install sewer lines, including lateral connections as
may be necessary to provide adequate service to each lot when
connection with the sewer system is made. The sewer lines shall be
suitably capped at the street right-of-way line. When capped sewers are
provided, on-site disposal facilities shall also be provided. Design of the
capped system shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
D. Where a public sanitary sewer system cannot feasibly be provided to
the proposed subdivision tract or is not planned for extension to the
proposed subdivision tract, the Borough Planning Commission may
require the submission of a sewage feasibility report by the subdivider.
Such a sewage feasibility report must be prepared by a registered
engineer.
§ 215-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-24
1:359
§ 215-25. Water supply and distribution systems. [Amended
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
The developer shall provide a water supply and distribution system to
service the proposed subdivision through one of the following methods
listed in their order of preference:
E. Where a private centralized sanitary sewage disposal and treatment
system is to be provided by the developer, a statement shall be
submitted to the Borough Planning Commission and the Joint Planning
Commission from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection certifying that a permit has been issued approving the
proposed facilities. Proof of adequate provision for the operation and
maintenance of the treatment plant shall be furnished to the Borough
Planning Commission. The system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Utility Commission where applicable.
F. In subdivisions where neither connection to a public sewerage system
nor a centralized sanitary sewer system is required, sewage disposal
shall be provided on individual lots, consisting of septic tanks and tile
absorption fields. The physical features of the tract on which on-lot
disposal is provided shall meet the criteria established by the
Department of Environmental Protection for on-lot sewage disposal
systems.
G. All new developments of three lots or more require that the Borough
revise its official sewage plan under the Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537,
as amended).79 A revision to the official sewage plan shall not be
required where the plan adequately meets the sewerage needs of the
proposed development. The Borough shall submit a Plan Revision
Module for Land Development to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in order to determine whether a plan revision
is necessary.
A. Connection to a public water supply system where such a system can
feasibly be provided to the proposed subdivision tract and where the
capacity of such a system can adequately fulfill the water supply
demands of the proposed subdivision. A distribution system shall be
designed to furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot. A copy of
the approval of such a system by the appropriate public authority or
utility company shall be submitted with the final plan.
B. Where a public water supply system cannot feasibly be provided to the
proposed subdivision and where the average residential lot size is to be
less than 20,000 feet, or where a public water supply system is planned
to serve the proposed subdivision area within 10 years, a private
centralized water supply system will be provided by the developer. If
such a system is provided, it shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and suitable agreements shall
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 750.1 et seq.
§ 215-24 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-25
1:360
§ 215-26. Storm drainage systems. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
be established for the ownership and maintenance of the system. Also,
such a system shall be designed and constructed in a manner that
would permit adequate connection to a public water supply system
in the future. Fire hydrants shall be provided in all centralized water
supply systems which will serve more than 25 lots or dwelling units.
C. If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall present evidence to the Borough Council
that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona
fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public
Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
D. Where individual on-lot water supply systems are to be utilized, they
shall conform to the criteria established by the Borough of
Northampton.
A. Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(2) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal.
(5) Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades to lead water
from springs and to avoid excessive use of cross-gutters at street
intersections and elsewhere.
B. General requirements.
(1) A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract shall be
prepared which illustrates the following information:
(a) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision is located.
(b) Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentration.
(c) Complete drainage systems for the subdivision. All existing
drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design
shall be so identified. If the subdivision is to be developed in
stages, a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision shall
§ 215-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-26
1:361
§ 215-27. Underground utilities and easements.
be presented with the first stage and appropriate development
stages for the drainage system shall be indicated.
(2) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners.
(3) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so
diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create
flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other
private properties or public lands, without approved provisions
being made by the developer for properly handling such conditions.
(4) Storm drainage facilities should be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but
also the anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the
property at a higher elevation in the same watershed is fully
developed.
(5) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourse, and of such width as will be adequate to
handle the unimpeded flow of a fifty-year design storm.
(6) Drainage structures that are located on state highway rights-of-way
shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and a letter from that office indicating such
approval shall be directed to the Borough Planning Commission.
(7) All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from their rights-of-way. The slope of the crown on
proposed streets shall be not less than 1/8 of an inch per foot and
not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot.
C. Calculation of storm runoff. Storm runoff should generally be calculated
by the rational method as described in Manual Number 37 of the
American Society of Civil Engineers and in accordance with
requirements of the Borough Engineer. Complete detailed calculations
shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer. When the development is
located in a large watershed, alternative methods of runoff calculations,
such as the Natural Resources Conservation Service method, should be
used in place of the rational method.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
Investigation Docket No. 99, as amended from time to time, all electric
utility distribution lines shall be installed underground in subdivisions
or land developments of five or more dwelling units. In addition, the
following design requirements shall be observed:
§ 215-26 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-27
1:362
(1) Established public utility and state and federal government agency
design standards shall be observed in preparing the utility plan.
(2) Utility lines to be installed within street rights-of-way shall be
located according to Borough or Borough Authority requirements.
(3) Whenever practicable, telephone and cable TV utilities shall be
installed underground in connection with the installation of electric
utility distributing lines.
(4) Streetlighting, where required, shall be provided at each
intersection of the development and at intervals not to exceed 350
feet between intersections.
(5) Utility lines shall be installed after final grading of roads, curbs,
sidewalks, and driveways has been established. Utility lines shall
be installed according to their depth, with the utility line installed
at the greatest depth being installed first.
B. Utility easements.
(1) Utility easements shall be provided for all utility lines servicing the
abutting lots when such utility lines are installed outside street
rights-of-way. No structures or trees shall be placed within such
easements. The location of utility easements shall be acceptable to
the appropriate public utility or municipal authority.
(2) Whenever practicable, within accepted safety standards, all utility
lines to be installed outside street rights-of-way shall share a
common utility easement.
(3) Utility easements shall be located either:
(a) Abutting the street right-of-way. In this case, a minimum
easement width of 10 feet shall be required.
(b) Along rear or side lot lines. In this case, a minimum easement
width of 20 feet, 10 feet on each side of the lot line, shall be
provided. Where the lot line coincides with the subdivision
boundary, a minimum easement width of 15 feet may be
required by the Borough Council.
C. Petroleum transmission lines.
(1) No company intending to install any petroleum, petroleum
products or natural gas transmission line shall be allowed to
construct the line on less than a fifty-foot right-of-way, such line to
be installed in the center of the right-of-way, and shall comply with
the applicable standards imposed by state and federal laws and
regulations.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet, measured from the
right-of-way line, between any proposed dwelling unit and any
§ 215-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-27
1:363
§ 215-28. Mobile home parks.
petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line
which traverses the subdivision.
A. Provisions regulating mobile home parks must be set forth in separate
and distinct articles of a subdivision and land development ordinance
according to § 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended.
B. The design and development of mobile home parks shall conform to all
the general standards and requirements set forth for subdivision and
land developments in this chapter in addition to the specific design
standards set forth in this section.
C. Permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, construct, alter, or
extend any mobile home park or any of the facilities thereof within
the limits of Northampton Borough unless he holds a valid permit
required and issued in his name for such purpose or purposes by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
holds a valid permit required and issued in his name for such
purpose or purposes by the Northampton Borough Council.
(2) No permit shall be issued by the Borough Council unless the person
making application therefor shall have first been issued a valid
permit by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
(3) An application for a mobile home park permit shall be approved by
the Borough Council only after all requirements of this chapter are
met and after the Borough Council receives satisfactory proof of
issuance of a valid permit by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) Application for renewal of a mobile home park permit shall be made
to the Borough Council at least 30 days prior to the expiration date
of a permit. The renewal of a mobile home park permit shall be
issued by the Borough Council upon furnished proof by the
applicant that his park continues to meet the standards and
requirements for the issuance of an original permit.
D. Off-street parking areas.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks
for the use of park occupants and guests. A minimum of two offstreet
parking spaces for each mobile home unit shall be required.
(2) Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide
convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a
§ 215-27 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-28
1:364
distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that they are intended
to serve.
E. Pedestrian walkways.
(1) All parks should provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian
access of adequate width for the intended use, and durable and
convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park
streets, and all community facilities provided for park residents.
Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
(2) Where a common walk system is provided and maintained between
locations, and where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, such
common walks shall have a minimum width of 3 1/2 feet.
(3) All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks, or to
streets, or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved
street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two
feet.
F. Mobile home siting.
(1) Mobile home stand construction.
(a) The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to
provide an adequate foundation for the placement of the
mobile home.
(b) The stand shall be constructed from either concrete, asphalt
concrete or other material sufficient to adequately support the
mobile home and to prevent abnormal settling or heaving
under the weight of the home. The corners of the mobile home
shall be anchored to prevent wind overturn and rocking with
tie-downs such as concrete "dead men," screw augers,
arrowhead anchors, or other devices suitable to withstand a
tension of at least 2,800 pounds.
(2) Mobile home hitch and decorative skirt. After a mobile home has
been anchored to the mobile home stand, the hitch which is
employed for the transportation of the unit shall be removed, and
there shall be a decorative skirt installed around the base of the
unit.
G. Common open space.
(1) At least 20% of the usable site area of the mobile home park must
be in common open space.
(2) Whenever possible, the common open space shall be designed as a
contiguous area with pedestrian and visual accessibility to all
residents of the mobile home park.
§ 215-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-28
1:365
(3) Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to meet the
anticipated needs of the residents of the park. Not less than 10% of
the usable site area, exclusive of lands within the required setback
area, shall be devoted to recreation. Preferably, recreation areas
should be of a size, shape and relief that is conducive to active play.
H. Utilities.
(1) Individual water connections.
(a) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
insuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of
3/4 inch and terminate at least four inches above the ground
surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(d) A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the
water-riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stopand-
waste valves are prohibited unless their type of
manufacture and their method of installation are approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(2) Individual sewer connections.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a fourinch
diameter sewer-riser pipe. The sewer-riser pipe shall be
so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the
mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of
not less than four inches, and the slope of any portion thereof
shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer-riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the site. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
§ 215-28 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-28
1:366
(3) Individual electrical connections.
(a) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment.
The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 100
amperes.
(b) The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by
an approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male
attachment plug.
(c) Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than 100
amperes, either a second outlet receptacle shall be installed or
electrical service shall be provided by means of permanently
installed conductors.
(4) Required electrical grounding. All exposed non-current-carrying
metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment shall be
grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor run with
branch circuit conductors and other approved methods of
grounding metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used
as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment.
(5) Natural gas systems.
(a) Natural gas piping systems, when installed in mobile home
parks, shall conform to the rules and regulations of the
American Gas Association.
(b) Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet.
The outlet shall be equipped with a cap to prevent accidental
discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
(6) Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(a) Liquefied petroleum systems provided for mobile homes,
service buildings or other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
National Fire Protection Association Standards NFPA Nos. 57
and 58.
(b) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
(c) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home
and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
(d) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes
shall be well supported and protected against mechanical
injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall
§ 215-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-28
1:367
§ 215-29. Environmental protection and open space preservation.
not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in
mobile homes.
(e) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross
capacity may be installed on a mobile home lot and shall be
securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning.
(f) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or
any other structure.
(7) Fuel oil supply systems.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the National
Protection Association Standard NFPA No. 31.
(b) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to
mobile homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened
in place.
(c) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have cutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(d) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and
shall be not less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(e) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be
protected against physical damage.
A. Erosion and sediment control.
(1) All earthmoving activities shall be conducted in such a way as to
prevent accelerated erosion and the resulting sedimentation.
(2) No changes shall be made in the contour of the land; no grading,
excavating, removal, or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until a plan
setting forth erosion and sedimentation control measures for the
site has been developed.
(3) The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and measures used
to control erosion and sedimentation shall meet the standards and
specifications set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual" and Chapter 102 of the Rules and Regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 215-28 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-29
1:368
(4) Where the earthmoving activity affects 25 acres or more, the soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan must be submitted to the
County Conservation District, together with an application for an
earthmoving permit, for review. An earthmoving permit must be
granted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Natural feature preservation.
(1) The design and development of all subdivisions and land
developments shall preserve, whenever possible, natural features
which will aid in providing adequate open space for recreation and
conditions generally favorable to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents. Some of these natural features are the natural
terrain of the site, woodland areas, large trees, natural
watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcroppings and
scenic views. More detailed standards concerning the preservation
of specific natural features are set forth in the following
subsections.
(2) Floodplain regulation.
(a) The developer shall consult floodplain engineering studies
done for the Borough or the county, where available, or obtain
a soil characteristics report from the County Conservation
District in order to delineate floodplain areas within the
proposed subdivision tract.
(b) With the exception of a privately developed water body or
watercourse, proposed subdivision tracts which include rivers,
lakes, streams or other significant watercourses or bodies of
water shall adhere to the following standards:
[1] No structure or street may be located within the area
subject to a fifty-year flood frequency.
[2] Building is permitted in areas subject to less frequent
occurrences of flooding, the rapid accumulation of
groundwater, and mudslides with the provision that they
adhere to reasonable floodproofing standards.
(3) Sanitary sewage and water supply systems. Sanitary sewage and
water supply systems shall be designed to minimize infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters. On-site sewage systems shall be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Lake, stream and river frontage preservation.
(a) An easement for maintenance purposes, a minimum of 20 feet
in width, but in all cases of sufficient width to provide proper
§ 215-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-29
1:369
maintenance, shall be provided along all stream and river
banks and lake shores.
(b) Lake, stream and river frontage shall be preserved as open
space whenever possible. This area may be credited toward the
open space requirement set forth in Subsection C.
(c) Access to the water and maintenance easement area shall be
provided at intervals of not more than 1/2 mile. These access
points shall not be less than 100 feet in width.
(5) Tree preservation and planting.
(a) Trees six inches or more in diameter (measured at a height 4 1/
2 feet above grade) shall not be removed unless they are
located within the proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of a
street right-of-way, or within 15 feet of the foundation area of a
new building. Areas in which trees are retained shall remain at
original grade level and undisturbed wherever possible. Tree
removal shall be kept to a minimum through the design and
location of street rights-of-way and buildings.
(b) Where there are no existing trees along the street rights-ofway,
trees shall be planted at intervals of between 50 feet and
100 feet but in no instance shall there be less than one tree per
lot. Tree plantings shall be of a variety approved by the
Borough Planning Commission.
(c) Trees shall not be retained or planted within three feet of the
street curb or the sidewalk. Trees may be retained or planted
between the street curb and the sidewalk if there is a minimum
distance of six feet.
(d) For all commercial, industrial, planned residential, mobile
home park and multifamily developments a landscape plan
shall be developed. The plan shall show the plant cover which
exists, and on the same or separate sheet, that which will exist
when the landscaping is completed.
(e) The landscape plan shall include trees in addition to those
required along the street right-of-way. The following standards
are to be used as a guide to the number, not the spacing or
location, of additional trees required:
[1] One tree per dwelling unit.
[2] One tree per 50 linear feet of interior street.
(f) The varieties of trees to be planted shall be approved by the
Borough Planning Commission.
(6) Topography. The natural terrain of the proposed subdivision tract
will be retained wherever possible with cut and fill operations
§ 215-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-29
1:370
being kept to a minimum. Areas with slopes greater than 15%
shall require special consideration by the Borough Planning
Commission. Such considerations shall focus, in particular, on the
types of housing and densities suited to this type of terrain.
(7) Topsoil protection. Topsoil shall not be removed from the
development site or used as fill. Topsoil shall be removed from the
areas of construction and stored separately. The topsoil shall be
stabilized to minimize erosion during storage. Upon completion of
the construction, the topsoil must be uniformly redistributed on the
site.
C. Open space and recreation areas.
(1) In proposed subdivisions which are intended to provide housing for
25 or more families, the Borough Planning Commission may
require that the developer dedicate land for open space and
recreation in accordance with the following guidelines:
Families to be Served
Minimum Open Space and
Recreation Acreage
25 to 49 1.5
50 to 174 3.0
175 to 374 5.5
375 to 624 6.5
625 to 800 8.0
For each additional 175
families
1.5
(2) Where a neighborhood recreation facility exists or is planned
within 1/2 mile of all homes within the proposed subdivision, where
an arterial street is not located between the recreation area and
the proposed subdivision, and where the recreation area
adequately fulfills the recreational needs of the residents of the
proposed subdivision, cash in lieu of open space dedication may be
accepted at the discretion of the Borough Planning Commission.
The cash in lieu of open space dedication must be used for the
purchase or development of the neighborhood recreational area.
(3) In proposed subdivisions intended to provide housing for less than
25 families, cash in lieu of open space dedication may be required
by the Borough Planning Commission and must be used for
recreational purposes in accordance with the standards set forth in
Subsection C(2).
(4) Where cash in lieu of open space dedication is required, the amount
of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount
of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated in
accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection C(1).
§ 215-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-29
1:371
(5) Fair market value shall be determined at which time the final
subdivision or land development plan is submitted to the Borough
Planning Commission and in accordance with the following:
(a) The fair market value as determined by the Borough Planning
Commission as based upon current appraisals;
(b) If the developer objects to such amount of evaluation he may,
at his expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
qualified real estate appraiser approved by the Borough
Planning Commission, which appraisal may be accepted by the
Borough Planning Commission if found reasonable; or
(c) The Borough Planning Commission and the developer may
agree as to the fair market value.
§ 215-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-29
1:372
ARTICLE VI
Improvement Specifications and Guarantees
§ 215-30. General requirements.
§ 215-31. Required improvements. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
The following improvements shall be provided, constructed and installed by
the developer as shown on the record plan:
A. Physical improvements to the proposed subdivision tract shall be
provided, constructed and installed as shown on the record plan, in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough.
B. As a condition to review of a final plan by the Borough Planning
Commission, the developer shall agree to installations of all
improvements shown on the plan and required by this chapter. Before
the record plan may be endorsed by the Borough Planning Commission,
the developer shall submit a completed and executed original copy of
the subdivision improvements agreements between the Borough and
the developer.
C. All improvements installed by the developer shall be constructed in
accordance with the design specifications of the Borough Engineer.
Where there are no applicable Borough specifications furnished
through the Joint Planning Commission, the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters, or such
other state agency as applicable, the Borough Planning Commission
may authorize that specifications be prepared by the Borough Engineer.
D. Supervision of the installation of those improvements required by
§ 215-31, following, shall in all cases be the responsibility of the
Borough Engineer or of the appropriate state regulatory agency.
A. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way,
surfaced and improved to the grades and dimensions shown on the
plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by the developer and
approved by the Borough Planning Commission.
(2) All streets intended to be dedicated to public use shall be paved to
full cartway width according to the standards set forth in
§ 215-23B. Wearing surface and pavement base shall be 2 1/2
inches of ID-2 surface course placed over a stone base course, both
in accordance with the latest specifications of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. The thickness of the stone base
course shall be 10 inches for arterial streets, eight inches for
collector streets and six inches for local streets. Bituminous
aggregate is an acceptable equivalent to the stone base course as
§ 215-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-31
1:373
noted in the latest Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
manual.
(3) Curbs shall be installed in accordance with the standards set forth
in § 215-23B. All curbs shall be the vertical type; constructed of
portland cement concrete, six inches at the top, eight inches at the
bottom and 21 inches in height. Where subdivision abuts a state
highway, the developer shall conform to the curb requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation where appropriate
or more stringent.
(4) Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way and shall
be five feet wide. Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete, four inches in thickness, a minimum of 2,500 psi,
placed on a four-inch cinder or crushed stone base.
(5) Where unusual or unique conditions prevail with respect to
prospective traffic and/or safety of pedestrians, different standards
of improvements than those set forth in the previous subsections
may be required. Crosswalks may be required when deemed
necessary by the Borough Planning Commission.
(6) Prior to laying of street surface, adequate subsurface drainage for
streets and underground utilities shall be provided and installed by
the developer.
(7) In all respects in which standards for required improvements are
not set forth herein, the applicable standard requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall govern, and all
work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in the standard
specifications for road construction of the Department.
B. Sanitary sewers.
(1) Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the design
standards and requirements set forth in § 215-24 of this chapter.
(2) Whenever a developer proposes to sell unimproved lots within a
subdivision and when individual on-lot sewage disposal systems are
proposed for use within the subdivision, the developer shall require
(by deed restriction or otherwise) as a condition of the sale of each
lot within the subdivision, that such facilities shall be installed by
the purchaser of each lot at the time that a principal building is
constructed and in accordance with § 215-24 of this chapter.
C. Water supply and distribution systems.
(1) Water supply and distribution systems shall be installed in
accordance with the design standards and requirements set forth
in § 215-25 of this chapter.
(2) Whenever a developer proposes to sell unimproved lots within a
subdivision and when individual on-lot water supply systems are
§ 215-31 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-31
1:374
proposed for use within the subdivision, the developer shall require
(by deed restriction or otherwise) as a condition of the sale of each
lot within the subdivision, that such facilities shall be installed by
the purchaser of each lot at the time that a principal building is
constructed and in accordance with § 215-25 of this chapter.
(3) Where a public water supply system or a private centralized water
supply system is to serve the subdivision, water distribution mains
within the subdivision shall be a minimum of eight inches in
diameter.
(4) Where a public water supply system or a private centralized water
supply system designed for more than 25 dwelling units is to serve
the subdivision, fire hydrants shall be provided as an integral part
of the water supply system.
D. Storm drainage systems.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be installed in accordance with the
design standards and requirements set forth in § 215-26 of this
chapter.
(2) Inlets shall be placed at points of abrupt changes in the horizontal
or vertical directions of storm sewers, at points where the flow in
gutters exceeds three inches, and at a maximum distance of 600
feet apart. In streets, inlets shall normally be located along the
curbline and at or beyond the curb radius points. For the purpose of
inlet location at corners, the depth of flow shall be considered for
each gutter. At intersections, the depth of flow across through
streets shall not exceed one inch. The Manning Equation shall be
used to calculate the capacities of gutters. Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation two-foot-by-four-foot and two-footby-
six-foot inlets or equivalents should be used and can be
considered to have capacities of 10 cfs and 15 cfs, respectively.
Inlets shall be depressed two inches below the grade of the gutter
or ground surface. Manholes may be substituted for inlets at
locations where inlets are not required to handle surface runoff.
(3) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and shall
be made of reinforced concrete or corrugated metal. The Manning
Equation shall be employed in computing pipe capacities. Sewers
shall be installed on sufficient slopes to provide a minimum velocity
of three feet per second when flowing full.
(4) Headwalls shall be used where storm runoff enters the storm sewer
horizontally from a natural or man-made channel. The capacity of
such sewers shall be calculated for both steady flow and culvert
design. The lower value of the two shall be used to determine the
capacity of the storm sewer.
(5) Open channels shall be designed to handle, without overflowing,
the calculated runoff from a storm of ten-year frequency. The
§ 215-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-31
1:375
capacities of any modifications to natural channels shall be
computed from the Manning Equation.
E. Monuments and markers.
(1) Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be accurately
placed, as specified by § 215-19C(2), at the intersection of all lines
forming angles and at changes in directions of lines in the
boundary (perimeter) of the property subdivided.
(2) Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete with minimum
dimensions of four inches by four inches by 30 inches or stone with
minimum dimensions of six inches by six inches by 30 inches.
Concrete monuments shall be scored on top of the copper or brass
dowel (with an indented cross); stone monuments shall be marked
on top with a proper inscription.
(3) All monuments shall be placed by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor so that the scored point shall coincide exactly
with the point of intersection of the line being monumented.
(4) Monuments shall be set with their top level flush with the finished
grade of the surrounding ground, except:
(a) Monuments which are placed within the lines of existing or
proposed sidewalks shall be so located (preferably beneath the
sidewalks) that their tops will not be affected by lateral
movement of the sidewalks.
(b) Where monuments are located beneath a sidewalk, proper
access shall be provided for their use.
(c) Where sidewalks are existing, a stone point (a four-inch square
chisel cut in the sidewalk with a drill hole in the center) may be
substituted for a monument.
(5) All streets shall be monumented (preferably on the right-of-way
lines) at the following locations:
(a) At least one monument at each intersection.
(b) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
(c) At each end of each curved street line, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
(d) At intermediate points, wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise
required monuments.
(e) At such other place along the line of streets as may be
determined by the Borough Engineer to be necessary so that
any street may be readily defined in the future.
§ 215-31 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-31
1:376
§ 215-32. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to final plat approval. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
(6) Markers shall be set at locations shown on the final plan:
(a) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or
rear.
(b) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(c) At all other lot corners.
(7) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least 30 inches
long, and not less than 3/4 inch in diameter.
F. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed within 400 feet of all
structures, measured by way of accessible streets (as specified by the
Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters).
G. Streetlights.
(1) The installation of streetlighting within subdivisions and land
developments may be required by the Borough Planning
Commission in accordance with conditions to be agreed upon by
the developer, the Borough and the appropriate public utility.
(2) The streetlighting system, where required, must comply with the
specifications of the appropriate public utility. Such a system shall
be approved by the Borough so that upon dedication of the
improvements, the Borough can enter into a streetlighting contract
with the appropriate public utility.
(3) A streetlighting system, where required, must be installed by the
developer within a reasonable time prior to the installation of
streets, driveways, sidewalks and curbs.
(4) Where the Borough Planning Commission determines that
streetlighting is not necessary initially, but may be required in the
future, the developer shall provide a streetlighting duct system
under streets, sidewalks and curbs. The duct system shall be
installed in compliance with the specifications of the appropriate
public utility.
(5) Types of streetlighting poles used by the developer shall conform to
the specifications of the appropriate public utility.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
§ 215-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-32
1:377
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities
including basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational
facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings
which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
§ 215-32 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-32
1:378
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification, the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
§ 215-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-32
1:379
§ 215-33. Release from improvement bond. [Amended 7-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 1048]
K. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
§ 215-32 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-33
1:380
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Borough Council and as from time to time amended. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for work
performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall
the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant
to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
§ 215-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-33
1:381
§ 215-34. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. [Added
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 215-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-35
1:382
§ 215-35. Recording plats and deeds. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of
such final approval, record such plat in the office of the recorder of
deeds of the county in which the Borough of Northampton is located.
The recorder of deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless
such plat officially notes the approval of the Borough Council and
review by the county planning agency.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
§ 215-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-35
1:383

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 215-36. Amendments.
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a subdivision and land development ordinance by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.80 In addition, in case of an
amendment other than that prepared by the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the Planning
Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for
the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
§ 215-37. Effect of change in this chapter. [Added 7-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 1048]
Changes in this chapter shall affect plats as follows:
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary
or final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly approved. The applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved
preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an
application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application
shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in this
chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 215-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-37
1:385
§ 215-38. Modifications. [Added 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Borough
Council, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the
date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect
of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density,
lot, building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply, and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period, the aforesaid
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plat approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in this chapter, zoning, and other governing
ordinance enacted by the Borough subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
§ 215-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-38
1:386
§ 215-39. Appeals.
The decision of the Borough Council with respect to the approval or
disapproval of subdivision or land development plans may be appealed
directly to court in the same manner and within the same time limitations,
as is provided for zoning appeals (see Chapter 250).
§ 215-40. Preventive remedies. [Added 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 215-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-41
1:387
§ 215-41. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
§ 215-42. Conflict with other provisions. [Amended 7-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 1048]
Whenever there is a conflict between the minimum standards or
requirements set forth in this chapter and those contained in other Borough
ordinances and regulations, or other applicable laws and regulations, the
most stringent standard or requirement shall apply.
§ 215-43. Fees. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
A. Plan submission fees shall cover the costs to the Borough of reviewing
subdivision and land development plans, including but not limited to
administrative, legal, engineering and inspection costs.
B. An initial fee payment shall be made by the developer or his agent at the
time of filing of the preliminary plan, prior to acknowledgement of
receipt of the plan by the designated Borough official. The fee payment
§ 215-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-43
1:388
§ 215-44. Review fees. [Added 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
shall be in accordance with such fee schedule as shall be adopted from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
C. Additional fee payments may be required by the Borough Planning
Commission where necessary to cover the costs of reviewing the
subdivision or land development plan.
D. In no case shall total fee payments exceed the costs incurred by the
Borough in reviewing a subdivision or land development plan.
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough's professional consultants or engineer for review and report to
the Borough, and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the Borough
that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough shall not delay
or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
Borough and the applicant or developer.
§ 215-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-44
1:389
Chapter 220
TAXATION
§ 215-44 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 215-44
1:390
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 1-9-1958 by Ord. No. 575; amended in its entirety
7-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1180]
§ 220-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act,
53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth therein, except
as modified below. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 12, 2012.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future, including any regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
thereunder.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAX OFFICER — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax in the TCD.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Tax Officer, and approved by the
TCC, for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or required
to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this article or the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article or the Local
Tax Enabling Act to file a return of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — The Northampton Tax Collection District, or any future tax collection
district, to which the Borough or any part of the Borough is assigned under
the Local Tax Enabling Act.81
§ 220-2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Borough hereby imposes a tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the Borough.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Borough also imposes
a tax for general revenue purposes at a rate of 1.0% on earned income
and net profits derived by an individual nonresident from any work,
business, profession, or activity, of any kind engaged in within the
boundaries of Borough.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-2
1:391
§ 220-3. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from the tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 220-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act and the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the TCC
and Tax Officer. A taxpayer is required to file a return even if no tax payment
is due and owing.
§ 220-5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
§ 220-6. Tax Officer.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act,82 and all provisions thereof that relate to
a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extend allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: all applicable laws and
regulations; and rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the Tax Officer in conformity with the Local Tax Enabling
Act. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extend allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
A. Collection of tax. The Tax will be collected from individuals and
employees by the Tax Officer. The Tax Officer is authorized to file an
action in the name of the Borough for the recovery of income taxes due
to the Borough and unpaid.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 220-2 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-6
1:392
§ 220-7. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
In the event of violation of this article of the Local Tax Enabling Act,84
or nonpayment of tax, individuals and employers are subject to interest,
penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act,
including costs of collection imposed by the Tax Officer in accordance with
authorization by the TCC. The Tax Officer may retain reasonable costs of
collection in accordance with Local Tax Enabling Act and as approved by
the TCC. To give full force and effect to this article, the authority of the Tax
Officer shall be interpreted in the broadest permissible sense for the benefit
of the Tax Officer's ability to perform its duties.
§ 220-8. Purpose; repealer.
The primary purpose of this article is to confirm the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008,85 and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior ordinance or part of any prior ordinance conflicting with
the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To
the extent the same as any ordinance in force immediately prior to adoption
of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a continuation of
such prior ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this article is declared
invalid, any prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall remain in full force
and effect and shall not be affected in any manner by adoption of this
article. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall such provision affect any suit or prosecution pending or
to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish offense under the
authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this article. Subject
to the foregoing provisions of this section, this article shall supersede and
repeal on the effective date any ordinance levying a tax on earned income
or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 220-9. Construal of provisions.
This article is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling Act,
and to include all necessary authorizations to permit the Tax Officer to take
such tax collection, administration, disbursement, enforcement and other
activities as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, subject to the policies
and procedures of the TCC.
B. Criminal complaints for violations. The Tax Officer is authorized to file
criminal complaints on behalf of the Borough for violation of this article
or the Local Tax Enabling Act.83
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:393
§ 220-10. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income received or earned and net profits earned or
made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter
without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance imposing such change.
§ 220-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-10
1:394
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 2-4-1960 by Ord. No. 597 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1993 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 220-11. Levy of tax. [Amended 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 858]
A per capita tax of $5, for general Borough purposes, is hereby levied and
assessed upon each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of Northampton
over the age of 18 years, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes
levied and assessed by the Borough of Northampton pursuant to any other
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 220-12. Collection.
Said tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of
the Borough of Northampton in the same manner and at the same time as
other Borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax Collection
Law of May 25, 1945, as amended and supplemented.86
§ 220-13. Bond of Collector.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection
and payment of said tax as provided by law for other Borough taxes.
§ 220-14. Duplicate constitutes warrant for collection.
The entry of the per capita tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of such
duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection
of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 220-15. Collector's expenses; compensation. [Amended 7-15-1993
by Ord. No. 1048]
The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall
be paid and allowed as provided by the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq.); as amended, which compensation shall be the same as
shall be fixed from time to time for the collection of other Borough taxes.
§ 220-16. Notice to taxpayers.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers of the amount of per
capita tax due under this article, at the same time and in the same manner
as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.87
86.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
87.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:395
§ 220-17. Addition of names to duplicate. [Amended 7-18-1974 by
Ord. No. 858]
In case the Tax Collector shall at any time find within the Borough any
resident or inhabitant above the age of 18 years, whose name does not
appear upon the tax duplicate, he shall report the name of such person
forthwith to the Assessor, who shall thereupon certify the same unto the
Borough Council, which shall promptly certify the same to the Tax Collector
reporting such name, whereupon the Tax Collector shall add such name and
the assessment of the per capita tax against such person to the duplicate of
the Borough of Northampton, and shall proceed to collect the same.
§ 220-18. Collection by distress; power and duties of Collector.
[Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048]
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers, shall have the power to
collect said tax by distress, shall have the power and authority to demand
and receive said tax from the employer of any person owing any per capita
tax, or whose spouse owes any per capita tax, shall remit such tax to the
Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the same time as other taxes
are remitted to the Borough, shall allow discounts and add penalties, shall
generally be subject to all the duties and shall have all the rights and
authority conferred upon him by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended and supplemented.88 It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Borough Council, in enacting this article, to confer upon the Tax Collector,
in the collection of this per capita tax, all the powers, duties and obligations
as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.
§ 220-19. Persons exonerated from per capita tax. [Added
2-12-1981 by Ord. No. 937]
A. Certain residents of the Borough of Northampton shall be exonerated
from the payment of the Borough per capita tax if they fall into any one
of the following categories:
(1) The resident is 70 years of age prior to the beginning of the tax
year.
(2) The resident is deceased at any time during the tax year.
(3) The resident is residing in a nursing home or is an invalid confined
to a private residential home.
(4) The resident is living solely on social security disability.
(5) The resident is in military service.
(6) The resident is a student attending an accredited college on a fulltime
basis.
88.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 220-17 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-19
1:396
(7) The individual moved prior to January 1 of the year for which the
tax is due.
(8) The individual's sole source of income is public assistance that is
provided for by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the federal
government.
B. There shall be no exonerations based on the income of the individual
resident other than specified above.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:397

ARTICLE III
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 1-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1094]
§ 220-20. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms "eligible tax" and "taxpayer" shall
have the same meanings as provided in 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8422.
§ 220-21. Disclosure statement.
The Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a
disclosure statement in accordance with the provisions of 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8423(a) and this article. All Borough employees and agents who contact
any taxpayer (orally or in writing) regarding the assessment, audit,
determination, review, or collection of an eligible tax shall either: hand
deliver or mail a copy of the disclosure statement to the taxpayer; or give
the notice set forth in 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8423(b) (orally or in writing, depending
on the method of contacting the taxpayer).
§ 220-22. Requests for information.
A. Response. A taxpayer must respond to a request for information [within
the meaning of 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8424(a)] within 30 calendar days after the
date of the request, unless a longer period of time is specifically set
forth in the request.
B. Verification. All responses to requests for information shall be
accompanied by a statement that the information presented is true,
correct, and complete to the best of the taxpayer's knowledge,
information, and belief, subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904
(relating to unsworn falsifications to authorities).
C. Extensions. If a taxpayer believes that there is a good reason why he/
she will be unable to respond to a request for information by the
deadline (or by the end of any previously granted extension), he/she
may request a reasonable extension. The request must be directed to
the Borough Manager (or his/her delegate), and may be made either by
phone, in writing, or in person to the Office of the Borough Manager.
The Borough must receive the request no later than 15 calendar days
before the deadline for the response (or, if later within five calendar
days after the taxpayer receives the request for information). The
Borough Manager may grant a reasonable extension if he/she feels the
taxpayer has a good reason for it. If the taxpayer is not satisfied with
the decision of the Borough Manager, the taxpayer may appeal the
decision to Borough Council by filing a petition for reconsideration
under § 220-23 of this article.
D. Action against taxpayer. The Borough shall take no lawful action
against a taxpayer for any tax and for any tax period for which a request
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:399
§ 220-23. Administrative appeals.
for information to the taxpayer is outstanding until the expiration of the
applicable response period, including extension.
A. Petition for reassessment. Any taxpayer who desires to challenge or
dispute any assessment or determination by the Borough of an eligible
tax against the taxpayer, and of any interest or penalties on an eligible
tax, must file a written petition for reassessment with the Borough
Council within 90 days after the date the assessment notice was mailed
to the taxpayer.
B. Petition for refund. Any taxpayer who believes he/she overpaid any
eligible tax and is entitled to a refund, may file a written petition for
refund with the Borough Council. The petition muse be filed no later
than the following deadlines, even if the taxpayer has filed a request for
a refund with the Tax Collector and not yet received a response:
(1) If a return or report is required for the particular tax, the deadline
is the later of:
(a) Three years after the due date of the return or report
(including extensions); or
(b) One year after the actual payment of the tax.
(2) If no return or report is required, the deadline is the later of.
(a) Three years after the due date for payment of the tax; or
(b) One year after the actual payment of the tax.
C. Petition for reconsideration. Any taxpayer who desires to appeal a
decision of the Borough manager denying or limiting the taxpayer's
request for an extension of time to respond to a Borough request for tax
information must file a written petition for reconsideration with the
Borough Council within five days after the date of the Borough
Manager's decision.
D. Requirements for petitions. A petition under this section need not be in
any particular form, but must include a concise statement of all the
reasons supporting the application. A petition for reassessment or
reconsideration must also include a copy of the assessment or decision
being appealed. A petition is considered "filed" on the date it is
delivered to the Office of the Borough Manager, or the date that the
letter/envelope transmitting it (and bearing sufficient postage) is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service for delivery to the
Office of the Borough Manager.
E. Review by Council. A petition under this section shall be considered by
Borough Council in executive session. Borough Council shall not
conduct a formal hearing, and no stenographic or other record shall be
made of the executive session. The process shall be a "review and
§ 220-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-23
1:400
§ 220-24. Compliance with act.
All Borough officers, agents, and employees who have any responsibility for
the audit, assessment, determination, or administration of an eligible tax,
including persons having any contact with taxpayers in that regard, shall
familiarize themselves with the requirements of the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8421 through 8438 and this article, and shall
comply with them at all times.
decision" under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8430(2) and not a "hearing and
decision." However, the taxpayer shall be given the opportunity,
personally or through counsel, to present relevant, nonrepetitious
evidence, without regard to formal rules of evidence, and to present
argument in support of the taxpayer's position. Borough officers,
employees, or agents may also present evidence and argument in
support of the assessment or decision, or in opposition to the relief
requested. Cross-examination shall only be permitted in the discretion
of Borough Council.
F. Decision. Borough Council shall render a decision on a petition and mail
a written decision to the taxpayer within 60 calendar days after the date
a complete and accurate petition is received by the Borough. The
decision need not contain any findings of fact or conclusions of law. If
Borough council fails to act within that time, the petition shall be
deemed approved.
§ 220-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:401

ARTICLE IV
Recycling Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 1-18-2001 by Ord. No. 1103]
§ 220-25. Short title.
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Recycling Business
Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 220-26. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Northampton, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — The Treasurer of the Borough.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — As defined in Section 103 of the Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — As defined in Section 103 of the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S.
§ 4000.103.
PERSON — An individual person, copartnership, association,
unincorporated enterprise, or corporation, domestic or foreign. Whenever
used in any provision imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to
corporations shall mean both the corporation and the officers thereof, and
as applied to partnerships or unincorporated associations shall mean both
the entity and the managing partners or members thereof (or in the absence
of such managing persons, all of the partners or members thereof).
RECYCLING BUSINESS — Any business engaged, in whole or in part, in
the collection, separation, recovery, reconstitution, processing, sale, and/or
reuse of metal(s) and/or glass materials which have already served their
original intended end use, which would otherwise have been disposed of or
processed as municipal waste had they not been separated or diverted from
solid waste, and which are ultimately intended (after any reconstitution
or processing which may be performed by the business or by any other
business, if necessary) to be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. The term "recycling
business" does not include any business operated exclusively as a municipal
waste landfill, resource recovery facility, and/or a business which converts
waste materials to usable energy.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — As defined in Section 103 of the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S.
§ 4000.103.
§ 220-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:403
§ 220-27. Imposition of tax.
Every person who maintains a place of business in the Borough in
connection with a recycling business shall pay an annual business privilege
tax to the Borough in the amount of $20,000 for each calendar year or part
of a calendar year in which such a place of business is maintained. The tax
is imposed by the Borough for general revenue purposes on the privilege of
conducting a recycling business.
§ 220-28. Exemptions.
§ 220-29. Payment of tax.
The tax imposed by this article on any given person for any given calendar
year shall be paid to the Collector on or before the 30th calendar day
after the first day of such calendar year in which such person maintained
a place of business in the Borough in connection with a recycling business.
However, for calendar year 2001, the tax shall be paid on or before the later
of:
§ 220-30. Registration.
A. Agencies of the government of the United States or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and any political subdivision or authority created or
organized under or pursuant to any Act of the Pennsylvania General
Assembly are exempt from the tax imposed by this article.
B. A person shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the
imposition of the tax on such person would not be within the taxing
power of the Borough under the Constitution and laws of the United
States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The 30th calendar day after the effective date of this article; or
B. The 30th calendar day after the first day in calendar year 2001 in which
such person maintained a place of business in the Borough in
connection with a recycling business.
A. No person shall maintain a place of business in the Borough in
connection with a recycling business unless the person shall have a
current, unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the Collector or
his designee for that place of business.
B. A person who desires a certificate of registration for a place of business
to be maintained in connection with a recycling business shall complete
and file an application with the Collector on a form prescribed by the
Collector. The application shall be signed and verified by the Person (if a
natural person), a general partner or member of the person (if a
partnership, limited liability company, or unincorporated association),
or an authorized officer of the person (if a corporation), subject to the
penalties for falsifications to authorities.
§ 220-27 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-30
1:404
§ 220-31. Interest and penalties.
C. Upon approval of an application, the Collector shall issue a certificate of
registration to the applying person for each approved place of business.
A certificate of registration may not be assigned to another person. The
certificate of registration must be conspicuously displayed at all times
at the place for which it is issued.
D. The Collector may refuse to approve an application and to issue or
reissue a certificate of registration if the application is incomplete, if
any information provided in the application is incorrect, or if the
applicant is in violation of any of the provisions of this article. The
applicant may appeal the Collector's decision to the Borough Council,
which will conduct a Local Agency Law proceeding to decide the
matter.
E. The Collector may suspend a certificate of registration whenever the
Collector finds that the person to whom the certificate is issued has
failed to comply with one or more of the requirements of this article.
Notice of the suspension shall be sent by regular mail and by certified
mail to the address provided on the application for registration or any
subsequent notice of change of address, and shall advise the person so
registered that the suspension will become a revocation unless the
person comes into full compliance or requests a hearing before
Borough Council within 10 calendar days after the date of the notice.
All requests for a hearing shall be in writing and filed with the Borough
Secretary. If the Person does not come into full compliance with this
article within 10 calendar days after the date of the notice, and does not
request a hearing before Borough Council, the person shall be deemed
to have waived a hearing, and the Collector shall suspend the certificate
of registration. If the person shall request a hearing within 10 calendar
days after the date of the notice, the Borough Council shall conduct a
Local Agency Law proceeding to determine whether the suspension
should be lifted or the certificate of registration should be revoked.
F. Each person to whom a certificate of registration has been issued shall
surrender all such certificates and duplicates thereof to the Collector
promptly whenever directed to do so by the Collector.
A. If any person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to pay over to the Collector
any tax under this article by its due date under § 220-29, an additional
10% of the amount of the tax shall be assessed against the person and
collected by the Collector, together with interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fraction thereof, from the date such taxes are due and payable
to the Collector until paid.
B. If any person shall file any intentionally false or misleading application
or statement with respect to the tax imposed under this article, a civil
penalty of $500, plus costs of collection, including reasonable attorneys'
fees, shall be assessed against the person and collected by the
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:405
§ 220-32. Suit for enforcement.
The Collector is hereby authorized to commence a civil action in the name of
the Borough for the collection of any tax, interest, and penalties hereunder
which is due and unpaid by any person, and to recover in such action,
in addition to such tax, interest, and penalties, the costs of collection,
including a reasonable attorney's fee. The Collector is also authorized to
commence an action in equity in the name of the Borough to restrain
any person from maintaining a place of business within the Borough in
connection with a recycling business, for which there is no current
registration under § 220-30.
§ 220-33. Taxes for benefit of Borough.
All taxes, interest, and penalties collected or received under the provisions
of this article by the Collector shall be held for the use and benefit of the
Borough.
§ 220-34. Implementation.
The Collector is hereby authorized and directed to make, prepare, and keep
such records and forms, promulgate such rules and regulations, and take
such other actions as may be necessary or convenient to carry this article
into effect.
§ 220-35. Filing of certified copy with Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Secretary of the Borough shall file a certified copy of this article with
the Department of Community and Economic Development within 15 days
after it shall become effective, as required by 53 P.S. § 6907. The copy shall
be sent to the Department of Community and Economic Development by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
Collector, in addition to any other penalties and interest imposed
hereunder.
C. If any person shall maintain a place of business within the Borough in
connection with a recycling business, for which there is no current
certificate of registration required under § 220-30, a civil penalty shall
be assessed against the person and collected by the Collector, in
addition to any other penalties under this article, in an amount equal
to:
(1) Three hundred dollars for each calendar day in which such a place
of business is maintained within the Borough; plus
(2) An additional $300 for each calendar day in which such a place of
business is maintained within the Borough after the Collector
notified the person that no such place of business may be
maintained until it is registered under § 220-30.
§ 220-31 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-36
1:406
§ 220-36. When effective; duration.
This article shall take effect on the 30th day after its enactment, and shall
continue in force without annual reenactment unless the rate or amount of
the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 220-37. Authorization.
The tax levied under this article is enacted under the authority of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-37
1:407

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 9-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1145]
§ 220-38. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Northampton adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 197189 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at the rate of 1% of the value of the real
estate represented by any document that is made, executed, accepted or
presented for recording.
§ 220-39. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 220-38 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511) as amended, known as "The Local Tax
Enabling Act";90 provided, that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by
the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of Northampton,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 220-40. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 220-38 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207 No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 220-41. Repealer.
A. As of the effective date of this article, all ordinances and resolutions
inconsistent with the within article are hereby repealed.
B. The repealed ordinances enumerated in Subsection A above remain
effective for documents that became subject to tax prior to the effective
date of this article.
89.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 220-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-41
1:409

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 1155]
§ 220-42. Authority; effective date.
This article is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., as
hereinafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania, and shall take effect January 1, 2008.
§ 220-43. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts, or any other earned income.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Borough,
employing one or more employees engaging in the occupation other than
domestic servants.
MILITARY SERVICE-CONNECTED DISABILITY — A military serviceconnected
disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration
or its successor to be a total 100% permanent disability.
NORTHAMPTON BOROUGH — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Northampton.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which
monetary compensation is received or charged.
RESERVE UNIT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article. The
pro rata share of the tax assessed on a person for a payroll period shall be
determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services tax levied
for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the
employer for the calendar year.
TAX COLLECTOR — An agency or person designated by Borough Council to
collect the local services tax.
TAXPAYER — Any natural personal liable for the tax levied by this article.
§ 220-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-44
1:411
§ 220-44. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes, in the amount of $52, is hereby imposed
upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the Borough in the
year after the effective date of this article, and in each following calendar
year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of
time in any calendar year beginning with the year as of the effective date
of this article, shall pay the tax in accordance with the provisions hereof;
provided, the tax hereby levied shall not be imposed upon any natural
person whose total income during the taxable year is less than $12,000.
Also exempted from the imposition of tax hereby levied are any persons
who have been declared as having a military service-connected permanent
disability, and any person who serves as a member of an armed forces
reserve unit and is called to active duty during the taxable year. A person
seeking to claim an exemption from the tax levied herein may annually file
an exemption certificate with the Borough and with the person's employer
affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and
net profits from all sources within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. The exemption
certificate will be provided through the person's employer for the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax hereby
levied.
§ 220-45. Collection through employers.
A. Each employer shall register with the Tax Collector the employer's
name, address and other information the Tax Collector may require
within 15 days after the effective date of this article or within 15 days
after first becoming an employer.
B. For each taxpayer employed for any length of time after the effective
date of this article and on or before March 31 of the current tax year,
each employer shall deduct that pro rata portion of the full tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer on the form prescribed by the
Tax Collector and pay to the Tax Collector said amount deducted and
collected on a pro rata basis and paid to the Tax Collector on a quarterly
basis. For each taxpayer for whom no prior deduction has been made,
who is employed after the effective date of this article and in any of the
three-month periods ending June 30, September 30, and December 31
of the current tax year, each employer shall deduct that pro rata portion
of the full tax from compensation payable to the taxpayer, file a return
on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector, and pay said Collector that
portion of the full amount of the taxes deducted, on or before July 31, or
October 31, of the current tax year, or January 31 of the following year,
respectively.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect, shall file the
return herein above required and pay the tax to the Tax Collector,
within 15 days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
§ 220-44 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-45
1:412
§ 220-46. Direct payment taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed or whose tax for any other reason is
not collected under § 220-45 of this article shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Tax Collector and shall pay that portion of the full amount
of the tax herein levied to said Collector on a quarterly basis. Each taxpayer
who first becomes subject to the tax after the effective date of this article,
and on or before March 31 of the current tax year, shall file a return and
pay that portion of the full amount of the tax on or before April 30 of the
current tax year, and shall file a return and pay the remaining portions of
the full tax each following quarter of that tax year. Each such taxpayer who
first becomes subject to the tax after March 31 of the current tax year, shall
file a return and pay that portion of the full tax on or before July 31 of the
current tax year, and on or before October 31 of the current tax year, and
on or before January 31 of the following year, whichever of such payment
dates first occurs at least 30 days after the taxpayer becomes subject to the
tax.
§ 220-47. Nonresident taxpayers.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Borough, be subject to the tax and the provisions of
this article.
§ 220-48. Administration and enforcement.
The Tax Collector shall collect and receive the taxes, interest, fines and
penalties imposed by this article, and shall maintain records showing the
amounts received and the dates such amounts were received. The Tax
Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration of the tax and may adopt and
enforce regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
of this article. The Tax Collector and/or agent designated by him/her may
examine the records of any employer and/or supposed employer or of
any taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or verify the accuracy of
any return. Every employer or supposed employer and every taxpayer or
supposed taxpayer shall give the Tax Collector and any agent designated
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the Tax Collector, shall be liable for such tax in full,
without deduction of the commission hereinafter provided, as though
the tax had originally been levied against such employer.
E. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection through
employers, the employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain
adequate records concerning such employees.
§ 220-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-48
1:413
by him/her all means, facilities and opportunity for the examinations hereby
authorized.
§ 220-49. Collection.
The Tax Collector shall, by written notice and demand, and subsequently by
suit if necessary, collect and recover the taxes, interest, costs and penalties
due under this article and unpaid. If for any reason any tax is not paid when
due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount of the unpaid taxes,
and an additional penalty of 5% on the amount due. Upon presentation of a
written notice and demand for payment from the Tax Collector, the taxpayer
or employer must pay or deduct and pay over to the Tax Collector within 60
days from the notice. Whenever suit is brought for the recovery of unpaid
tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection as
well as for interest and penalties. The Tax Collector may accept payment
under protest of the tax claim by the Borough in any case where any person
disputes the claim for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter
decides that there has been an overpayment to the taxpayer, the taxpayer
shall refund the amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under
protest. Any action instituted for such judicial determination shall be filed
within two years of the last day of the period for which the tax is disputed
or claim made. All refunds shall be made in conformity with the procedure
prescribed by the Borough Council.
§ 220-50. Violations and penalties.
Any employer or taxpayer who makes a false or untrue statement on any
return required by this article, who refuses inspection of his records in his
custody or control setting forth his employee subject to this tax, who fails
or refuses to file a return required by this article, or who violates any other
provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine no more than $600, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
§ 220-48 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 220-50
1:414
Chapter 224
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 220-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-50
1:415

ARTICLE I
Use by Minors
[Adopted 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 1154]
§ 224-1. Short title.
This article may commonly be referred to as the "Borough of Northampton
Tobacco Ordinance."
§ 224-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side
of lots of buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular
traffic.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for the purpose of vehicular travel. The term includes a roadway open to
the use of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a public or private
school or public or historical park.
ROADWAY — The portion of the highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk, berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street between curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
TOBACCO — A lighted or unlighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other lighted
smoking product and smokeless tobacco in any form.
TRAFFICWAY — The entire width between property lines or other boundary
lines of every way or place of which any part is open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right or custom.
§ 224-3. Use or possession by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to use or
possess tobacco, in any form, within the Borough of Northampton, on any
Borough-owned property, on any public street, highway, trafficway, alley, or
sidewalk.
§ 224-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-19-2009 by Ord. No.
1165]
A. Any minor who violates this article shall be issued a ticket with a cost of
$10 to pay within 24 hours of the offense.
B. If the ticket is not paid within said twenty-four-hour period, a fine of $20
must be paid within 10 days from the date of the offense.
§ 224-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-4
1:417
C. If the ticket has not paid within 10 days from the date of the offense,
then the Police Officer will issue a summary citation with a maximum
fine of $300.
D. The above-mentioned tickets should be paid at the Borough Police
Station, located at 1401 Laubach Avenue, Northampton, Pennsylvania.
In the event a summary citation is issued by a Police Officer pursuant to
Subsection C, it shall be processed through the Magisterial District
Court No. 03-2-07, who shall collect any fines and costs.
§ 224-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 224-4
1:418
Chapter 228
UTILITY POLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 224-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-4
1:419

ARTICLE I
Identification; Annual License
[Adopted 5-7-1952 by Ord. No. 492; amended in its entirety
7-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1048 (Ch. 13, Part 3, of the 1993 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 228-1. Identification; annual license.
All poles utilized for the stretching of wires and cables for telegraph,
telephone, electricity or other purposes in the Borough of Northampton
shall be legibly marked with the name, initial, or other identifying mark
of the owner. An annual license fee, as established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council, shall be charged for each pole against the
owners of all poles erected in the Borough, such fee to be payable on or
before June 15 of every year. Upon payment of such fee, for the use of
the Borough, the Borough Secretary shall issue a license to such owner,
authorizing it to maintain the poles in the Borough for one year.
§ 228-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-2
1:421

ARTICLE II
Erection and Relocation
[Adopted 7-18-1974 by Ord. No. 876 (Ch. 21, Part 1D, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 228-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any telegraph, telephone or electric company or
any person or persons other than the Borough of Northampton, to erect or
relocate any utility pole within the limits of the Borough without first having
obtained a license therefor.
§ 228-4. Issuance of license; inspection fee. [Amended 7-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 1048]
Application for a license under this article shall be made to the Borough
Secretary, which application shall specify the number and size of poles
intended to be erected or relocated, and their location. If such application
shall be in order, and there are no objections, the Secretary shall issue a
license to the owner of such poles upon payment of an inspection fee, as
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, for each
pole. If there are objections, the matters shall be resolved before Council.
§ 228-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:423
Chapter 234
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 228-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 228-5
1:424
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 234-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 234-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 234-3. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 234-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81),91 as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
D. Although the streets in the Borough of Northampton run generally in a
northeast-southwest and a northwest-southeast direction, for the
purpose of this chapter, Main Street and the streets running parallel or
generally parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to run in a northsouth
direction, and Twenty-First Street and the streets parallel or
generally parallel to Twenty-First Street shall be deemed to run in an
east-west direction.
91.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:425
§ 234-5. Experimental regulations; violations and penalties.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough of Northampton where, for a
period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability
of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough of Northampton
relative to traffic and parking.
§ 234-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
§ 234-4 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-6
1:426
§ 234-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
underway and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is
to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by
which it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit
has been granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized by
the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance
of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the
route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-7
1:427
§ 234-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough of Northampton are hereby authorized to
direct traffic on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof
and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 234-9. Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
procession is underway, the time when the procession may commence
to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the procession
shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit
shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or
otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Borough Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed
timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6101 et seq. (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 234-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-9
1:428
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 234-10. Maximum speed limits on certain streets. [Amended
8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
All alleys 15
All other streets 35
Al Erdosy Drive Lincoln Avenue and
Laubach Avenue
15
Canal Street
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Twenty-First Street and
Laubach Avenue
25
Cherryville Road
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Allen Township Line south
to Twenty-Fourth Street
25
Clear Springs Drive
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Horwith Lane and
Lerchenmiller Drive
25
Dewey Avenue Twenty-First Street and
Twenty-Fourth Street
25
East Eighteenth
Street
Lincoln Avenue and
Laubach Avenue
15
East Eleventh Street Atlas Lane and Washington
Avenue
25
East Fifth Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Howertown Road and
Keglovits Lane
25
East Fourth Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Allen Township Line and
Main Street
25
East Seventeenth
Street
Lincoln Avenue and
Laubach Avenue
15
East Tenth Street East Borough line to Main
Street
25
§ 234-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-10
1:429
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
East Twelfth Street
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
Northampton Avenue and
Siegfried Avenue
25
Frank Drive [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Twenty-Seventh Street and
north Borough line
25
Hollow Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Horwith Lane and east
Borough line
25
Horwith Lane
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Smith Lane and north
Borough line
25
Howertown Road
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Tenth Street and south
Borough line
25
Jeffrey Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Frank Drive and north
Borough line
25
Laubach Avenue
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Twenty-First Street and
Thirteenth Street
25
Laubach Avenue Thirteenth Street and
Twenty-First Street
25
Lerchenmiller Drive
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Main Street and Smith
Lane
25
Main Street North Borough line and
Twenty-Third Street
35
Main Street South Borough line and
Twenty-Third Street
25
Main Street Twenty-First Street and
north Borough line
35
Main Street Twenty-First Street and
south Borough line
25
Michael Court
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
West Twenty-Seventh
Street and end
25
§ 234-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-10
1:430
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Newport Avenue
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Laubach Avenue and
Lumber Street
25
Roth Avenue
[Repealed
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Siegfried Avenue Thirteenth Street and
Twenty-First Street
25
Sipos Drive [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Howertown Road East to
Borough line
15
Smith Street
[Repealed 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
Smith Street [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
Stadium Drive East to end 25
Smith Street
[Amended 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
Stadium Drive West to
Laubach Avenue
15
Twentieth Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Laubach Avenue and end 25
Twenty-First Street Hokendauqua Creek and
west Borough line
25
Twenty-First Street Lehigh River and east
Borough line
25
West Thirtieth Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Boro Vu Drive and
Cherryville Road
25
West Twenty-Seventh
Street [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Main Street and north
Borough line
25
West Twenty-Third
Street
Entire length 15
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
§ 234-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-10
1:431
§ 234-11. Maximum speed limits on certain bridges and elevated
structures.
§ 234-12. Maximum speed limits for certain vehicles on hazardous
grades.
§ 234-13. Maximum speed limits in parks.
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
§ 234-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-13
1:432
§ 234-14. Traffic signals at certain locations. [Amended 8-28-1997
by Ord. No. 1083]
§ 234-15. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
[Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Laubach Avenue and Main Street Traffic control
Main Street and Lerchenmiller Drive Traffic control
Main Street and West Seventeenth
Street
Traffic control
Ninth Street and Main Street Traffic control
Twenty-First Street and Main Street Traffic control
Twenty-First Street and Siegfried
Avenue
Traffic control
Twenty-Fourth Street and Main Street Traffic control
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
§ 234-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-15
1:433
§ 234-16. One-way streets.
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Direction of Travel
Cherryville Road and Main
Street [Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
Cherryville Road South
Main Street and Ninth
Street
Both streets All, except that on
Main Street, the
regulation is limited
to the hours of 12:00
noon to 1:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. to
5:00 p.m. for north
and southbound
traffic
Main Street and Twenty-
Fourth Street [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Main Street North
Main Street and West
Seventeenth Street
[Amended 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 1114]
West Seventeenth
Street
Eastbound
Twenty-First Street and
Main Street
Both streets All
Twenty-Fourth and Main
Streets [Repealed
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Bass Alley Main Street Cherryville Road West
Cedar Alley
[Added
2-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 1159]
Pearl Street Main Street West
Cedar Street Howertown
Road
Pearl Street West
§ 234-15 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-16
1:434
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Center Road and
Twenty-Eighth
Street
Thirtieth Street Cherryville Road South
Dewey Avenue Lincoln Avenue East Sixteenth
Street
North
Diebert Alley Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
Doris Place Roethline Court West Sixteenth
Street
North
East Eighteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue West
East Eighth
Street
Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
East Fifteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue East
East Fourteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue West
East Nineteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue East
East
Seventeenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue East
East Sixteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue West
East Thirteenth
Street
Main Street Laubach Avenue East
East Twentieth
Street
Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
East Twenty-
Second Street
Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
East Twenty-
Third Street
Main Street Ridge Alley West
Kiechel Court Main Street Lincoln Avenue West
Lawrence Court Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
Poplar Street West
Seventeenth
Street
West Sixteenth
Street
South
Schreiber Street Main Street Washington
Avenue
East
§ 234-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-16
1:435
§ 234-17. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 234-18. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Spangler Street Main Street Franklin Street West
West Alley West Twenty-
First Street
Station Alley North
West Thirteenth
Street
Newport Avenue Stewart Street West
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Applicable
Type of
Vehicle
Main
Street,
Right-
Turn-Only
Lane
South Left turn Laubach
Avenue
At all
times
All types of
vehicles
Tenth
Street
East Left turn Main
Street
At all
times
All types of
vehicles
Tenth
Street
West Left turn Main
Street
At all
times
All types of
vehicles
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to make left
turn into or travel
straight across
Tenth Street East At all Times Main Street
Tenth Street West At all Times Main Street
§ 234-16 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-18
1:436
§ 234-19. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 234-20. No-passing zones. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
§ 234-21. Through highways.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
All borough streets and alleys
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,92 as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway
until he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the
law:
Highway Between
Main Street Almond Alley and north Borough
line
Twenty-First Street Canal Street to east Borough line
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
92.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c).
§ 234-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:437
§ 234-22. Stop intersections. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No.
1083]
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 234-21) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code,93 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Adaire Street East Eighth Street East and west
Adaire Street East Eleventh Street North and south
Adaire Street East Ninth Street North and south
Adaire Street East Tenth Street North and south
Adaire Street East Twelfth Street North
Adrianna Court
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Anthony Drive South
Al Erdosy Drive
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Lincoln Avenue West
Anthony Drive
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
East Fifth Street South
Apple Street Northampton Avenue West
Ash Alley Lincoln Avenue East
Ash Alley Washington Avenue West
Atlas Court Cherry Street West
Atlas Court Northampton Avenue East and west
Atlas Court Siegfried Avenue East and west
Atlas Lane [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Buckingham Drive Four-way
Atlas Lane East Eleventh Street South
93.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:438
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Atlas Lane East Tenth Street South
Banks Street East Eighth Street North
Banks Street Howertown Road East and west
Barrington Drive Kingston Court East
Bass Alley Cherryville Road West
Beech Alley Lincoln Avenue East
Beech Alley Washington Avenue West
Beil Alley East Eighteenth Street North and south
Beil Alley East Nineteenth Street North and south
Beil Alley East Ninth Street North and south
Beil Alley East Seventeenth Street South
Beil Alley East Seventh Street South
Beil Alley East Tenth Street North
Beil Alley East Twentieth Street North
Beil Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Beil Alley Lawrence Court North and south
Beil Alley Station Alley South
Bridge Alley [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Adaire Street East and west
Bridge Alley [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
Cherry Street East and west
Bridge Alley Howertown Road East
Bridge Alley Lincoln Avenue East and west
Bridge Alley Northampton Avenue East and west
Bridge Alley Siegfried Avenue East and west
Bridge Street Dewey Avenue East and west
Bridge Street [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Main Street East and west
Bridge Street Washington Avenue East and west
Buckingham Drive McKeever Lane East and west
Buckingham Drive McKeever Lane South
Buckingham Drive Northampton Avenue East and west
Buckingham Drive Scarboro Lane East and west
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:439
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Canal Street Laubach Avenue South
Canal Street West Seventeenth Street North and south
Canal Street and
Lumber Street
None Three-way
Canal Street and West
Fourteenth Street
None Three-way
Canal Street and West
Sixteenth Street
None Three-way
Candlewycke Lane Wynnewoode Drive West
Carp Alley Bass Alley South
Carp Alley West Twenty-Fifth Street North
Cedar Alley Diamond Street East and west
Cedar Alley Howertown Road East
Cedar Alley Main Street East and west
Cedar Alley Pearl Street East and west
Cedar Street West Fourteenth Street South
Cedar Street West Sixteenth Street North
Cement Alley [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
Ridge Alley East and west
Cement Court Dewey Avenue East
Cement Court Ridge Alley East and west
Cement Court Washington Avenue East and west
Cement Haul Road
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
East Twenty-First Street South
Cherry Street East Eleventh Street North and south
Cherry Street East Ninth Street South
Cherry Street East Tenth Street North and south
Cherry Street East Twelfth Street North
Cherryville Road Main Street South
Chestnut Street Poplar Street East
Church Alley Washington Avenue East and west
Church Street Stewart Street West
Church Street Vienna Street East
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:440
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Clear Springs Drive
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Horwith Lane North and south
Clear Springs Drive
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Lerchenmiller Drive West
Clover Alley Northampton Avenue East and west
Coventry Court Northampton Avenue West
Culver Street Greenview North
Czapp Avenue and
Newport Avenue
None Three-way
Czapp Avenue and
Stewart Street
None Three-way
Deibert Alley Lincoln Avenue East
Deibert Alley Washington Avenue East and west
Dewey Avenue
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
East Fifteenth Street South
Dewey Avenue East Ninth Street North and south
Dewey Avenue East Sixteenth Street North
Dewey Avenue East Tenth Street North
Dewey Avenue
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114];
amended 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
East Twenty-Third Street North and south
Dewey Avenue
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Lawrence Court North and south
Dewey Avenue Washington Avenue South
Dewey Avenue and
East Twenty-Second
Street
None Four-way
Diamond Street East Fifth Street North and south
Diamond Street East Fourth Street North and south
Diamond Street East Second Street South
Dimler Alley Lincoln Avenue East
Dimler Alley Washington Avenue East and west
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:441
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Doris Street West Sixteenth Street North
East Eighteenth
Street
Hokendauqua Avenue East and west
East Eighteenth
Street
Laubach Avenue West
East Eighteenth
Street and Lincoln
Avenue
None Three-way
East Eighteenth
Street and
Washington Avenue
None Three-way
East Eighth Street Dewey Avenue West
East Eighth Street Howertown Road East and west
East Eighth Street Lincoln Avenue East and west
East Eighth Street Washington Avenue East and west
East Eleventh Street Atlas Lane East
East Eleventh Street Lincoln Avenue East and west
East Eleventh Street Northampton Avenue East and west
East Eleventh Street Washington Avenue West
East Eleventh Street
and Siegfried Avenue
None Four-way
East Fifteenth Street Dewey Avenue East
East Fifteenth Street Laubach Avenue East
East Fifteenth Street Washington Avenue East
East Fifth Street
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
Diamond Street East
East Fifth Street Howertown Road East
East Fifth Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Pearl Street West
East Fifth Street and
Pearl Street
None 2-Way
East First Street Lincoln Avenue East
East Fourteenth
Street and Dewey
Avenue
None Four-way
East Fourth Street
and Howertown Road
None Four-way
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:442
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
East Nineteenth
Street
Laubach Avenue East and west
East Nineteenth
Street
Lincoln Avenue East
East Nineteenth
Street
Northampton Avenue East and west
East Ninth Street Northampton Avenue East and west
East Ninth Street Washington Avenue East
East Ninth Street and
Siegfried Avenue
None Four-way
East Seventeenth and
Lincoln Avenue
None Three-way
East Seventeenth
Street
Laubach Avenue East
East Seventeenth
Street
Washington Avenue East
East Sixteenth and
Washington Avenue
None Three-way
East Sixth Street Line Alley West
East Sixth Street Washington Avenue East and west
East Twelfth Street Atlas Lane East and west
East Twelfth Street Cherry Street West
East Twelfth Street Northampton Avenue East and west
East Twelfth Street Siegfried Avenue East and west
East Twelfth Street Wynnewoode Drive East
East Twelfth Street Wynnewoode Drive West
East Twentieth Street Lincoln Avenue West
East Twentieth Street Siegfried Avenue East and west
East Twentieth Street Washington Avenue East
East Twenty-Fourth
Street and Dewey
Avenue
None Four-way
East Twenty-Second
Street
Hokendauqua Avenue East
East Twenty-Second
Street
Siegfried Avenue East and west
East Twenty-Second
Street
Washington Avenue East and west
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:443
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
East Twenty-Sixth
Street
Held Drive West
East Twenty-Third
Street
Dewey Avenue West
East Twenty-Third
Street
Washington Avenue West
Elm Alley Hokendauqua Avenue East and west
Elm Alley Northampton Avenue West
Evans Street East Eighteenth Street South
Evans Street East Nineteenth Street North and south
Evans Street East Twentieth Street North
Fourteenth Street and
Main Street
None Four-way
Frank Drive [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Jeffrey Lane South
Franklin Street Dimler Alley North and south
Franklin Street Laubach Avenue South
Franklin Street West Eighteenth Street North and south
Franklin Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
West Fifteenth Street North and south
Franklin Street West Nineteenth Street North and south
Franklin Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
West Seventeenth Street North and south
Franklin Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
West Sixteenth Street North and south
Franklin Street
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
West Thirteenth Street North and south
Grape Street West First Street South
Green Street [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
West Twenty-Eighth
Street
North
Green Street West Twenty-Seventh
Street
South
Greenview Drive Howertown Road East
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:444
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Greenview Drive Lincoln Avenue West
Held Drive Cherryville Road East
Hickory Court Dewey Avenue East and west
Hokendauqua Avenue East Nineteenth Street North and south
Hokendauqua Avenue East Twentieth Street North
Hollow Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Horwith Lane West
Horwith Drive
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
Smith Lane North
Hotel Street Newport Avenue West
Hotel Street Railroad Street East
Howertown Road and
East Ninth Street
None Three-way
Hudson Court Dewey Avenue West
Hudson Court [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Franklin Street West
Hudson Court Laubach Avenue East
Hudson Court [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Levan Alley East and west
Hudson Court Lincoln Avenue East
Hudson Court [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Main Street East
Hudson Court Washington Avenue East and west
Jeffrey Lane [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Twenty-Seventh
Street
East
John Court [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Stewart Street East
Juniper Court Howertown Road East
Juniper Court Limestone Alley East and west
Juniper Court Pearl Street West
Keglovits Lane Main Street West
Kiechel Court Line Alley East
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:445
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Kiechel Court Washington Avenue South
Kingston Court
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Oxford Drive East
Laubach Avenue Canal Street West
Laubach Avenue Washington Avenue South
Lawrence Court Dewey Avenue East
Lawrence Court Washington Avenue East and west
Lerchenmiller Drive Main Street West
Lerchenmiller Drive Smith Street West
Levan Alley East Fifteenth Street North and south
Levan Alley East Fourteenth Street South
Levan Alley East Sixteenth Street North
Levan Alley East Twenty-Fourth
Street
North and south
Levan Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Levan Alley Station Alley South
Library Driveway Laubach Avenue West
Lilac Court Center Street West
Lilac Court Lincoln Avenue West and East
Lilac Court Siegfried Avenue East
Limestone Alley East Fourth Street North and south
Limestone Alley East Second Street South
Limestone Alley East Third Street North and south
Limestone Alley
[Added 9-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 1175]
Juniper Court South
Lincoln Avenue East Second Street North and south
Lincoln Avenue East Seventh Street North and south
Lincoln Avenue East Tenth Street North and south
Lincoln Avenue East Twenty-Second
Street
North
Lincoln Avenue and
East Eighteenth
Street
None Three-way
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:446
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Lincoln Avenue and
East Nineteenth
Street
None Three-way
Lincoln Avenue and
East Ninth Street
None Four-way
Lincoln Avenue and
East Sixteenth Street
None Three-way
Line Alley Bridge Street North and south
Line Alley Cement Court North and south
Line Alley Church Alley North and south
Line Alley Deibert Alley North and south
Line Alley Dimler Alley North and south
Line Alley East Eighteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Eighth Street North and south
Line Alley East Eighth Street North and south
Line Alley East Fifteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Fifteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East First Street North and south
Line Alley East Fourteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Nineteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Ninth Street North and south
Line Alley East Second Street North and south
Line Alley East Seventeenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Seventh Street North and south
Line Alley East Sixteenth Street North and south
Line Alley [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Sixth Street North and south
Line Alley East Tenth Street North
Line Alley East Thirteenth Street North and south
Line Alley East Twentieth Street North and south
Line Alley East Twenty-Fourth
Street
North
Line Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Line Alley East Twenty-Third Street North and south
Line Alley Hudson Court North and south
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:447
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Line Alley Kiechel Court North and south
Line Alley Lawrence Court North and south
Line Alley Roethline Court North and south
Line Alley Schreiber Street North and south
Line Alley Station Alley North and south
Main Street Fourth Street North
Main Street Laubach Avenue South — in front of
V.F.W
Maple Street Stark Street North
Maple Street West Sixteenth Street South
Marlin Alley Madison Street East
McKeever Lane Buckingham Drive North and south
Meadow Lane Cherryville Road West
Michael Court
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
East Twenty-Seventh
Street
East
Mill Street [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
East Twenty-First Street North
Newport Avenue Laubach Avenue South
Newport Avenue
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
West Fifteenth Street Four-way
Newport Avenue West First Street North
Newport Avenue West Fourteenth Street Three-way
Newport Avenue West Seventeenth Street Four-way
Newport Avenue West Sixteenth Street Four-way
Northampton Avenue Buckingham Drive North and south
Northampton Avenue East Eighteenth Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Eighth Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Eleventh Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Nineteenth Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Ninth Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Tenth Street North and south
Northampton Avenue East Twelfth Street South
Northampton Avenue East Twentieth Street North and south
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:448
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Northampton Avenue East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Northampton Avenue East Twenty-Third Street North and south
Nottingham Court Wynnewoode Drive West
Olive Alley West Twenty-Sixth Street North
Osborne Alley East Eighteenth Street North and south
Osborne Alley East Twentieth Street North
Osborne Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Osborne Alley Station Alley South
Oxford Drive [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Atlas Lane East
Oxford Drive [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Kingston Court West
Pear Street East Eighth Street North
Pearl Street East Fourth Street North and south
Penn Court Dewey Avenue West
Penn Court Siegfried Avenue East
Perch Alley Carp Alley South
Perch Alley West Twenty-Fifth Street North and south
Pine Alley Hokendauqua Avenue West
Plum Alley [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Adaire Street North and south
Plum Alley Dewey Avenue East and west
Plum Alley Howertown Road East
Plum Alley Northampton Avenue East and west
Plum Alley Siegfried Avenue East and west
Poplar Street West Fourteenth Street South
Poplar Street West Sixteenth Street North and south
Portland Street East Eighteenth Street South
Portland Street East Nineteenth Street North and south
Portland Street East Twentieth Street North
Railroad Alley West Fifteenth Street North and south
Railroad Alley West Seventeenth Street North and south
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:449
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Railroad Alley West Sixteenth Street North and south
Railroad Street Hotel Street North and south
Railroad Street West Fifteenth Street North
Railroad Street West Seventeenth Street North
Railroad Street West Sixteenth Street South
Reyemdale Court
[Repealed
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Ridge Alley [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Deibert Alley North and south
Ridge Alley Dewey Avenue South
Ridge Alley East Eighteenth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Eighth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Fifteenth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Fourteenth Street North
Ridge Alley East Nineteenth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Ninth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Seventeenth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Seventh Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Sixteenth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Sixth Street North and south
Ridge Alley East Tenth Street North
Ridge Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Ridge Alley East Twenty-Third Street North and south
Ridge Alley Hudson Court North and south
Ridge Alley Kiechel Court North and south
Ridge Alley King Street South
Ridge Alley Laubach Avenue South
Ridge Alley Lawrence Court North and south
Ridge Alley Lilac Court North
Ridge Alley Station Alley North and south
Roethline Court Washington Avenue East and west
Roth Street Howertown Road West
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:450
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Ruth Alley West Sixteenth Street North
Salmon Alley Cherryville Road East and west
Salmon Alley Green Street East and west
Scarboro Lane Atlas Lane Northwest
Scarboro Lane Buckingham Drive North and south
Schreiber Court Evans Street West
Schreiber Court Portland Street East
Schreiber Court Washington Avenue East
Second Street Howertown Road East
Segal Court West Fourteenth Street North
Seventh Street Banks Street North
Seventh Street Dewey Avenue West
Siegfried Avenue East Eighth Street North and south
Siegfried Avenue
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Tenth Street Four-way
Siegfried Avenue
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Twelfth Street North
Siegfried Avenue
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Siegfried Avenue
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Twenty-Third Street North
Smith Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Horwith Lane East and west
Smith Lane Laubach Avenue West
Smith Lane Lerchenmiller Drive East and west
Smith Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Stadium Drive East and west
Spangler Court Evans Street West
Spangler Court Franklin Street West
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:451
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Spangler Court Portland Street East
Stark Street Canal Street West
Stark Street Poplar Street East
Station Alley Dewey Avenue East and west
Station Alley Lincoln Avenue East and west
Station Alley Northampton Avenue East and west
Station Alley Ridge Alley East and west
Station Alley Siegfried Avenue East and west
Station Alley Washington Avenue East and west
Stewart Street Canal Street South
Stewart Street West Fourteenth Street North
Sycamore Court
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Hollow Lane North
Tenth Street
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
Howertown Road Three-way
Terrace Drive [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Hollow Lane North
Terrace Drive [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Sycamore Court South
Third Street Howertown Road East
Thirtieth Street
[Amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Boro Vu Drive East
Thirtieth Street Center Road East and west
Thirtieth Street Cherryville Road East and west
Thirteenth Street Laubach Avenue East
Thirteenth Street Washington Avenue East
Trout Alley Thirtieth Street North
Trout Alley West Twenty-Eighth
Street
North and south
Trout Alley West Twenty-Ninth
Street
North and south
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-22
1:452
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Tuna Alley West Twenty-Eighth
Street
South
Tuna Alley West Twenty-Ninth
Street
North
Twenty-Sixth Street
Playground Exit
West Twenty-Sixth Street North
Universal Court
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
Adaire Street East and west
Universal Court Cherry Street West
Universal Court Northampton Avenue East and west
Universal Court Siegfried Avenue East and west
Vienna Street Czapp Avenue North and south
Vienna Street West Fourteenth Street North
Vine Street East Eleventh Street North and south
Vine Street East Twelfth Street North
Washington Avenue East Fifteenth Street North and south
Washington Avenue East First Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Nineteenth Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Ninth Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Second Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Seventeenth Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Seventh Street North and south
Washington Avenue East Tenth Street North
Washington Avenue East Twenty-Fourth
Street
North
Washington Avenue East Twenty-Second
Street
North and south
Washington Avenue East Twenty-Third Street North and south
Washington Avenue Lerchenmiller Drive North
Washington Avenue Main Street South
West Alley Station Alley North
West Fifteenth Street Newport Avenue East and west
West Fifteenth Street Poplar Street West
West Fourteenth
Street
Newport Avenue East
§ 234-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-22
1:453
§ 234-23. Yield intersections.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
West Fourteenth
Street
Railroad Street East
West Seventeenth
Street
Canal Street West
West Sixteenth Street Railroad Street East
West Thirteenth
Street
Railroad Alley Three-way
West Thirteenth
Street
Stewart Street West
West Twenty-Eighth
Street
Cherryville Road East and west
West Twenty-Fifth
Street
Cherryville Road West
West Twenty-Ninth
Street
Boro Vu Drive East
West Twenty-Ninth
Street
Cherryville Road East and west
West Twenty-Seventh
Street
Madison Street East
West Twenty-Seventh
Street
West Alley West
West Twenty-Sixth
Street
Cherryville Road East and west
Whittle Alley East Eighteenth Street North and south
Whittle Alley East Nineteenth Street North
Whittle Alley East Twenty-Second
Street
North
William Street Canal Street West
William Street Poplar Street East
Windsor Drive Scarboro Lane West
Wynnewoode Drive East Tenth Street South
Wynnewoode Drive East Twelfth Street North
Wynnewoode Drive Nottingham Court North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 234-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-23
1:454
§ 234-24. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
§ 234-25. Rotary traffic islands.
§ 234-26. Play highways.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 234-21) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code,94 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No motor vehicle including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall
be operated on any property owned by the Borough or any other public
agency or instrumentality within the Borough without the permission of
the property owner and a permit from the Police Chief of the Borough.
B. Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and
every vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the island:
(Reserved)
B. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the Borough are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Highways)
94.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 234-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-26
1:455
§ 234-27. Snowmobile roads designated.
B. The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he
deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any part of any street in the Borough, where sledding and
coasting, shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for
the purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the police
officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons
using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who
violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following roads and streets within the Borough are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic?
Shared with
Vehicular
Traffic?
(Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Borough other than as provided above.
Provided nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
operating a snowmobile on any other street in the Borough:
(1) As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code95 for emergency and
bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways; or
(2) For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code.96
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle
Code.97
95.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721.
96.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723.
97.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a).
§ 234-26 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-27
1:456
ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 234-28. Vehicle weight limits on certain streets and bridges.
§ 234-29. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,98 it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum
Gross Weight
(pounds)
Canal Street [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Twenty-First Street and
south to Tenth Street
25,000
Cherryville Road Main Street and north
Borough line
25,000
Howertown Road Bridge
[Added 4-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 1200]
Entire length 50,000
Laubach Avenue [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Twenty-First Street and
south to Washington
Avenue
25,000
Main Street [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Twenty-First Street and
north Borough line
25,000
Main Street [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Twenty-First Street and
south to Borough line
25,000
Smith Lane [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
Laubach Avenue and
east to Horwith Drive
25,000
Twenty-First Street Entire length 25,000
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,99 and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for
each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
98.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
99.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g-1).
§ 234-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-29
1:457
§ 234-30. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on certain
streets and bridges.
§ 234-31. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,100 it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and § 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,101 and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,102 it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,103 and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $100 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
100. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
101. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g-1).
102. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b).
103. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b) and (g-1).
§ 234-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-31
1:458
ARTICLE IV
General Parking Regulations
§ 234-32. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 234-33. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
[Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Adaire Street East and west Tenth Street and Twelfth Street
Beil Alley East and west Ninth Street and Plum Alley
Beil Alley East and west Seventeenth Street and
Eighteenth Street
Bridge Street North and south Main Street and Dewey Avenue
Canal Street East Start Street and Lumber Street
Canal Street East and west 1349 Canal Street and West
Sixteenth Street
Canal Street East and west Laubach Avenue and Stewart
Street
Canal Street West At entrance to Canal Road south
of West Twenty-First Street
Canal Street West Lumber Street north 200 feet
Cedar Street East West Fourteenth Street north 40
feet
Cedar Street West 100 feet north of Fourteenth
Street
Cement Court North and south Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Center Street East and west West Nineteenth Street and West
Twenty-First Street
Cherry Street East and west Ninth Street and Tenth Street
Cherryville Road West Twenty-Sixth Street and Twenty-
Fourth Street
Church Street North Steward Street and Vienna Street
Clear Springs Drive
[Added 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
North Horwith Drive and Lerchenmiller
Drive
§ 234-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-33
1:459
Street Side Between
Clear Springs Drive
[Added 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
South Lerchenmiller Drive and Horwith
Drive
Czapp Avenue North and south Newport Avenue and Vienna
Street
Deibert Alley North Main Street and Line Alley
Deibert Alley South Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Dewey Avenue East Fifteenth Street and Hudson
Court
Dewey Avenue West Fourteenth Street and Fifteenth
Street
Dewey Avenue West Twenty-First Street and Station
Alley
Dimler Alley North and south Main Street and Lincoln Avenue
Doris Street East Roethline Court and Sixteenth
Street
Doris Street West 115 south of Sixteenth Street
East Eighteenth
Street
South Main Street and Franklin Street
East Eighth Street North and south Main Street and Lincoln Avenue
East Nineteenth
Street
North Main Street and Line Alley
East Nineteenth
Street
South Main Street east 40 feet
East Ninth Street South Main Street and Line Alley
Eleventh Street North Lincoln Avenue and Cherry Street
Franklin Street East West Nineteenth Street north 240
feet
Franklin Street
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
East West Seventeenth Street and R.
Paul Street
Held Drive North and south Cherryville Road and end of Culde-
sac
Howertown Road East East Fourth Street and East Tenth
Street
Howertown Road East Greenview Drive and Fourth
Street
Hudson Alley North and south Levan Alley and Laubach Avenue
§ 234-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-33
1:460
Street Side Between
Hudson Alley North and south Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Juniper Court North and south Pearl Street east 100 feet
Laubach Avenue East Fourteenth Street and
Seventeenth Street
Laubach Avenue East Washington Avenue and Smith
Street
Laubach Avenue North Main Street and Newport Avenue
Laubach Avenue North Main Street and Thirteenth Street
Laubach Avenue South Main Street and Canal Street
Laubach Avenue West East Seventeenth Street and East
Eighteenth Street
Lerchenmiller Drive
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114;
amended
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
North and south Main Street and Smith Lane
Levan Alley East East Twenty-Fourth Street South
400 feet
Lilac Court [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
North and south Center Street east and dead end
Lilac Court North and south Franklin Street west to railroad
property
Lincoln Avenue East Sixteenth Street and Seventeenth
Street
Lincoln Avenue South 1115 Lincoln Avenue to 310 East
Twelfth Street
Lincoln Avenue West 1522 Lincoln Avenue and
Fifteenth Street
Lincoln Avenue West East Seventh Street and East
Eighth Street
Lincoln Avenue West East Twenty-First Street south 60
feet
Lincoln Avenue West Eleventh Street and Twelfth
Street
Lincoln Avenue West Ninth Street north 40 feet
Line Alley East Twenty-First Street and Lilac
Court
§ 234-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-33
1:461
Street Side Between
Line Alley East Twenty-First Street to Station
Alley
Line Alley East and west Kiechel Court and Seventeenth
Street
Line Alley East and west Twenty-Second Street and Deibert
Alley
Line Alley West Dimler Alley south 100 feet
Lumber Street North and south Newport Avenue and Canal Street
Main Street East Cement Court south 60 feet
Main Street East Dimler Alley north 80 feet
Main Street East Dimler Alley south 40 feet
Main Street East First Street south to Borough Line
Main Street East Fourteenth Street south 400 feet
Main Street East Kiechel Court north 140 feet
Main Street East Laubach Avenue north 70 feet
Main Street East Nineteenth Street south 40 feet
Main Street East Ninth Street south 120 feet
Main Street East Sixteenth Street north 80 feet
Main Street East Sixteenth Street south 120 feet
Main Street East Tenth Street south 200 feet
Main Street East Twenty-First Street south 100 feet
Main Street East Twenty-Fourth Street and the
north Borough line
Main Street East Twenty-Fourth Street south 225
feet
Main Street East Twenty-Second Street south 40
feet
Main Street East and west Tenth Street and Laubach Avenue
Main Street West 1926 Main Street to 2004 Main
Street
Main Street West 527 Main Street and Fourth
Street
Main Street West Fourteenth Street south 40 feet
Main Street West Fourth Street south 200 feet
Main Street West Nineteenth Street north 50 feet
Main Street West Ninth Street and Bridge Street
Main Street West Ninth Street north 160 feet
Main Street West Ninth Street south 75 feet
§ 234-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-33
1:462
Street Side Between
Main Street West Spangler Street north 60 feet
Main Street West Twenty-First Street and Twenty-
Fourth Street
Main Street West Twenty-First Street south 120 feet
Main Street West West Fourth Street north 1,100
feet
Main Street West West Seventeenth Street north
100 feet
Maple Street West Sixteenth Street north 200 feet
Newport Avenue East Czapp Avenue north 60 feet
Newport Avenue East Laubach Avenue and Thirteenth
Street
Newport Avenue East Lumber Street south 80 feet
Newport Avenue West Fourteenth Street and Lumber
Street
Newport Avenue West Thirteenth Street north 200 feet
Ninth Street North Main Street and Line Alley
Ninth Street North and south Washington Avenue west 40 feet
Ninth Street South Lincoln Avenue and Beil Alley
Ninth Street South Main Street east 40 feet
Pear Alley East and west Seventh and Eighth Streets
Plum Alley North and south Dewey Avenue and Walnut Alley
Poplar Street East Sixteenth Street and Seventeenth
Street
Poplar Street East and west Fourteenth Street and Sixteenth
Street
Railroad Alley West West Seventeenth Street south 60
feet
Ridge Alley East and west Dimler Alley and Eighteenth
Street
Ridge Alley West East Tenth Street to East Ninth
Street
Ridge Alley [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
East Twenty-Second Street and Deibert
Alley
Roethline Court North and south Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Schreiber Street North Main Street and Washington
Avenue
§ 234-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-33
1:463
Street Side Between
Segal Court
[Repealed
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
Seventeenth Street North Main Street and Railroad Alley
Seventeenth Street North Main Street West 200 feet
Seventeenth Street South Main Street and Newport Avenue
Seventeenth Street South Main Street east 40 feet
Seventeenth Street South Ridge Alley west 30 feet
Seventh Street South Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Siegfried Avenue West Twentieth Street and Twenty-First
Street
Sixteenth Street
[Added 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
North Canal Street and Maple Street
Sixteenth Street South Canal Street and Maple Street
Smith Lane [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
North Laubach Avenue and Horwith
Drive
Smith Street
[Repealed
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Smith Street
[Repealed
2-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 1159]
Spangler Street North and south Main Street and Franklin Street
Station Alley North and south Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Station Alley
[Added 2-21-2008
by Ord. No. 1159]
North and south Main Street and West Alley
Tenth Street North Main Street east 300 feet
Tenth Street South 504 East Tenth Street and 520
East Tenth Street
Tenth Street South Main Street and Line Alley
Tenth Street South Main Street and railroad tracks
Thirtieth Street South Cherryville Road west 40 feet
§ 234-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-33
1:464
Street Side Between
Tulip Alley North and south Hokendauqua Avenue and
Northampton Avenue
Twelfth Street North Lincoln Avenue and Cherry Street
Twentieth Street North Siegfried west 40 feet
Twentieth Street North and south Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Twenty-Eighth
Street
South Cherryville Road west 40 feet
Twenty-First Street North Dewey Avenue and Northampton
Avenue
Twenty-First Street North Main Street and Lincoln Avenue
Twenty-First Street
[Added 9-2-2010
by Ord. No. 1175]
North Main Street west to Borough line
Twenty-First Street South Dewey Avenue and Siegfried
Avenue
Twenty-First Street South Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Twenty-First Street South Main Street and west Borough
line
Twenty-Fourth
Street
South Main Street and Dewey Avenue
Twenty-Second
Street
East Line Alley west 45 feet
Twenty-Second
Street
North Main Street and Washington
Avenue
Twenty-Second
Street
North and south Main Street and West Alley
Twenty-Second
Street
South Line Alley east 20 feet
Twenty-Second
Street
South Main Street east 40 feet
Twenty-Seventh
Street [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
North Cherryville Road west 40 feet
Twenty-Seventh
Street
South Cherryville Road West 600 feet
Twenty-Seventh
Street
South Madison Street and Cherryville
Road
Twenty-Sixth Street North Olive Alley west 650 feet
§ 234-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-33
1:465
Street Side Between
Twenty-Third Street North Main Street east 30 feet
Twenty-Third Street North Ridge Alley and Main Street
Twenty-Third Street North and south Main Street and West Alley
Vienna Street
[Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1114]
West Fourteenth Street and Church
Street
Vienna Street
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 1114]
West Fourteenth Street and Czapp
Avenue
Vine Street [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
East and west Eleventh Street and Universal
Court
Washington Avenue East 717 Washington Avenue Fire
Station
Washington Avenue East Dimler Alley north 40 feet
Washington Avenue East Twenty-Second Street 100 feet
Washington Avenue East Twenty-Second Street north 25
feet
Washington Avenue South Main Street east 60 feet
Washington Avenue West 714 Washington Avenue and 720
Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue West In front of 1524-1526 Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue West Nineteenth Street north 40 feet
Washington Avenue West Nineteenth Street south 40 feet
Washington Avenue West Seventeenth Street south 40 feet
Washington Avenue West Twenty-Second Street and
Twenty-Fourth Street
Washington Avenue West Twenty-Second Street South 40
feet
West Alley East and west West Twenty-First Street and
Station Alley
West Alley [Added
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
West Twenty-Third Street south 100
feet
West Eighteenth
Street
South Main Street and Franklin Street
West Fourteenth
Street
North Segal Court to Cedar Street
§ 234-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-33
1:466
Street Side Between
West Fourteenth
Street
South Railroad Street and Canal Street
West Fourth Street South Main Street west 450 feet
West Nineteenth
Street
North and south Main Street and Center Street
West Tenth Street North Main Street and Driveway
West Thirteenth
Street
North and south Newport Avenue and Stewart
Street
§ 234-34. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and
hours. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Canal Street East and
west
Between signs
in front of 2025
Canal Street
Every day 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Church Street South Vienna Street
to Stewart
Street
Saturday 2:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
East
Eighteenth
Street
North Main Street to
Laubach
Avenue
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Eighteenth
Street
South Main Street to
Laubach
Avenue
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East Eleventh
Street
North Lincoln Avenue
to Atlas Lane
Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East Eleventh
Street
South Lincoln Avenue
to Atlas Lane
Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Nineteenth
Street
[Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
North Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
§ 234-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-34
1:467
Street Side Between Days Hours
East
Nineteenth
Street
[Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
South Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Seventeenth
Street
[Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
North Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Seventeenth
Street
[Amended
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
North Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Seventeenth
Street
North and
south
Lincoln
Avenue, east 60
Feet
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
East
Seventeenth
Street
[Amended
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
South Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Seventeenth
Street
[Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
South Main Street
and Laubach
Avenue
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Twentieth
Street
North Lincoln Avenue
to Laubach
Avenue
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
East
Twentieth
Street
South Lincoln Avenue
to Laubach
Avenue
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
§ 234-34 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-34
1:468
Street Side Between Days Hours
East Twenty-
Fourth Street
North Line Alley to
Main Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Hokendauqua
Avenue
West 73 feet north of
Eighteenth
Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 a.m.
Laubach
Avenue
West Seventeenth
Street and
Sixteenth
Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Laubach
Avenue
[Added
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
West Twentieth
Street and
Eighteenth
Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Levan Court
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
East and
west
Hudson Court
to Mike
Lisetski Drive
School days 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
East East Sixteenth
Street and East
Seventeenth
Street
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
East East
Seventeenth
Street and East
Twenty-First
Street
Monday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
East In front of
Franklin School
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
West Twenty-First
Street and
Fifteenth
Street
Wednesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Main Street East Ninth Street
and Seventh
Street
Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Main Street West Ninth Street
and Seventh
Street
Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
§ 234-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-34
1:469
Street Side Between Days Hours
Main Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
Mike Lisetski
Drive [Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
North Lincoln Avenue
and Laubach
Avenue
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Municipal
Parking
Smith Street,
East Fourth
Street, West
Twenty-Sixth
Street and
Canal Street
Park
Every day 10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Newport
Avenue
East In front of 1357
Newport
Avenue
Every day 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Newport
Avenue
West Fourteenth
Street to
Laubach
Avenue
First and
third
Monday
12:00 noon to
2:00 p.m.
Ninth Street South Lincoln Avenue
and Beil
Avenue
School days 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Segal Court East and
west
Fourteenth
Street and a
point 40 feet
south
Every day 12:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Washington
Avenue
[Amended
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
East Tenth Street
south to Main
Street
Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Washington
Avenue
East Thirteenth
Street to
Twenty-Fourth
Street
Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Washington
Avenue
West Tenth Street
south to Main
Street
Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
§ 234-34 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-34
1:470
Street Side Between Days Hours
Washington
Avenue
West Thirteenth
Street to
Twenty-Second
Street
Wednesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
West
Fourteenth
Street
[Amended
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
North Canal Street to
Newport
Avenue
First and
third
Monday
12:00 noon to
2:00 p.m.
West
Fourteenth
Street
[Amended
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
North Main Street to
Franklin Street
Every day 6:00 p.m. to
11:00 p.m.
West Twenty-
Seventh
Street
North Main Street to
Cherryville
Road
Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
§ 234-35. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations. [Amended 5-6-2004 by Ord. No.
1120; 7-17-2008 by Ord. No. 1161]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ARTICULATED BUS — A bus designed to transport passengers and on
which passengers are authorized to be transported, consisting of two
or more units or sections permanently assembled in tandem by flexible
connections, which permit passenger movement throughout the length
of the bus.
BOAT — A small vessel for travel on water.
BOAT TRAILERS — A towing trailer with wheels designed to house a
boat inside, so that a boat may be transported above ground.
COMBINATION — Two or more vehicles physically interconnected in
tandem.
COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION TRUCK — A truck engaged in
construction operations, such as paving trucks, plowing trucks,
landscaping trucks, and/or similar vehicles.
FARM EQUIPMENT — A vehicle designed or used exclusively for
agricultural operations and only incidentally operated or moved upon
§ 234-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-35
1:471
highways, including, but not limited to, farm tractors, choppers and
balers.
FULL TRAILER — A trailer so constructed that no part of its weight
rests upon the towing vehicle. A semitrailer attached to a towing
vehicle by means of an auxiliary front axle or dolly shall be deemed to
be a full trailer.
HOUSE TRAILER —
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle designed for carrying no more than
nine passengers, exclusive of the driver, and used for the transportation
of persons for compensation.
MAXI-CUBE VEHICLE — A combination. The truck may have either
a detachable or permanently attached cargo box. The cargo box on
the trailer shall be designed such that the truck may be loaded and
unloaded through the trailer. Neither cargo box shall exceed 34 feet in
length and the overall length of the combination shall not exceed 65
feet.
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed or adapted for use as a
mobile dwelling or office, except a motor vehicle equipped with a truckcamper.
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle designed for use off of a
main or paved road.
PICKUP CAMPERS — A vehicle designed with a pickup truck base, that
has a camper attached to the bed of the truck.
RECREATIONAL TRAILER — A trailer designed or adapted and used
exclusively for recreational purposes.
SEMITRAILER — A trailer so constructed that some part of its weight
rests upon or is carried by the towing vehicle.
SNOWMOBILE — Any various automotive vehicles for travel on snow.
TENT TRAILERS — A compact trailer that opens up into a tent or
camper.
TOW DOLLY — A trailer designed and used exclusively to tow another
vehicle by mounting its front or rear wheels on the tow dolly while the
other wheels of the towed vehicle remain in contact with the ground.
A trailer, which is designed, constructed and equipped as a
dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place (either permanently
or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets
and highways.
(1)
A trailer containing a chassis and exterior shell designed and
constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined in Subsection (1),
but which is used permanently or temporarily for advertising, sales,
display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other
commercial purpose except the transportation of property.
(2)
§ 234-35 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-35
1:472
§ 234-36. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
East Ninth
Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
North In front of
219 East
Ninth Street
Every
day
1 hour
East Tenth
Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK-CAMPER — A structure designed, used or maintained primarily
to be loaded or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling,
sleeping place, office or commercial space.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks.
B. Unlawful parking. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to park
any articulated buses, boats, boat trailers, buses, combinations,
commercial construction trucks, (unless a single vehicle is used
exclusively for traveling to and from work), farm equipment, full
trailers, house trailers, limousines, maxi-cube vehicles, motor homes,
off-road vehicles, pickup campers, recreational trailers, semitrailers,
snowmobiles, tent trailers, tow dollies, trailers, truck-campers or truck
tractors on any street or alley in the Borough, or to allow it to remain
parked there, at any time. This prohibition shall not apply to any
emergency vehicle/truck during an emergency, or any vehicle/truck
temporarily parked to service a residential zone, i.e., moving
households. "Temporary" shall be defined as no more than eight
continuous elapsed hours in one day.
§ 234-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-36
1:473
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Eighteenth
Street
North East of
Lincoln
Avenue for
40 feet
Every
day
1 hour
Lincoln
Avenue
West In front of
1802
Lincoln
Avenue
Every
day
15 minutes
Main Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114;
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Main Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114;
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Main Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
Main Street
[Repealed
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Main Street
[Repealed
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Main Street
[Repealed
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
§ 234-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-36
1:474
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Main Street East 2019 Main
Street
Every
day
6:00 p.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
15 minutes
Main Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
East 2030 Main
Street
Every
day
15 minutes
Main Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
East Deibert
Alley and
Station Alley
Every
day
2 hours
Main Street East In front of
1627 Main
Street
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
15 minutes
Main Street
[Added
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
East In front of
1651 Main
Street
Monday
to
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
1 hour
Main Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
West 1756 Main
Street
Every
day
15 minutes
Main Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
West 1774 Main
Street
Every
day
15 minutes
Main Street West 342 Main
Street
Every
day
30 minutes
Main Street
[Amended
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
West In front of
1416 Main
Street
Saturday 7:30 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
15 minutes
Main Street
[Added
2-21-2008
by Ord. No.
1159]
West In front of
1628 Main
Street
Monday
to
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
15 minutes
§ 234-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-36
1:475
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Main Street
[Added
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
West In front of
1712-1714
Main Street
Monday
to
Friday
9:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
1 hour
Main Street West In front of
1924 Main
Street
Monday
to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
10 minutes
Municipal Lot Corner of
Nineteenth
Street and
Center
Street
Every
day
3 hours
Municipal Lot Laubach
Avenue
Monday
to
Saturday
9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
3 hours
Newport
Avenue
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114;
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Newport
Avenue
[Repealed
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114;
9-2-2010 by
Ord. No.
1175]
Nineteenth
Street
[Added
9-18-2003
by Ord. No.
1114]
North 1903 Main
Street (1
parking
space)
Every
day
15 minutes
Siegfried
Avenue
West North of
Twenty-First
Street (2
parking
spaces)
Every
day
2 hours
§ 234-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-36
1:476
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Washington
Avenue
North
and East
East
Seventeenth
Street and
Dimler Alley
Monday
to
Saturday
7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
15 minutes
West
Sixteenth
Street
North Newport
Avenue east
100 feet
Saturday
and
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
15 minutes
§ 234-37. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Between
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Main Street East 1 spot in front of
Miller's Diner
Loading/unloading
Main Street East At bus stop north of
East Twenty-Second
Street northward (5
parking spaces)
Bus loading/
unloading
Main Street East Eighteenth Street and
a point 30 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Fifteenth Street and a
point 30 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East First Street and a
point 100 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Fourteenth Street and
a point 50 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East In front of 1857 Main
Street
Loading/unloading
Main Street East Laubach Avenue and a
point 50 feet north
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Nineteenth Street and
a point 40 feet north
thereof
Bus stop
§ 234-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-37
1:477
Street Side Between
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Main Street East Ninth Street and a
point 100 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Second Street and a
point 30 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Seventh Street and a
point 30 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Sixteenth Street and a
point 40 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Tenth Street and a
point 50 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Thirteenth Street and
a point 20 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Twenty-First Street
and a point 20 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Twenty-Second Street
and a point 40 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street East Twenty-Third Street
and a point 20 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Eighteenth Street and
a point 35 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Fifteenth Street and a
point 100 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West In front of 1224 Main
Street
Loading
Main Street West In front of 1718 Main
Street
Loading/unloading
Main Street West Laubach Avenue and a
point 100 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
§ 234-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-37
1:478
Street Side Between
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Main Street West Nineteenth Street and
a point 50 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Ninth Street and a
point 100 feet south
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Seventh Street and a
point 36 feet north
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Tenth Street and a
point 20 feet north
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Thirteenth Street and
a point 20 feet north
thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Twenty-First Street
and a point 100 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Twenty-Fourth Street
and a point 100 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Twenty-Second Street
and a point 20 feet
north thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West Twenty-Third Street
and a point 50 feet
south thereof
Bus stop
Main Street West West Seventeenth
Street and a point 150
feet south thereof
Bus stop
Newport Avenue East In front of 1801
Newport Avenue
Loading/unloading
§ 234-38. Handicapped parking. [Added 2-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1158]
A. Guidelines and purpose.
(1) On-street handicap/disabled veteran parking spaces located in
residential neighborhoods of the Borough of Northampton shall be
governed by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, Sections 1342, 1338,
3354, (75 P.S. §§ 1342, 1338, 3354). Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Vehicles has provided forms MV-145A and MV-145V to assist all
§ 234-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-38
1:479
handicapped residents of Pennsylvania in applying for the proper
relief.
(2) The Borough Council ("Council"), upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to make all determinations
with respect to establishment, continuation and removal of
handicapped parking spaces. This authority is applicable to
preexisting handicapped spaces, their continuation and removal,
notwithstanding that such spaces were previously established and
authorized. Anyone aggrieved by the determination of Council may
request reconsideration by filing said request within 15 business
days of Council's decision.
(3) It is not the obligation of the Borough of Northampton to provide
off-street or on-street private parking for residents of the Borough
with or without disabilities. Owners of apartment buildings shall
make every effort to establish off-street parking for their tenants.
(4) Any handicap parking space created is available for use by any
vehicle displaying a valid handicap registration plate or placard.
(5) All persons requesting a handicapped parking space must submit
an application and all supporting documentation to the Chief of
Police for consideration prior to Council approval. The above
mentioned forms (MV-145A and MV-145V) along with an
application will be adapted as an aid to control the issuing of
handicapped parking spaces within the Borough limits.
(6) Applications for designation of handicap/disabled veteran parking
space in residential neighborhoods shall be considered on a case by
case basis using, but not limited to, the following guidelines:
(a) The applicant must reside at the address and prove the need
for the requested sign.
(b) The applicant must own and drive a vehicle, possess a valid
handicapped license plate or placard.
(c) All on-street parking restrictions, such as sweeper, snow
emergency routes, school zones, shall apply and be obeyed.
(d) The Chief of Police shall review the status of all on-street
handicap/disabled veteran-parking areas on an annual basis to
assure that the need for the parking space continues to exist.
(e) Applicants shall not have a driveway or garage for parking
their vehicle off-street.
(f) Handicapped parking space will only be allowed if parking is
permitted in the front of or on the side of the residence.
(7) Upon the death of a handicapped person to whom a parking space
has been issued under this section, the parking space shall be void
§ 234-38 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-38
1:480
30 days after death and revoked by the Council by resolution as of
said date.
B. Criteria and conditions.
(1) No space shall be granted where adequate, handicapped accessible
off-street parking is available to the applicant.
(2) Applicant must have one or more of the below listed handicaps and
be physically disabled as determined by the Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Motor Vehicles:
(a) Person who is blind;
(b) Person who does not have full use of an arm or both arms;
(c) Person is wheelchair confined;
(d) Person is unable to walk a distance of 200 feet without
stopping to rest (applicant may be asked to perform this and/or
produce documentation verifying this condition);
(e) Person cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a
brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device,
wheelchair or other assistive device;
(f) Person is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the
person's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second,
when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter or the
arterial oxygen tension is less that 60 mm/hg on room air at
rest;
(g) Person uses portable oxygen;
(h) Person has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or
Class IV according to the standards set by the American Heart
Association;
(i) Person is severely limited in his or her ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition;
(j) The person has severe cardiopulmonary insufficiency requiring
the use of ambulatory equipment;
(k) The person requires the use of prosthetic devices that restricts
normal ambulation;
(l) The person has other physical or mental limitations that the
Council believes are severe enough to warrant a handicapped
parking space; and
(m) The person requesting a space is caring for or in loco parentis
of a person specified in the above subsections.
§ 234-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-38
1:481
(3) The applicant requesting the handicapped parking space must first
obtain either a disability registration or qualify for a disabled
placard, and shall exhibit proof of the issuance of or qualification of
a handicapped person's or severally disabled veteran's license
plate or place card under the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
(4) An applicant may register one vehicle with a gross weight not to
exceed 6,000 pounds.
(5) No more than one handicapped parking spaces shall be established
upon any one individual application.
(6) No handicapped parking space shall be allowed along a street or
portion thereof where parking is prohibited, or which is of an
insufficient width, or where the physical conditions of the street or
traffic conditions would make it unsafe for a handicapped parking
space for access and use by a handicapped/disabled person.
(7) No handicapped parking space shall be created or continued unless
it can be demonstrated that the applicant's physical condition
justifying such a parking space is reasonable expected to persist for
a period of not less than one year.
(8) For the establishment or continuation of a handicapped parking
space, a report from the applicant's treating physician may be
considered, but any such report without more shall not be
considered conclusive. Any such medical report shall be
independent and reliable, and otherwise not be from a physician
whom is familiarly related to the applicant.
(9) In the event there is a material improvement in the physical
condition of the applicant to the extent that the applicant would no
longer qualify as a handicapped person or severely disabled
veteran under the criteria set forth herein, the handicapped
parking space shall be removed. Likewise, the handicapped
parking space shall be removed if there is a change in the
circumstances or conditions, such as the applicant's death or
moving to another location, such that the handicapped parking
space shall no longer be necessary or otherwise appropriate under
the criteria referred to herein.
C. Location of handicapped parking space/spaces.
(1) No more than two handicapped parking spaces shall be located on
any block where parking is permitted on both sides of the street.
(2) No more than one handicapped parking space shall be located on
any block where parking is permitted on only one side of the street.
§ 234-38 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-38
1:482
(3) All handicapped parking spaces permitted prior to the effective
date of this ordinance shall be allowed to remain as located but
must be renewed annually beginning January 1, 2008.
(4) In the event previously permitted spaces exceed the maximum
allowed per block, the Council shall refrain from granting any
additional spaces in that block until the number of handicapped
spaces falls below the maximum allowed.
(5) The Council shall solely determine the particular location of the
handicapped parking space within the street, and shall have the
appropriate signs or street or curb markings placed thereat.
(6) The discretion of the Borough to establish handicapped parking
areas at other locations where the Council deems appropriate or to
continue preexisting handicapped parking spaces is not limited
hereby.
D. New application.
(1) Applicant must complete an application form and forward all
supporting documents to the Borough Hall, attention: Chief of
Police. Supporting documents include but not limited to the
following: copy of operator's license showing the address where the
parking space is being requested, a signed copy of the form
MV-145A or MV-145V, copy of the car registration, copy of handicap
license plate, copy of handicap placard, copy of disabled veteran
license plate, medical doctor documentation, etc. Said application
is substantially in the form as set forth in Exhibit A.104
(2) A resident of Northampton or other individual requesting an onstreet
handicapped parking space within the Borough shall submit
an application to the Council. All applications so submitted shall be
reviewed for approval or rejection by the Council by
recommendation of the Chief of Police under the criteria and
conditions herein set forth.
(3) An incomplete application form or failure to provide all necessary
supporting documentation may result in rejection of the request.
(4) Applications shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, who will make
a final recommendation to Council, who will make final decision
regarding granting a handicapped parking space.
E. Renewal application.
(1) Each permit for a handicapped parking space shall be renewed on
an annual basis.
(2) Applications for renewal shall complete the application form and
forward all supporting documents to the Chief of Police. Supporting
104. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 234-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-38
1:483
§ 234-39. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 234-40. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
documents include: copy of operator's license showing the address
where the parking space is being requested, a signed copy of the
form MV-145 or MV-145A, copy of the car registration, copy of
handicap license plate, copy of handicap placard veteran license
plate, medical doctor documentation, etc.
(3) Renewal applications shall be submitted to the Chief of Police
between January 1 and January 31 of each calendar year.
(4) In making the final determination regarding the renewal of a
previously permitted handicapped space, the Council shall apply
the criteria contained in this policy.
(5) Once a permit is not renewed for any reason, any future application
by the same applicant shall be considered a new application and
shall be governed by the new application provisions of this policy.
F. Revocation of space and violations.
(1) The Council reserves the right to revoke and and/or deny any
permit for a handicapped parking space at any time for any reason.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a summary offense and punished by a fine of not more than
$600, plus costs of prosecution.
(3) Any vehicle found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall, upon the direction of any police officer of the Borough of
Northampton, be towed at the owner's sole cost and expense.
G. General provisions. Under extraordinary circumstances, the Council
may allow handicapped parking spaces other than as set forth herein.
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
§ 234-38 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-40
1:484
§ 234-41. Residential permit parking. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 1083]
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
A. Findings and purpose. The Borough finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parking, therefore depriving the residents of those areas of
spaces in which to park their own vehicles;
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level; and
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the Borough considers it to be in the interest of
the people of the Borough to provide for the establishment of a
residential permit parking program to insure primary access to
available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to
provide a cleaner ambient air level.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in
this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address;
for the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one
parking permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
residential and nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
C. Criteria. The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this
section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
§ 234-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-41
1:485
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal, on-street parking
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1), directly
above, 10% or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the
streets in the area are not registered in the name of a person
residing in the area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest
available information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and
Licensing of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be used. Provided: in
determining that a specific area identified as impacted and eligible
for residential permit parking is designated as a residential permit
parking area, the following factors are taken into consideration:
(a) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment;
(b) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
Borough;
(c) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking
and related health and safety hazards;
(d) The proximity of public transportation to the residential area;
(e) The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs
in connection with it; and
(f) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit
parking program in proximity to establishments located in the
residential permit parking area and used by the general public
for religious, health or educational purposes.
D. Designation of residential permit parking areas:
(1) The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
§ 234-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-41
1:486
Street Side Location Days Hours
Dewey
Avenue
[Added
2-21-2008 by
Ord. No.
1159]
East Pete Schneider
Drive to
Hudson Court
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Dewey
Avenue
East and
west
Hudson Court
to East
Sixteenth
Street
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
East
Eighteenth
Street
[Amended
2-21-2008 by
Ord. No.
1159]
North and
south
Hokendauqua
Avenue to end
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
East
Nineteenth
Street
North and
south
Laubach
Avenue to
Hokendauqua
Avenue
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
East Sixteenth
Street
South Laubach
Avenue to
Lincoln
Avenue
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Hokendauqua
Avenue
East and
west
East Twentieth
Street to
school
property
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
[Added
2-21-2008 by
Ord. No.
1159]
East Dewey Avenue
to Mike
Lisetski Drive
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
[Added
2-21-2008 by
Ord. No.
1159]
West East Sixteenth
Street to East
Seventeenth
Street
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
Northampton
Avenue
East and
west
East Twentieth
Street to
school
property
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
§ 234-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-41
1:487
Street Side Location Days Hours
Portland
Street
East and
west
East
Eighteenth
Street to East
Nineteenth
Street
School
days
7:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m.
(2) Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions
under which parking shall be by permit only.
E. Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police by the person desiring the permit, who
shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on
or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street or other
location within a residential parking permit area. A separate
application shall be required for each motor vehicle, and each
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, set pursuant to a
resolution of the Borough Council, which shall be for the use of the
Borough, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential
permit parking program. Each application shall contain the following
information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of
the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as the
case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's current
driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall be required, at the time of making application, to present his
driver's license and the vehicle registration card.
F. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee,
and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the
Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit,
which shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit
shall display the serial and registration numbers of the motor vehicles,
the residential parking area number, and the expiration date. The
permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date, upon
making application for renewal and payment of the permit fee. It shall
be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to display
other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking in a
residential permit parking area at any time when those permits are to
be displayed.
G. Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits
may be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee established
pursuant to a resolution, to bona fide visitors of residents of a
designated residential permit parking area, and exemption parking
permits may be issued, without payment of a fee, to handicapped
persons.
§ 234-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-41
1:488
§ 234-42. Violations and penalties for specified sections. [Amended
7-17-2008 by Ord. No. 1161; 8-21-2008 by Ord. No. 1163]
H. Responsibility of permit holder:
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential
parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is
permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential
parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve
to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than
the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the
parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
(a) Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police shall have authority
to revoke the residential parking permit of any permit holder
found to be in violation of any provision of this section. Upon
written notification to him of the revocation, the permit holder
shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police. Failure to do
so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this
section. Provided: any person receiving such a notice may,
within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to Borough
Council for a hearing on the revocation, and the decision of
Borough Council shall be final.
A. Any person who violates any provision of § 234-32, 234-33, 234-34,
234-36, 234-37, 234-39, 234-40, or 234-41, shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs. Provided: it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement
§ 234-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-42
1:489
§ 234-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs. Provided: it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this article, indicating, in each case: the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the
Chief of Police and pay the sum of $10 within 10 days after the time of the
notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of
the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
personnel of the Borough to report to the appropriate official all
violations of any provision of this article (except § 234-35), indicating,
in each case: the section violated, the license number of the vehicle
involved in the violation; the location where the violation took place;
and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police
officer or other person making the report shall also attach to or place
upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked
in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions to the
owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the
Chief of Police and pay the sum of $10 within 10 days after the time
of the notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this
section.
B. Further, any person who violates any provision of § 234-35, shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs,
with a minimum fine of $25 and, in default of payment of the fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
C. Pursuant to Section 6109 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code [75 P.S.
§ 6109(22)], any vehicle found to be in violation of the provisions of
§ 234-35 of this article above indicated may, upon the direction of any
police officer of the Borough, be towed to and impounded at a location
as determined by said police officer, at the owner's sole cost and
expense.
§ 234-42 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-43
1:490
ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 234-44. Parking meter zones. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No.
1083; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 1114; 5-6-2004 by Ord. No. 1120]
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
Borough of Northampton, as follows:
Street Side Location Weekday Times
Main Street
[Amended
9-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 1175]
Both Eighteenth Street
and Twenty-First
Street
9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Main Street East Ninth Street and
Tenth Street
9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Main Street West Bridge Street and
Tenth Street
9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
§ 234-45. Issuance of parking permits to business owners or
operators. [Added 8-18-2005 by Ord. No. 1131]
§ 234-46. Days and hours parking meters in operation and parking
time limits apply. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 1114; 5-6-2004
by Ord. No. 1120]
Parking meters shall be operated, by the deposit of a coin in the meter, as
prescribed by § 234-49, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time,
as well as the maximum parking times prescribed in § 234-44, shall apply
at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, in the parking meter zones listed in § 234-44. Provided, however:
A. The owner or operator of a retail business which has no on-premises
parking and which is not within 300 feet of municipal parking may pay a
nonrefundable fee to the Borough of Northampton in the amount of
$400 for a parking permit, which shall expire one year from the date of
issuance. Said parking permit shall be issued to allow the owner or
operator to park in the space directly in front of his or her place of
business. The existing parking meter at said location shall be removed
by the Borough, and a sign shall be erected indicating permit parking
only.
B. Said parking permit shall be valid between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and
5:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
C. The owner or operator shall conspicuously display the parking permit in
his or her motor vehicle.
D. This section shall become effective five days from the date of its
adoption.
§ 234-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-46
1:491
the requirements of this article as to parking time limit and as to deposit of
coins in meters shall not apply on Borough of Northampton holidays.
§ 234-47. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 234-44
of this article shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 234-48 of this
article. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough of Northampton, and when the adjacent
space is occupied by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by
its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and, on the
expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or over-parking.
§ 234-48. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so
placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking,
or to park a vehicle in such a position that that vehicle is not wholly within
the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 234-49. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 234-46 of
this article, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall
immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter, one or
more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in
any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall
be considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 234-50. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 234-46 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-51
1:492
§ 234-51. Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time
beyond legal limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit or
cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article, any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of 15 minutes in any
fifteen-minute parking meter zone, 1/2 hour in any one-half-hour parking
meter zone, one hour in any one-hour parking meter zone, or two hours in
any two-hour parking meter zone.
§ 234-52. Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 234-53. Unlawful to tamper with meter.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. Provided:
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough of
Northampton under the direction of the Mayor or Borough Council.
§ 234-54. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully; effect of payment
within 24 hours.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough of Northampton, acting in accordance with
the directions of the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article;
(2) The date and hour of the violation;
(3) The license number of the vehicle;
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article, and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report of the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough of Northampton, the sum of
§ 234-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-54
1:493
§ 234-55. Violations and penalties.
§ 234-56. Exceptions.
$5 within 24 hours after the time of such notice of violation, or report to
the Office of the Chief of Police and pay, for the use of the Borough, the
sum of $10 after 24 hours but within 10 days of the time of such notice
of violation, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine prescribed in § 234-55A of this article. [Amended
5-6-2004 by Ord. No. 1120]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 234-53, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 234-54, shall be
cited within 15 days of the violation and upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $20 costs. [Amended 5-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 1120]
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 234-53 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
A. By resolution, the Borough Council may temporarily suspend the
provisions of this article by requiring coin deposit in meters and
establishing a maximum parking time at meters.
B. The Borough of Northampton shall have authority to establish noparking
or special-purpose parking zones within any parking meter
zone, and to remove parking meters from those areas as previously
installed there, and the provisions of this article shall not apply in those
areas where no-parking or special-purpose parking are in effect.
§ 234-54 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-56
1:494
ARTICLE VI
Traffic Regulations on School Property
§ 234-57. Speed limits.
The speed limit on all roads and parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour and
shall be clearly posted.
§ 234-58. Traffic direction.
§ 234-59. Posting of signs.
Signs which meet the requirements of the new Pennsylvania Vehicle Code
shall be posted as recommended by the Police Department of the Borough of
Northampton. These signs shall include one-way traffic signs, 15 mph signs,
signs indicating that traffic rules are enforced by Borough Police, stop signs,
and no parking signs.
§ 234-60. School bus regulations.
A. Entrance to area. Traffic into the area shall be by the easternmost
entrance in front of the Senior High School from Laubach Avenue and
also from Ida Smith Lane and Stadium Drive behind the Junior High
School.
B. Drives around schools.
(1) The drive in front of the Senior High School building shall be one
way traveling from south to north.
(2) The drive around the front of the Junior High School shall be one
way from the place where it branches to the right from the Laubach
Avenue entrance. It shall continue one way to Stadium Drive.
(3) The drive between the Junior and Senior High Schools shall also be
one way from the place at which it branches from the Laubach
Avenue entrance to the parking lot behind the Senior High School
building.
(4) That portion of the drive around the Junior High School between
the entrance to the parking lot referred to in the above subsection
and Stadium Drive shall be two ways. Stadium Drive shall continue
to be two ways.
C. Exits. There shall be two exits from the area of the secondary schools.
One of these is the western drive to Laubach Avenue in front of the
Senior High School. The other is Stadium Drive and Ida Smith Lane
behind the Junior High School.
A. The above "one-way" regulations shall apply to all vehicles except
school buses, which shall be permitted to travel in the opposite
direction from those posted in the afternoon when picking up students
§ 234-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-60
1:495
§ 234-61. Firesafety.
Signs indicating no parking because of interference with the use of firefighting
equipment are to be installed at locations specified by the
Northampton Fire Department. Enforcement of these no-parking areas for
all vehicles shall also be subject to the control of the Northampton Borough
Police.
§ 234-62. Violations and penalties.
Fines for violations of this article will be the same as for similar violations
listed in other articles of this chapter.
at the Junior High School. School buses also shall be permitted to exit
to Laubach Avenue on the drive which is otherwise posted for one-way
entrance.
B. This exception to the one-way street does not provide for an exception
to the speed limit which shall apply equally to buses.
§ 234-60 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-62
1:496
ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 234-63. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code,105 and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound those
vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking
regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined
by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere
with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 234-64. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 234-63 of this article. Provided: no such vehicle shall
be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of
this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 234-65. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 234-66. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by "approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time
by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and, when the
schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed
or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. Borough
105. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a-22).
§ 234-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-66
1:497
Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage
that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed
or impounded under this article.
§ 234-67. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 234-68. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 234-69. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 234-70. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 234-71. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 234-72. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code,106 by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa C.S.A. § 110 et seq., as
amended).
106. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
§ 234-66 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-73
1:498
§ 234-73. Illegal storage of vehicles.
A. No vehicle shall be stored upon any public highway as defined in the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code or upon public property of the
Borough of Northampton. As used herein, "storage" shall mean the
parking of a vehicle in one place continuously for more than 72 hours.
Each seventy-two-hour period shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Notice of violation.
(1) Any police officer or duly authorized employee of the Borough shall
place on the motor vehicle parked in violation of the provision of
this section a notice to report to the Magisterial District Judge in
whom appropriate jurisdiction lies.
(2) For violation of this section, the owner or operator within 10 days
of the date such notice was attached to his/her motor vehicle shall
pay as a penalty in full satisfaction the sum of $25. Upon a second
violation of this section, the offender's vehicle, regardless if it was
involved in the first violation, will be removed and impounded
pursuant to 75 Pa C.S.A. § 6109, and all costs, including but not
limited to towing and storing, will be borne by the offender.
§ 234-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-73
1:499

ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 234-74. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 234-76 of this
article, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency
(designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the
existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the Borough through radio,
newspaper or other available media, and information on the termination of
the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 234-75. Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on
snow emergency routes during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 234-76. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Side Between
East Fourth Street South Main Street to Howertown
Road
East Ninth Street [Added
2-21-2008 by Ord. No.
1159]
South Ridge Alley and Howertown
Road
East Tenth Street North Main Street to Borough line
East Twelfth Street [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1114]
North Atlas Lane and Cherry Street
Main Street West Twenty-First Street and Ninth
Street
Newport Avenue West Fourteenth Street to Laubach
Avenue
Washington Street West Tenth Street and Main Street
§ 234-77. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 234-76 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 234-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-77
1:501
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 234-74 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 234-74 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 234-77 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-77
1:502
ARTICLE IX
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 234-78. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited.
§ 234-79. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Borough:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough, set by the Borough Council pursuant to a
resolution. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment
of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with Borough Council
that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by Borough Council
and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location;
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on;
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, chapter or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
§ 234-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-79
1:503
§ 234-80. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles. [Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Borough, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion
of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 234-6 of Article I or
§ 234-26 of Article II of this chapter. Provided: nothing in this
subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or
without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in rollerskating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk and any
sidewalk at the War Memorial plot located at Fourteenth Street and
Washington Avenue and Fourteenth Street and Dewey Avenue.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 234-79 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-80
1:504
ARTICLE X
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 234-81. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Borough of Northampton where official traffic-control
signals are installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by
pedestrian-control signals installed under § 234-82 of this article, shall obey
the directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 234-82. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
[Amended 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1083]
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway;
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
Main Street Laubach Avenue North-South-East-West
Main Street Twenty-First Street North-South-East-West
Main Street Twenty-Fourth
Street
North-South-East-West
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
article.
§ 234-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-83
1:505
§ 234-83. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated.
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 234-84. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 234-85. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough except in
a crosswalk;
B. To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in the
Borough, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
C. Provided: nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in
a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 234-82 of this article.
§ 234-83 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 234-85
1:506
Chapter 240
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Northampton Borough Municipal
Authority — See Ch 8, Art. I.
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Sewers — See Ch. 190.
§ 234-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-85
1:507

ARTICLE I
Water Conservation
[Adopted 12-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1008 (Ch. 26, Part 1, of the 1993
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 240-1. General policy.
§ 240-2. Building permits; water service.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled, and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way, and for which construction a permit is required to be
obtained from the Borough of Northampton (or would be required but for an
exemption from a permit requirement for public or governmental agencies)
unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water
using fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of § 240-4
of this article. The provisions of this article shall apply to any such building
or structure for which such a building permit is issued, or would otherwise
be required to be issued for such an exemption, on or after December 1,
1988.
§ 240-3. Plumbing fixture requirements. [Amended 5-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 1058]
A. Customers shall be encouraged not to permit any water furnished by
the NBMA (Northampton Borough Municipal Authority) to run to waste
in any gutter or other impervious surface.
B. Each resident or property owner of the Borough of Northampton is
urged to install fixtures which will reduce the quantity of water
required to flush toilets and to reduce the flow rates of showers and
faucets.
A. Water use by water closets. For water closets and associated flushing
mechanism, maximum volume shall not exceed an average of 1.6
gallons per flushing cycle when tested in accordance with the hydraulic
performance requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Water closets and urinals operated by flushometers.
(1) For water closets and associated flushing mechanism, maximum
volume shall not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flushing cycle
when tested in accordance with the hydraulic performance
requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
(2) Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of one
gallon per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig or a maximum of 1 1/2 gallons per flush cycle at any one test
pressure. The flushometer shall be adjusted according to
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:509
manufacturer's specifications. The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in the ANSI
112.9.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures standard.
C. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 2 3/4
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80
psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
cited in the ANSI 112.18.1 Finished Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture
Fittings standard.
D. Sink faucets.
(1) Kitchen sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 2 3/4 gallons
of water per minute over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80
psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.1 Finished Rough Brass
Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.
(2) Residential lavatory sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed
2 3/4 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.1 Finished Rough Brass
Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.
(3) Nonresidential lavatory faucets shall be either self-closing or
metering faucets as described below:
(a) Self-closing faucets shall not exceed an average discharge rate
of 1/2 gpm between the pressures of 20 and 80 psig when
tested in accordance with the discharge test procedure cited in
ANSI A112.18.1 Finished and Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture
Fittings.
(b) Metering faucets shall be field-adjustable and set so that the
discharge quantity shall not exceed 1/2 gallons of water per
cycle.
E. Blowout toilets and urinals. Replacement of blowout toilet and urinal
fixtures with like type fixtures may be granted by local officials upon
request where adequate justification of special need is provided.
F. Pressure reducing valve. Where the service water pressure to a
building is expected to exceed 60 psi a water pressure reducing valve
with strainer shall be installed just downstream of the building's main
valve, so as to be accessible. The valve shall provide for pressure
adjustment within the range of 50 to 60 psi. The valve shall conform to
the requirements of product standard ASSE 1003. Exemptions to this
article are service lines to sill cocks, outside hydrants, and main supply
risers to buildings where pressure from the mains does not exceed 60
psi at the fixture branches or at individual fixtures.
§ 240-3 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 240-4
1:510
§ 240-4. Hearing.
Any person(s) may apply to the Building Code Hearing Board for an
exception to the terms of this article, which exception may be granted in
the discretion of the Borough Council, upon proof that some other device,
system or procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth
herein, or that those set forth herein cannot be complied with, without
undue hardship.
§ 240-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1993 by Ord. No.
1048]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $600 plus
costs, and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:511

ARTICLE II
Water System Connections
[Adopted 1-3-2000 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 240-6. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Water System Connections Ordinance."
§ 240-7. Definitions.
Unless specifically set forth otherwise, the meaning of the terms in this
article shall be as set forth below:
AUTHORITY — The Municipal Authority of the Borough of Northampton, a
Pennsylvania municipal authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Northampton, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, a political subdivision, acting by and through its Council and
by and through its authorized representatives.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is erected a structure or any property within the Borough upon which
a structure is proposed to be erected.
OWNER — Any person vested with legal or equitable ownership, in whole
or in part, of any property located in the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity, or combination thereof.
WATER SYSTEM — The water distribution facilities, including all related
facilities, owned by or in the control of the Authority, including all real and
personal property, and property of a mixed nature, rights, powers, licenses,
easements, rights-of-way, privileges, franchises, and other property or
interest in property of whatsoever nature used or useful in connection
with such facilities, and together with all additions, extensions, alterations,
improvements, and enhancements thereof or thereto which may be made,
installed or acquired, from time to time, by or for the authority.
§ 240-8. Use of public water system required.
A. Notice to connect. The owner of any improved property shall connect
such improved property to the water system in such manner as the
Borough and the Authority may require, within 60 days after notice to
such owner from this Borough to make such connection.
B. Form of notice. The notice by the Borough or Authority to make a
connection to the water system, referred to in Subsection A above, shall
consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments or
supplements at the time in effect, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection in accordance with the provisions of this
article, specifying that such connection shall be made within 60 days
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-8
1:513
§ 240-9. Connection requirements.
§ 240-10. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
from the date such notice is given. Such notice shall be served upon the
owner in accordance with law.
C. Failure to connect. If the owner of any improved property abutting upon
any street, after 60 days' notice from the Borough in accordance with
Subsection A, shall fail to connect such improved property, as required,
the Borough may make such connection and may collect from such
owner the costs and expenses thereof, including a 10% administration
charge and any and all attorney and engineering fees and costs. In such
case, this Borough shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send
an itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the
owner of the improved property to which connection has been so made,
which bill shall be payable forthwith. Should the owner of such
improved property fail to pay such bill, the Borough shall file a
municipal lien for said construction and all costs set forth in this
subsection, within two months of the date of the completion of the
construction of said connection. The aforementioned lien is subject in
all respects to the general law providing for the filing and recovery of
municipal liens.
A. Permit required. No person shall construct any connection to, uncover,
connect with, make any opening into or use, alter or disturb, in any
manner, any water main constituting a part of the water system,
without first making application for and securing a permit, in writing,
from the Authority. Such application shall be made on a form to be
provided by the Authority.
B. Connections to conform to regulations. All connections to the water
mains and the installation of any service line to an improved property
shall be accomplished in conformance with the rules and regulations of
the Borough and the Authority.
C. Authorizations from authority. Only persons properly authorized by the
Authority shall be permitted to make service line and service
connection installations.
D. Additional provisions. The Borough and the Authority reserve the right
to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as they
shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with the water
system, which additional rules and regulations, to the extent
appropriate, shall be, and shall be construed as, part of this article.
A. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article
shall, upon official determination thereof, be ordered to pay a fine not
exceeding $500 and costs. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 240-8 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 240-10
1:514
B. Collection powers. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this
article shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time
provided by applicable law.
§ 240-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-10
1:515
Chapter 246
YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 210.
§ 246-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Northampton, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
HOUSEHOLD — The individual who applies for a permit, and anyone who
resides in that individual's residence.
PERMIT — The form that must be obtained, completed and submitted along
with the respective fee to the Borough Secretary prior to conducting a yard
sale.
YARD SALE — Any public sale of goods on residential property including,
but not limited to, the residential properties' garage, home, lawn or yard.
§ 246-2. Permit required; signs prohibited on public property.
§ 246-3. Frequency and duration limitations.
§ 246-4. Fee for permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, group or corporation to conduct
within the Borough a yard sale, or permit a yard sale to be held within
the Borough, on residential property under the control of the individual,
group or corporation without first obtaining a yard sale permit from the
Borough.
B. No signs shall be posted on any public property or any utility poles.
A. Two yard sales are permissible per household in any twelve-month
period;
B. The maximum duration of any yard sale shall be two consecutive
calendar days; and
C. The approved yard sale must be held within 30 days of the issuance of
the permit for that yard sale.
A. The fee for the first permit issued to a household within any twelvemonth
period shall be $5.
§ 240-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 246-4
1:516
§ 246-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and prosecution costs
for the first offense; $100 plus prosecution costs for the second offense; and
$300 for the third offense and any offense thereafter.
§ 246-6. Enforcement.
Any police officer is hereby authorized to act on behalf of the Borough.
Chapter 250
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 83.
Construction codes — See Ch. 105.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 125.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
B. The fee for the second permit issued to a household within the same
twelve-month period as the first permit shall be $10.
C. All permit fees shall be paid to the Borough Secretary prior to the
issuance of the permit.
D. Nonprofit service organizations and charitable organizations may
obtain up to two yard sale permits in any twelve-month period without
payment of fee.
§ 246-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-6
1:517

ARTICLE I
Short Title and Purposes
§ 250-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Borough of Northampton
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 250-2. Application.
No building, sign or other structure or land shall be used or occupied
and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. However, this chapter shall not require
any change to any building, structure or use legally existing at the effective
date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto; or to any building, structure
or use planned and construction started in compliance with existing laws
prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, and
completed within a one-year period after the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment thereto, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 250-3. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to establish comprehensive controls for the
development of land in the Borough based on the Comprehensive Plan
for the area and enacted in order to promote and protect health, safety,
comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the people. The general
purpose of this chapter is to seek the following general objectives.
§ 250-4. Objectives.
Such regulations shall be made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan
and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from
fires, flood, panic and other dangers; to promote the health and general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of
land; to facilitate the provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools,
parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the characteristics of
the district and its peculiarities for particular uses and with a view to
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land throughout the Borough.
§ 250-5. Plan objectives.
A. Land use goals and objectives.
(1) Residential.
(a) To buffer residential areas from adjacent nonresidential
incompatible land use activities.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5
1:519
(b) To allocate more acreage for medium-density land use than
was proposed in the 1972 Borough General Plan. The preferred
medium-density housing type is a two-family house.
(c) To permit some of the edges of the Uptown to be used for
medium- and high-density residential land uses.
(d) To increase the off-street parking requirement for all
residential land uses, except for senior citizen housing along
bus routes.
(e) To expand the opportunities for home occupations in
residential areas but clearly define the performance
requirements for such uses so that they do not become a
nuisance.
(f) To establish a policy regarding new land ownership patterns
such as subdivision of an existing two or multifamily property
and conversion of a multifamily property into a condominium
or cooperative form of ownership.
(g) To provide technical advice to homeowners in regard to quality
building maintenance, expansion, construction, energy
conservation and environmental enhancement.
(2) Commercial.
(a) To consolidate and revitalize the Uptown as the Central
Business District (CBD). At a minimum, the CBD should include
Main Street from Nineteenth Street to Twenty-First Street,
Twenty-First Street from Main Street to Center Street and
Center Street.
(b) To encourage office and service commercial uses.
(c) To improve off-street parking opportunities in the Uptown
CBD.
(d) To attract restaurants, offices, specialty, and convenience
stores into the CBD.
(e) To facilitate reuse of vacant stores and buildings, particularly
in the CBD.
(f) To explore the possibility of an Uptown Improvement District.
(g) To recognize that the midtown and downtown commercial
areas deserve recognition and support. Their identity as
business districts with special character should be preserved
and enhanced. The downtown as a business area extends from
Ninth Street to Thirteenth Street. The midtown business/
residential area extends from Thirteenth Street to Eighteenth
Street.
§ 250-5 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-5
1:520
(3) Industrial.
(a) To attract technology-type businesses.
(b) To promote limited development of new factories.
(c) To encourage innovative reuse of existing industrial land.
(4) Recreation and open space.
(a) To preserve and enhance areas along streams and rivers for
recreation and open space purposes.
(b) To preserve presently vacant high points with nice views for
recreation purposes.
B. Community facilities goals and objectives.
(1) To preserve and enhance the Borough Municipal Building Complex.
(2) To construct an indoor recreation center.
C. Transportation goals and objectives. To establish traffic, parking and
pedestrian movement recommendations for the Northampton Business
District Improvement Program.
(1) To encourage orderly traffic flow through the Borough as a positive
component for business opportunity in the Borough.
(2) To establish and implement a plan for improving the efficiency and
safety of traffic flow in the Borough.
(3) To improve off-street parking resources within the Borough.
(4) To further enhance pedestrian and bicycling movements within the
Borough.
(5) To encourage the development of mass transportation system
service and to encourage intermodal terminals and/or stations to
be located within the Borough.
§ 250-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5
1:521

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 250-6. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of the chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include
the word "building"; the word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended" to be
used; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional.
§ 250-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUT — A term which includes adjacent, contiguous, and touching.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A building or use customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building and located on the same lot as
the principal building or use.
ACREAGE, GROSS — The overall total area of real property.
ACREAGE, NET — The remaining area after all deductions are made; with
deductions including street, easements for access, street dedications and
similar areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED FACILITY — An establishment having a substantial
amount (more than 20% of floor space or more than 20% of its show time)
of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, photographs, videotapes, on-site
picture or live shows, messages which are distinguished by their emphasis
on matters depicting, describing or relating to "obscene" materials, shows
or services as defined herein.
ALLEY — A public or private way affording only secondary means of access
to abutting property.
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in construction,
occupancy or use.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — As applied to a building or structure, a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a structure including the
walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling; or an enlargement,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving
from one location or position to another; but not including normal
maintenance or minor repairs or improvements.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alterative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. Such devices
shall not be deemed a public utility or public use.
§ 250-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:523
AMUSEMENT CENTER — An establishment offering five or more
amusement devices, including, but not limited to, coin-operated electronic
games, shooting gallery, table games and similar recreational diversions
within an enclosed building.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock and poultry,
with the intent of producing capital gain, or profit or with the intent of
selling any livestock or poultry products. The keeping of livestock or poultry
as farm pets, or for domestic purposes pursuant to the regulations of this
chapter shall not be construed as animal husbandry.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, radio frequencies (excluding
radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communications signals. Such devices shall not be deemed a public utility
or public use.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A residential building designed or used for three or
more dwelling units.
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENTIAL CARE — Assisted-living residential care
combines private apartment-like living with supportive services such as
personal care, housekeeping, linen service, meals, medication management,
and twenty-four-hour oversight. Sometimes, health care services may be
available at the facility or through an arrangement with another provider.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business where
such items as gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade,
at retail, and where minor repair service is rendered.
AUTOMOTIVE JUNKYARD — A place where two or more motor driven
vehicles which do not bear a current state inspection sticker and license
plate and their related parts are stored or disassembled.
AWNING — A shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone networks. Such devices shall not be
deemed a public utility or public use.
BASEMENT — A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement
shall be considered a story if more than 1/3 of the perimeter walls are
five feet or more above the finished grade level of the ground immediately
adjacent to the walls.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST FACILITY — A limited commercial activity,
conducted within a structure, which includes dining and bathroom facilities
with sleeping rooms for short-term guest lodging.
BLOCK — Land, or a group of lots, surrounded by streets or other rightsof-
way, other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any
recorded subdivision tract.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of Northampton.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:524
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Northampton.
BUFFER — Any device or material used to reduce the impact of one land
use activity upon another land use activity. An effective buffer (screening)
includes a mound, wall, fence and/or dense screen planting composed of
trees, shrubs, and vegetative ground cover to the full length of the lot line to
serve as a barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise throughout
the year.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or land area covered
by the principal and accessory buildings (including covered porches,
carports, and breezeways, but excluding open patios).
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, tanks and similar projections.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — The premises in which care is provided at
any one time for seven or more children unrelated to the operator. This
child care is in lieu of care by the parent or guardian for part of a twentyfour-
hour day. The term does not include care of related children, foster
children, nor on-site training in the case of a student who is fulfilling
the requirements of a secondary, postsecondary, postsecondary child-care
training or educational curriculum. The PA Department of Welfare is
responsible for licenses and regulations of child day-care centers.
CLUB or LODGE — An organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes,
which are not conducted primarily for gain, providing there are not
conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities
except as required generally for the membership and purposes of such club.
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not
conducted for private profit and which is not an adjunct to or operated by
or in connection with a public tavern, cafe or other public place.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is required by law
to bear any license plate other than that issued for passenger car use.
Also, any motor vehicle including passenger cars which by reason of a
characteristic coloring or marking exceeding one square foot in area is
identified or commonly associated with any business, industry, or public
agency shall be considered a commercial vehicle within the terms of this
chapter. Other passenger cars used in business by a resident shall not be
considered commercial vehicles.
COMMISSION — The Borough of Northampton Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or a combination of
land or water area within a development site not including streets, off-street
parking areas, private yard space, and areas set aside for nonresidential
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:525
and public facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of
structures but may contain such improvements as are in the development
plan as finally approved by the Borough Council and as are appropriate for
recreational use or enjoyment by the residents of the development site.
COMMUNICATION TOWER and HEIGHT OF TOWER — A structure other
than a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower,
designed and used to support communications antennas. The height of
a communication tower shall be the vertical distance measured from the
ground level to the highest point on a communication tower, including
antennas mounted on the tower.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device.
This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes
or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including, without
limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The declaration of purposes, policies and
programs for the preservation, enhancement, and development of the
Borough.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which would become harmonious or
compatible with neighboring uses through the application and maintenance
of qualifying conditions.
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE — Any building or portion thereof which
contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation and may also include
facilities for eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family. A
congregate residence may include a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory,
fraternity, fraternity or sorority house, but shall not include jails, hospitals,
nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
CONVALESCENT CENTER — A facility which is publicly or privately
operated and intended for long-term patient care due to human illness
or infirmity, including the elderly and developmentally disabled, normally
employing the services of skilled and licensed practitioners, excluding
hospitals.
CONVERSION (TO COMMERCIAL) — The redesign and change of
residential or other nonconforming structures to commercial use.
CONVERSION (TO RESIDENTIAL) — The redesign and change of existing
residential or nonresidential structures into a one-, two-family and
multifamily dwelling.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:526
COURT and COURTYARD — A space, open and unobstructed to the sky,
located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides
by walls of a building.
DANCE HALL, DISCOTHEQUE — An establishment intended primarily for
dancing and entertainment within an enclosed building, using either live or
electronically produced music, either open to the public or operated as a
private club open to members only.
DAY CARE, FAMILY — The keeping for part-time care and/or instruction,
whether or not for compensation, of six or less children or adults at any one
time within a dwelling, not including members of the family residing on the
premises. Domiciliary care homes are included in family day care. Also see
definition for "domiciliary care homes."
DAY CARE, GROUP — An establishment for the care and/or instruction,
whether or not for compensation, of seven or more persons at any one
time. Child nurseries, preschool and adult-care facilities are included in this
definition.
DECK — See definition of "patio" and "porch."
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an acre
of land, which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets
contained within the development.
DISTRICT or ZONE — A portion of the territory of the Borough within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements of various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DOMICILIARY CARE HOME — A premises certified by the local Area
Agency On Aging (AAA) for the purpose of providing a supervised living
arrangement in a homelike setting for a period exceeding 24 consecutive
hours to elderly and/or handicapped clients placed there by the AAA.
Domiciliary care homes are required to comply with the PA Department of
Aging permit regulations.
DWELLING — Any building, or portion thereof designed or used as the
residence of one or more persons. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed
to include mobile home park, rooming house, tourist home, hotel, hospital,
nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or other student
resident as defined herein.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof which contains
living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation as required by the Borough, for not more than one family or
a congregate residence for six or less persons.
A.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building, designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
B.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling unit, with kitchen
and sleeping facilities designed for occupancy by one family.
C.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:527
EFFICIENCY UNIT — A dwelling unit consisting of one room for living and
sleeping purposes, a bathroom, kitchen and closets directly off the principal
room.
ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS (EA) — The technical process of identifying
and evaluating the potential environmental effects of a specific project both
within impact category and as a whole. For existing nonresidential property,
an evaluation of possible on-site pollution may be included in the required
EA to identify potential hazards and brown field sites. A Phase I and/or
II study acceptable to the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania will satisfy the on-site pollution evaluation requirements.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
DWELLING, SEMIATTACHED — A semiattached building with not more
than two individual dwelling units which are entirely separated by
vertical walls. This is a building which utilizes a vertical common wall
between dwelling units for economy of lot use and building
construction.
D.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building designed or arranged to be
occupied by two families living independently, the structure having only
two dwelling units.
E.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME — A transportable dwelling structure,
intended for permanent occupancy for use by one family, contained in
one or two sections designed to be joined into one integral unit and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation and
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations; except for a travel
trailer as defined herein; and excluding such mobile home dwellings
or prefabricated homes or sections thereof which when assembled or
combined into a single unit are more than 19 feet in width, which meet
BOCA Building Code requirements and which no longer are readily
capable of being separated for repeated towing.
F.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-UNIT — A building or portion thereof designed
for occupancy by three or more families living independently in which
they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces.
Individual dwelling units may be owned as townhouses, condominiums,
or offered for rent. Dwelling units contained in such structures may also
include units commonly referred to as apartments, garden apartments
and quadraplex units.
G.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE AND/OR ROW HOUSE — A townhouse and
row house are special types of multiple-unit dwelling buildings and
therefore, for purposes of this chapter, are defined and regulated
separately. Townhouses and/or row houses are multiple-unit dwelling
buildings with each dwelling unit separated from one another by a
vertical wall(s) so that there is no other dwelling unit above or below
another dwelling unit. Dwelling units may be adjacent to one another.
H.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:528
FAMILY — Any individual, or two or more persons, all of whom are related
by blood, marriage, legal adoption or foster placement. A group of not more
than six persons, some of whom are not related as defined above, living
together as a single housekeeping unit shall also be considered to be a
family. A "family" shall not be deemed to include the occupants of a hotel,
motel, boarding house, rooming or lodging house, club, fraternity/sorority
or dormitory or patients at a temporary crisis or care center.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY OR HOME — The keeping for care and/or
instruction, whether or not for compensation, of six or less children or
adults at any one time within a dwelling, not including members of the
family residing on the premises. Domiciliary care homes are included in
family day care. Also see definition for "domiciliary care homes." and "day
care, family." Family care homes are not regulated by the PA Department of
Welfare until four or more individuals receive service and the facility then
is defined as a personal care facility or a domiciliary care home which is
regulated by the PA Department of Aging.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — Any outdoor barrier composed of fabricated materials which is
placed or arranged as a line of demarcation between lots, or to enclose a
lot or a part of a lot. For the purpose of this chapter, a fence is a boundary
line fence when the average center line of the fence is established on the lot
within two feet of a property and/or lot line. The height of any fence shall be
the distance measured from the existing grade of the natural surface to the
top of the fence.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal area of floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate,
FLOODPLAIN —
A lowland area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is
subject to partial or complete inundation.
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source. For the purpose of this chapter,
the one-hundred-year floodplain as defined in the Flood Insurance
Study for the Borough of Northampton prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(2)
A.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purpose
of this chapter, the floodway and approximated floodplain, as defined
in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Floodway Data Table
prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
B.
C. FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
D.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:529
from the center line of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks or
porches when covered by a roof.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts,
elevators, stairways, exterior walls and similar facilities.
FRONTAGE — The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way
measured at the front property line.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION) — The lowest point of elevation
of the existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building
and a line five feet from the building.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides resident services to six
or more individuals of whom one or more are unrelated. These individuals
are handicapped, aged or disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation and are
provided services to meet their needs. This category includes uses licensed
or supervised by any federal, state or county health/welfare agency, such as
group homes (all ages), halfway houses, resident schools, resident facilities
and foster or boarding homes.
HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM) — Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER — When referring to a tower used or to be used in
wireless communications, the distance measured from the finished grade
at the perimeter of the structure to the highest point of the tower or other
structure, including the base pad and any antenna. If the base of the tower
is not on ground level, the height shall include the base of the building or
other structure to which the tower is attached.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation which is permitted under the terms
of this chapter to be conducted in a residential dwelling unit as an accessory
use.
HOSPITAL — A building or part thereof used for the medical, psychiatric,
obstetrical or surgical care, on a twenty-four-hour basis, of four or more
inpatients. Hospital shall include general hospitals, mental hospitals,
tuberculosis hospitals, childrens' hospitals, and any such facilities providing
medical inpatient care.
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings designed to serve the public,
with one or more outside entrances which contains six or more permanent
bedrooms and which is designed, arranged and used for the overnight
lodging of travelers or for temporary occupancy of transients; and which
may include a public dining room and kitchen.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, for family use only
(noncommercial) with cages, pens etc.
JUNK — Includes scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead
or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, and bones, rags,
used cloth, used rubber, used machinery, used vehicles, used tools, used
appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates,
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:530
used pipe or pipe fittings, used tires, and other manufactured goods, any of
which are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in
their existing condition, but are subject to being dismantled or processed
for reclamation, salvage or recycling.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, primarily used
for the storage outside of a completely enclosed building, of junk, including
vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same, the deposit or storage
of two or more wrecked or broken motor vehicles for a period of two months
or longer, or the major parts of two or more such vehicles shall be deemed
to make the lot a "junkyard."
KENNEL — Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats over
four months of age are kept, for compensation or not.
KITCHEN — Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and
intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.
LANDSCAPING — The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas.
Landscape materials generally include naturally growing elements such
as grass, trees, shrubs and flowers. Landscape materials shall also be
permitted to include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features and
contouring the earth.
LODGE — See definition of "club."
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plot or
plat or otherwise permitted by law, and to be used, developed or built upon
a unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets or alleys
at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135°. The point of intersection of the street
lot lines is the "corner."
A.
LOT, DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
B.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the public
right-of-way including alleys.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
(2)
C.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot
line.
(1)
(2) LOT LINE, STREET — A lot line separating the lot from a street.
D.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:531
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MOBILE HOME — See definition of "dwelling, mobile home."
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park
owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL — A building, or group of buildings, whether detached or
interconnected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units,
designed primarily for transient travelers, and provided with accessory offstreet
parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designed as
tourist courts, motor lodges, auto courts and other similar uses.
MULTIFAMILY — See definition of "dwelling, multifamily."
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Northampton.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot whose width, area or other dimensions did
not conform to the regulations when this chapter became effective.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
lawfully existing at the time this chapter became effective, which was
designed, erected or structurally altered whereby it does not conform to the
zoning regulations of the zone in which it is located. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
OBSCENE — The exhibition or dissemination of materials, shows or
services which contain sexually explicit nudity and/or sexual conduct as
defined later herein. If such use comprises more than 20% of the stock-intrade
of the premises or 20% of the show time, from time to time, then the
obscene use also constitutes an adult facility.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — The exhibition or dissemination by sale, loan,
or otherwise of explicit sexual materials of an obscene nature; if such
use comprises more than 20% of the stock-in-trade of the premises or
constitutes, from time to time, the primary or major attraction to the
premises.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the two side lot lines measured at
the required setback line.
E.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:532
OPEN SPACE — Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures,
parking areas, streets, alleys or required yards. Open space shall be
permitted to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features,
patios, and recreational areas and facilities.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES — Parking lots or structures located along
public transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private
automobile to mass transit of to encourage carpooling for purposes of
commuting, or for access to recreation areas.
PARKING FACILITIES — Parking facilities shall consist of paved outdoor
areas used for the storage of vehicles or of specially designed buildings or
garages used for the same purposes. Private parking facilities are those
which are restricted to use by persons resident on the premises or residing
in the immediate vicinity of such facility or by their guests. Public parking
facilities are those which are open to the public as an accommodation for
customers, clients or visitors.
PARKING GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building, other than a private
garage, used for the parking of automobiles with or without a fee.
PARKING LOT — An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
automobiles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE — A space within a building or private or
public parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work
areas, for the parking of an automobile.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIALS —
Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film,
or other similar visual representation of image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sadomasochistic abuse; or
(1)
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, videotape, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any manner
enumerated in Subsection (1) above, or explicit and detailed verbal
excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse.
(2)
A.
OBSCENE NATURE —
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
(1)
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
materials of the type described hereinabove; and
(2)
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational, or scientific value.
(3)
Words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings given to
them under 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903 and any amendments, from time to
time, thereto.
(4)
B.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:533
PATIO — An area or courtyard located in the rear or side yard of the
principal structure, designed for outdoor living purposes; an accessory use
to a structure, which shall be completely unenclosed except for any side
which may adjoin a structure or for any fences, shrubs or hedges three feet
or less in height. Outdoor areas enclosed by a permanent roof or awning
shall be considered to be a structure.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Borough of Northampton authorizing
an applicant to undertake certain activities.
PERMITTED USE — Any use which does not require special action by the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board before a zoning permit
is granted by the Zoning Officer.
PERSON — A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns,
and includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agents of any of the aforesaid.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A premises in which food, shelter and personal
assistance supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for four
or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require
the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but who do require
assistance or supervision matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency or
medication prescribed by self-administration. Such homes are regulated
and licensed by the PA Department of Welfare. Also see "domiciliary care
home" definition for reference purposes only.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Northampton.
PORCH — A structure or part of a structure which is enclosed on one or
more sides by a fence or wall over three feet high or by a roof or awning
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration, or reconstruction of a structure is in
accordance with the provisions of the building code adopted by the
Borough of Northampton107 and authorizing an applicant to commence
with said construction, alteration or reconstruction. Such a permit shall
not be confused with a zoning permit or occupancy permit as required
under the terms of this chapter.
A.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit issued indicating that a proposed use,
building or structure is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a structure, or change in use of structure or parcel of
land indicating that the premises comply with the provisions of this
chapter and may be used for the purposes set forth in the occupancy
permit.
C.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Construction Codes, Art. II, Adoption of UCC.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:534
or a structure which would otherwise be classified as a patio or deck except
that it is one foot or more above the ground elevation.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers
or antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval is
current and not expired, or other tower or antenna lawfully installed in the
Borough of Northampton.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or most important use of a lot, parcel or
structure.
PUBLIC BUILDING OR FACILITY — Municipal, county, state or federal
government buildings or facilities designed, maintained or used by the
government or designed, maintained or used for public use which is
sponsored by such governments, except landfills and waste disposal areas
and facilities. Public buildings and facilities shall not include alternative
tower structures, antennas, backhaul networks or towers.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this act.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."108
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice given not more than 30 days and not less
than seven days in advance of any public hearing required by Act 247,
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.109 Such notice shall be
published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
at the hearing, and the notice shall state the place or places where copies of
items being considered may be examined. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATION VEHICLE (RV) — A vehicle unit, other than a mobile home,
whose gross floor area is less than 320 square feet, which is designed for
travel, recreational and vacation use, and which is either self-propelled,
mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. Examples include, but are not
limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifthwheel
trailer or van.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant, other than a solicitor, to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
108. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:535
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESORT — A business, situated on a lot containing 10 acres or more,
combining lodging, eating and recreational facilities as a single enterprise
offered to the public at large or any segment thereof, subject to the
requirements contained herein.
ROOMING OR BOARDING HOUSE — A building containing one or more
dwelling units in which at least two rooms are offered for rent, to adults
aged 18 years or older, payable in money or other consideration, whether
or not meals are furnished to occupants, and in which no transients are
accommodated and no public restaurant is maintained. A school or college
dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, membership club with residents and
other similar uses are not deemed to be a boarding or rooming house.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE ACADEMIC INSTITUTION — A premises that maintains
or conducts classes for the purpose of offering instruction for consideration,
profit or tuition. To five or more pupils at one time, or to 25 or more pupils
during the school year, the purpose of which is to educate an individual
generally or specifically or to prepare an individual for more advanced
study. These schools may include nursery and kindergarten, elementary and
secondary schools, special education schools, tutoring centers, education
testing and remedial centers. The PA Department of Education governs
most private academic schools.
SCREENING — Screening as required by this chapter shall consist of a
visual screen or obstruction of sufficient height (but not less than six feet
high) to effectively obscure the area being screened from adjoining uses.
Such a screen or obstruction shall consist of a suitable fence or wall or
of appropriate planting materials such as shrubs, hedges or trees located
within a buffer strip having a minimum width of five feet.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual,
or simulated, involving a person or persons, or a person or persons and
an animal, including acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, anilingus or physical contact with a person's nude or partially
denuded genitals, pubic area, perineum, anal region, or if such a person be
female, a breast.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT NUDITY — A sexually oriented and explicit showing
or exhibition, by any means or manner, which presents or exposes to the
viewer the following anatomical areas: the human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, buttocks or anal region, with less than a fully opaque covering;
the covered human male genitals in a discernible turgid state; the
postpubertal, full or partially developed human female breast with less than
fully opaque covering of a portion thereof below the top of the areola nipple.
SIGN — An advertising message, announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:536
maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement
or promotion of the interests of any person, entity, product or service,
including the sign structure, supports, lighting system and any attachments,
ornaments or other features used to draw the attention of observers.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold,
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is
affixed.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A provision of this chapter which may be granted
or denied by the Board pursuant to express standards and criteria
established in this chapter. Requests for such special exceptions shall be
decided by the Board after a hearing to determine compliance with said
standards and criteria and after review by the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL USE — Have the same meaning and be identical with "special
exception."
STORY and HALF STORY — That portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor, but excluding the basement or cellar, and the ceiling
next above it and having a vertical distance of not less than seven feet. Any
such portion of a building having a distance of less than seven feet shall be
considered to be a half story.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which provides the principal means of
access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed including a building, the use of which
requires permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something
having a permanent location on the ground, including stationary and
portable carports, porches and below-ground swimming pools.
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water having a
surface area of more than 80 square feet and/or a depth at any point greater
than two feet, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing and
constructed, installed, or maintained in or above the ground.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto. Such devices shall not be
deemed a public utility or public use.
TOWNHOUSE and/or ROW HOUSE — See definition of "dwelling,
townhouse and/or row house."
TRAVEL TRAILER — See definition of "recreation vehicle."
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:537
UTILITY — Equipment or facilities regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission and utilized for producing, generating, transmitting,
distributing or furnishing natural or artificial gas, electricity or steam for
the production of light, heat or power to or for the public for compensation;
diverting, developing, pumping, ponding and distributing or furnishing
water to or for the public for compensation; transporting passengers or
property as a common carrier; equipment or facilities for use as a canal,
turnpike, tunnel, bridge, wharf and the like for the public for compensation;
transporting or conveying natural or artificial gas, crude oil, gasoline or
petroleum products, materials for refrigeration of oxygen or nitrogen or
other fluid substance by pipeline or conduit for the public for compensation;
conveying or transmitting messages or communications by telephone or
telegraph or domestic public land mobile radio service including, but not
limited to, point-to-point microwave radio service for the public for
compensation; and sewage collection treatment or disposal for the public
for compensation utilities shall not include alternative tower structures,
antennas, backhaul networks or towers.
VARIANCE — The Board's authorized departure to a minor degree from the
text of this chapter in direct regard to a hardship peculiar to an individual
lot in accordance with the procedure set forth in this chapter.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal building or group
of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as herein permitted.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of
Northampton.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space, which lies between the principal
building or group of buildings and the front lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward exclusive of shrubs or fences.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between a principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except for accessory structures
as permitted in this chapter.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the
rear yard between a principal building and the nearest side lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
C.
§ 250-7 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-7
1:538
ARTICLE III
Establishment and Designation of Districts
§ 250-8. Establishment of districts.
§ 250-9. Zoning Map. [Amended 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 1113;
6-1-2006 by Ord. No. 1140; 9-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1189]
Said districts are bounded as shown on the map entitled "Borough of
Northampton Zoning Map," prepared, effective retroactively to the effective
date of Ord. No. 1137, adopted February 16, 2006, which map accompanies,
and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of
this chapter.111
§ 250-10. Interpretation of boundaries.
A. The Borough of Northampton is divided into the following districts:
CO Conservancy District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-3 Residential District
R-4 Residential District
C-1 Commercial Transition District
C-2 Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Industrial District
B. In addition to the above nine zoning districts, there are floodplain
overlay districts which shall also be applicable. The Borough has
adopted a separate Floodplain Management Ordinance.110 All specific
floodplain management regulations are contained in that separate
ordinance.
A. Designation of district boundaries. The district boundary lines are
intended generally to follow the center line of streets, the center line of
railroad rights-of-way, existing lot lines, the mean water level of
streams, and other waterways, or municipal boundary lines, all as
shown on the Zoning Map; but where a district boundary line does not
follow such a line, its position is shown on said Zoning Map by a specific
dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street center line or
other boundary line as indicated.
B. Determination of locations of boundaries. In case of uncertainty as to
the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the
110. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 125, Flood Damage Prevention.
111. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices. A Table of Zoning Map
Amendments is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10
1:539
§ 250-11. Intent and purpose of zoning districts.
The general intent and purpose for each of the zoning districts established
in § 250-3 above are as follows:
Zoning Officer shall request the Zoning Hearing Board to render its
determination with respect thereto; provided no boundary shall be
changed by the Zoning Hearing Board. Wherever this chapter states
more restrictive or less restrictive district, the above order of districts
shall apply with the first noted being the more restrictive and the last
the least restrictive.
C. Boundary tolerances. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held
in single and separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter,
the regulations applicable to the less restrictive district shall extend
over the portion of the lot in the more restrictive district a distance of
not more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary line.
A. CO Conservancy District. To establish and preserve areas for
watershed, flood control, forestry, cement quarry reclamation
settlement and the general conservation of the land with its flora and
fauna. Uses such as low-intensity outdoor recreation and other uses
that do not significantly change the natural character of the land or do
not attract large numbers of people would be compatible with this
intent.
B. R-1 Residential District. To establish and preserve the lowest-density
residential areas in the Borough for quiet single-family home
neighborhoods free from incompatible activities which would generate
distractive sights, sounds, traffic or which would in any way
compromise the privacy and serenity of the living environment for the
individual residential lots.
C. R-2 Residential District. To establish and preserve relatively low-density
residential areas in the Borough for single-family, two-family and
limited multifamily uses (three to eight units per structure) which are
protected in the same manner as the R-1 District above.
D. R-3 Residential District. To establish and preserve medium-density
residential areas where a variety of housing types, including single-,
two-family and multifamily uses, are protected in the same manner as
the R-1 District above.
E. R-4 Residential District. To establish and preserve a medium-density
single-, two-family and townhouse residential area where mobile home
parks could also be developed and which would be protected in the
same manner as the R-1 District above.
F. C-1 Commercial Transition District. To establish and preserve areas in
transition from residential to commercial so that the quality of the
human living environment and the business environment may be jointly
§ 250-10 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-11
1:540
considered, respected and preserved to the greatest extent possible
during the time of change in predominant land use for the area.
G. C-2 Commercial District. To establish and preserve compact business
areas where a variety of retail, office and service businesses would
receive priority consideration and protection. Residential uses already
in existence or well-planned mixed uses would be permitted to coexist
with the business uses. An attractive environment should be maintained
within which to do business and/or to reside.
H. I-1 Industrial District. To establish and preserve areas of light, limited
and/or low-intensity industrial land use activity. These types of areas
may include older, already developed industrial buildings on sites
where the scale of industrial and warehouse-type activity could be less
intense than the I-2 District.
I. I-2 Industrial District. To establish and preserve areas for a variety of
industrial uses, for certain commercial type uses and for farm and
related uses. All uses would be required to comply with Borough
performance standards. Permitted accessory and special uses would be
given priority. Other uses would be considered to be incompatible and
would not be permitted.
§ 250-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11
1:541

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 250-12. Schedules of regulations.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate use, reuse and
development in each district are set forth in the attached schedules which
are supplemented by other sections of this chapter.112
§ 250-13. Application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
§ 250-14. Floodplain regulation overlay.
A separate Northampton Floodplain Ordinance has been adopted by the
Borough Council of Northampton.113 The floodplain regulations from that
separate ordinance shall be considered to be an overlay of additional
regulations in addition to the zoning requirements.
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be
designed, used, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than as permitted in the district in which such building or
land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in
which such building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings be altered, enlarged
or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the
yard, lot area, and building location regulations hereinafter designated
for the district in which such building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building or any other lot.
112. Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14
1:543

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 250-15. Nonconforming uses and buildings.
Any legal and nonconforming use may be continued, repaired, maintained
and improved except as provided below:
A. Enlargement. Such nonconforming use or structure may not be
enlarged more than 50% of the existing floor area and/or lot area and
such enlargement shall not exceed the maximum height or maximum
building coverage requirements set forth in Schedule II for the district
in which such nonconforming use is located.114
B. Restoration. If any such nonconforming use is damaged, a permit for its
restoration or reconstruction may be obtained if such application is
filed within 90 days of the initial damage or destruction and if
restoration is completed within 12 months of the issuance of the permit.
C. Discontinuance. No such use may be reestablished after it has been
discontinued or vacated for a period of 12 months.
D. Change of use. A nonconforming use or structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use or structure only if such change is more
appropriate to the character of the district in which it is located as
determined by the Board. In general, a higher use (a use first appearing
in a higher zoning district in the Schedule I chart115) would be
considered less offensive than a use permitted in a lower zoning
district.
E. Termination. Certain types of nonconforming uses or structures which
present a special nuisance or hazardous condition shall be terminated
as follows:
(1) General nuisances. Upon a complaint registered by the Zoning
Officer from 50% of the property owners within 500 feet of the
nonconforming use, which use is considered to be a general
nuisance or a hazard to the health, safety, welfare and morals of
uses or structures adjoining such nonconforming use or uses, the
Board shall hold a public hearing and make a finding with respect
to the nuisance or hazardous condition which exists and shall
determine the necessity of terminating such nonconforming use.
Such uses shall be terminated within such reasonable time as shall
be determined by the Board as related to the reasonable
amortization of the capital investment in such uses, or as may be
provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
114. Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:545
§ 250-16. Lot regulations and permitted deviations from required
areas.
The minimum lot, yard and height requirements of Article IV shall prevail in
all cases, except as follows:
A. Existing nonconforming lots.
(1) In any zone where a nonconforming lot exists, the Zoning Hearing
Board may permit development of the nonconforming lot if the
applicant can present evidence that any proposed development on
the nonconforming lot shall conform to all minimum yard and
height of building regulations as prescribed by Schedule II, the
Zoning Schedule of Bulk and Coverage Controls, of this chapter.116
In addition, any proposed development requiring on-lot sewage
disposal must produce evidence to the Hearing Board that the
nonconforming lot qualifies to receive a sewage disposal permit
and that the lot meets the minimum state standards and
requirements for safe and healthy disposal of such waste. The
burden of proof for all aspects of this application rests with the
applicant, not the Hearing Board.
(2) Upon review by the Board, the zoning application for a subdivision
which would create a nonconforming lot maybe approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board for the purpose of dividing an existing
attached single-family structure, a two- or a multifamily structure
into separate ownership parcels of land located under the separate
dwelling units.
B. Changes to conforming uses and buildings on a nonconforming lot.
(1) Any conforming use or building on a nonconforming lot may be
repaired, maintained, restored or rebuilt to the same dimensions
existing at the time that the use or building was originally
constructed or started.
(2) Any enlargement or addition to any conforming use on a
nonconforming lot must comply in all respects with the regulations
of this chapter, except that in the case of any enlargement or
addition of buildings legally existing at the effective date of this
chapter, the maximum building coverage requirements of Schedule
II shall not apply; provided, however, that all of the off-street
parking and loading requirements of this chapter shall be complied
with for the entire building including the existing conforming use
plus any enlargement or addition. In such a case, the maximum
building coverage for the enlarged section shall not exceed 80% for
commercial and manufacturing buildings or 60% for residential
buildings.
116. Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-16 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-16
1:546
C. Changes to conforming uses and buildings on a conforming lot. Any
conforming use or building may be repaired, maintained, restored or
rebuilt up to the same dimensions existing at the time that this chapter
was adopted. Any enlargement of a structure which houses an existing
conforming use, on the same lot, must comply in all respects with the
regulations of this chapter, except that, subject to Zoning Hearing
Board approval, an existing structure legally not in conformance with a
side or rear yard setback may be enlarged to line up with and be as
wide or as deep as the principal structure on the lot.
D. Height limitations. District height limitations shall not apply to church
spires, cupolas and domes, monuments, water and/or cooling towers,
chimneys, smokestacks, silos, elevators, fire towers, flagpoles, radio
and television towers, masts and aerials (not satellite dishes), public
utility poles and towers, bulkheads, gas tanks, and parapet walls
extending not more than 40% above the limiting height of the building.
No tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant purposes.
No sign, name plate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney, tower,
tank or other structure which extends above the height limitation of the
zone district.
E. Lot width. The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured along
the minimum building setback line as required for the district in which
it is located.
F. Front yard exception. When an unimproved lot is situated between two
improved lots, each having a principal building within 20 feet of the
side lot line of the unimproved lot, the front yard may be reduced to a
depth equal to that of the greater front yard of the two adjoining lots;
provided, however, that it may not be reduced to below 10 feet.
G. Front yard exception for corner lots. When an unimproved corner lot is
situated adjacent to two improved lots, then the front yard of the corner
lot may be reduced to the respective front yard of the adjacent lots
along the designated front of the corner lot. However, neither the front
or the side yard shall be reduced to less than 10 feet.
H. Side yard exception. When an unimproved lot having 50 feet or less
frontage is situated between two improved lots, then the side yards of
the existing vacant lot shall be not less in width than the respective
adjacent side yards in the event a dwelling is erected.
I. Projections into yards. Projections into required yards shall be
permitted as follows, except that in the residential districts, in no case
shall a structure or projection, except for patios, be located closer than
10 feet to any side lot line, 10 feet to any rear lot line or 15 feet to any
front lot line.
(1) Bay windows, carports, fireplaces, fire escapes, chimneys,
uncovered stairs and landings, and balconies and cornices,
canopies, marquees, eaves, or other architectural features not
§ 250-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:547
§ 250-17. Unique lots and building locations.
§ 250-18. Accessory structures and uses.
required for structural support may project into the required side,
front, or rear yard not more than a total of two feet.
(2) Accessory structures may project into yards as set forth in
§ 250-18A.
(3) Patios may be located in the required side and rear yards not closer
than three feet to any adjacent property line, except that patios
constructed on existing nonconforming lots may line up with and be
as wide as the principal structure on the lot.
A. Two or more buildings on a lot. Two or more principal buildings located
on a parcel in single ownership shall conform to all the requirements of
this chapter which would normally apply to each building if each were
on a separate lot.
B. Lots fronting on an alley. Where individual lots exist at the effective
date of this chapter with frontage only on an alley, the alley shall be
construed as a street for application of all the requirements of this
chapter and the district in which said lots are located.
C. Through lots. Where a lot extends from street to alley, then the front lot
line shall be the street lot line and the rear lot line shall be the line
separating the lot from the alley.
D. Side yard of a corner lot. The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a
street shall be equal to at least 1/2 of the required front yard for that
street except as per § 250-16F of this chapter.
E. Corner obstruction to vision. No obstruction to vision (other than an
existing building, post, column, public utility pole or tower, or tree)
between 30 inches in height and eight feet in height shall be erected or
maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street
intersection, created by the right-of-way of each street extended to a
point, and a line drawn between two points each located 30 feet from
the street intersection. All plant materials shall be kept trimmed to
ensure uninterrupted vision for motor vehicle traffic.
A. Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall conform with the
minimum yard regulations established in Article IV, except as permitted
below:
(1) Unattached structure accessory to residential buildings. Structures
accessory to residential buildings which are not attached to a
principal structure may be erected within the required side and
rear yards of a principal structure, provided that they conform with
the following:
§ 250-16 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:548
(a) Maximum height: one and one-half stories or 15 feet in height.
(b) Distance from side lot line: not less than four feet from the side
lot line, except in the case of corner lots where the full side
yard as specified in § 250-17E shall be maintained and except
that a common or joint garage which is not part of a principal
building may be erected on or along the common boundary line
of the adjoining lots. However, each garage must have at least
one side yard.
(c) Distance from rear lot line: not less than eight feet from the
rear lot line.
(d) Distance from principal structure: not less than 10 feet from a
principal structure, except for small (120 square feet or less
"footprint") accessory, shed structures which shall be no less
than two feet from a principal or other accessory building.
(2) Unattached structures accessory to nonresidential building. Such
accessory structure shall comply with front and side yard
requirements for the principal structure and shall have a minimum
rear yard of at least 10 feet.
(3) Fences and walls. Unless specifically noted, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to fences, terraces or walls less than six feet
in height above the average natural grade, nor to terraces, steps,
unroofed porches or other similar features not over three feet high
above the level of the floor of the ground story.
B. Home occupations accessory use. A home occupation may be permitted
as either a "permitted use" or as a "special exception use" as provided
herein. Any customary home occupation or avocation shall be subject to
the following requirements:
(1) General regulations.
(a) Where permitted. The home occupation shall be carried on
wholly indoors and within a dwelling or other structure
accessory thereto. Home occupations are not permitted in the
CO nor R-1 Residential Districts.
(b) Evidence of use. There shall be no use of show windows or
display or advertising visible outside the premises to attract
customers or clients other than home occupation
announcement sign as permitted in Subsection J et seq. No
external alterations, additions or changes to the structure shall
be permitted in order to accommodate or facilitate a home
occupation.
(c) Outdoor storage. There shall be no exterior storage of
materials.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:549
(d) Retail or wholesale sales. No articles shall be sold on the
premises.
(e) Deliveries. Frequent and repetitive servicing by commercial
vehicles for supplies and materials shall not be permitted. All
deliveries shall be made by vehicles which have no more than
three axles. More than one delivery per week will be
considered frequent and repetitive.
(f) Participants. The home occupation shall be operated only by
members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling
except for an accessory office home occupation. Home
occupation accessory office may include realtor, insurance
salesman, physician, lawyer, clergyman, teacher, or other
professional of like character, provided that not more than two
employees, assistants or associates in addition to the resident
practitioner shall be employed on the premises.
(g) Extent of use. The floor area devoted to a home occupation
shall not be more than 25% of the ground floor area of the
principal residential structure, excluding garage.
(2) "Permitted use" home occupations.
(a) Includes, but is not limited to, the following: home offices, art
studio teaching not more than four pupils simultaneously or, in
the case of musical instruction, not more than a single pupil at
a time; seamstress, handicrafts, or other like activity; barber
shop and beauty parlor limited to serving one patron at a time;
and greenhouse.
(b) Permitted use home occupations shall be subject to the
following additional specific regulations:
[1] They shall be restricted to occupations which do not
generate more than six customers, visitors or clientele in
any one hour.
[2] They shall not detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood or exhibit any influences which are
detrimental to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the
residents of the neighborhood.
[3] They shall comply with all off-street parking requirements
of § 250-19.
[4] All such home occupations shall be located within the
principal residential structure or other approved
accessory structure such as a garage, barn or residential
storage building.
(c) Any noise generated by the home occupation shall not exceed
65 decibels at the home occupation property line. This
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:550
standard should be applied with windows open if the home
does not have an air conditioning system. See § 250-21,
Performance requirements, for sound measurement standards.
(3) Special exception use home occupation.
(a) Except for a permitted home office, any resident wishing to
operate a home occupation which requires the employment of
more than one nonresident person may apply for a permit
which shall be subject to all of the special exception use
procedures of this chapter. In such cases, the Planning
Commission shall review said application to determine the
following before making a recommendation to the Zoning
Hearing Board:
[1] That the home occupation is in conformity with all of the
other applicable provisions set forth in Subsection B(1)
above.
[2] That, beyond a reasonable doubt, the nature of the home
occupation and of the traffic and clientele to be generated
shall remain relatively stable and shall not grow to a point
where it may detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood or exhibit any other adverse influences on
the neighborhood.
(b) Funeral parlors, antique shops, tourist homes, and restaurants
shall be approved on a case-by-case basis as a special
accessory use by the Zoning Hearing Board. The procedures
for application, review and approval of special uses shall apply
to these uses.
(4) Application for home occupation. All applicants for special
exception use permits to undertake a home occupation shall submit
the following information to the Zoning Officer:
(a) A complete description of the nature and operation of the home
occupation.
(b) The type of use, product or service produced or rendered.
(c) The names of the residents who will operate the home
occupation.
(d) The number of additional employees or other nonresident
personnel, if any, to be utilized by the home occupation.
(e) The portion of the residential or accessory structure to be
devoted for the use of the home occupation.
(f) Any building or structural modifications, signs or other
physical changes required to the interior or the exterior of the
structure.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:551
(g) The expected maximum number of customers, visitors or
clientele expected to be served by the home occupation during
any one hour and the number of hours and schedule of
operations when home occupations shall be open to the public.
(h) A description or plan indicating how compliance will be
achieved with off-street parking requirements.
(i) A certification by the applicant that the home occupation shall
not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood
and that all of the facts submitted with the application are true
and correct and that any incorrect information submitted shall
be cause for the Borough to require cessation of the home
occupation.
(j) A certification and agreement by the applicant that the home
occupation will be discontinued if changes occur in the
character of the operation so that it no longer complies with
the requirements of this chapter.
C. Home gardening, nurseries and greenhouses. Home gardening and
accessory structures used for nurseries or as greenhouses are
permitted in residential areas, provided they are used by the residents
for noncommercial purposes, except in compliance with the home
occupations provisions set forth above, and provided further that these
uses shall not include the outdoor storage of equipment and supplies.
D. Dormitory accessory use. An accessory building for the residency of
students, religious orders, teachers, or others engaged in the primary
activity of the institution where individuals need to live on the site. The
density in such areas shall be based on persons per acre, since
dormitories are not family dwellings. The following standards shall
apply:
(1) Habitable area. Each dormitory resident shall have a minimum of
180 square feet of living/sleeping space within the building.
(2) Density requirements. The net density of the dormitory area shall
not exceed 64 persons per acre of the lot.
(3) Parking requirement. Dormitories shall have the same requirement
as accessory dwelling units in Schedule III of this chapter.117
E. Outside storage or display accessory use.
(1) Permitted uses. Outside storage or display, other than storage as a
primary use of the land, necessary but incidental to the normal
operation of a primary use, subject to the following additional
provisions:
117. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:552
(a) No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas
intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required parking
areas, and no part of the required front yard shall be occupied
by outside storage or display.
(b) Outside storage and display areas shall occupy an area of less
than half the existing building coverage.
(c) Outside storage and display areas shall be shielded from view
from the public streets and adjacent lots.
(2) Special exception uses. Uses requiring more substantial amounts of
land for storage or display may be exempt from the provisions of
Subsection E(1)(b) and (c) above when granted as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such uses shall be subject
to the following additional provisions:
(a) Neither the principal use nor the outside storage and display
use shall encroach upon the minimum required yards and
buffer yards of the district.
(b) In particular, uses appropriate for consideration under this
provision include, but are not limited to, public or private
educational institutions, churches, office buildings, motor
vehicle sales, and extraction of stone, sand or gravel.
(c) Among the uses that shall not be considered appropriate for
inclusion under this provision are retail stores, repair shops,
gasoline service stations, automobile repair garage, sale of
automobile accessories, wholesale business and storage,
contractor offices and shops, large retail stores and crafts.
F. Temporary accessory structure. A temporary permit may be issued for
structures or uses necessary during construction or other special
circumstances of a nonrecurring nature, subject to the following
additional provisions:
(1) Time limit. The time period of the initial permit shall be six months.
This permit may be renewed for three-month time periods.
(2) Nonconforming structures. Temporary nonconforming structures
or uses shall be subject to authorization by the Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer shall use the BOCA codes as a basis for his
decision.118 He may request advice or a decision from the Zoning
Hearing Board at his discretion.
(3) Removal of structure. Such structure or use shall be removed
completely upon expiration of the permit without cost to the
Borough.
118. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 105, Construction Codes, Art. II, Adoption of UCC.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:553
G. Off-street parking accessory use. Off-street parking is subject to the
provisions and requirements of § 250-19 of this chapter. Boats and
other recreation vehicles (RVs) may only be parked in the rear yard of
the property occupied by the RV owner. No RV may be occupied while
parked as an accessory use. No unlicensed vehicles nor large
commercial vehicle of 25 feet or longer shall be parked on a residential
zoning district lot except within a suitably designed structure.
H. Fence and wall accessory uses.
(1) Permitted accessory uses may include fabricated or natural
barriers, dividers, fences, terraces and walls of six feet or less in
height with the height measured from the average grade of the lot
in the vicinity of the fence and they shall conform with the
following:
(a) Maximum height. Except for the I-1, I-2 and C-2 Districts,
fences, partitions or walls shall not exceed six feet in height
above the natural grade, except that front yard fences shall not
exceed four feet in height, nor shall front yard fences obstruct
vision of oncoming traffic as defined by § 250-17E of this
chapter.
(b) Setback requirements.
[1] Rear yard fences shall be set back a minimum of six feet
from the rear property line where they abut a street or
alley. Corner lot fences shall not be located closer than 10
feet to the curbline, nor shall these fences obstruct vision
at the corner as defined by § 250-17E of this chapter.
[2] A side yard fence may be constructed along or up to the
side property line, provided that poles and all fence parts
and vegetative growth will not encroach on adjacent
property with a common fence provided for below. When
properties do not abut an alley or street in the rear, fences
may be installed according with the requirement for side
yard fences above.
[3] A side yard fence of up to six feet in height may be
constructed from the rear yard fence setback as defined
above to the front yard setback line as defined by the
minimum front yard dimension requirements in Schedule
II of this chapter for the appropriate zoning district.119
(c) Common fences. Common fences may be erected on the
property line with the written consent of both owners.
(2) No fence shall be constructed or maintained in the vicinity of any
street intersection or driveway entrance which provides an
119. Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:554
obstruction to vision, thereby creating potential vehicular safety
hazards. An "obstruction to vision" is defined as any fence which
obstructs vision between a height of 30 inches and eight feet above
the center line grade of the adjoining street or streets, within a
distance of 30 feet from the point of intersection of intersecting
streets as measured back along the street right-of-way lines from
their point of intersection.
I. Private outdoor swimming pools. A single private outdoor swimming
pool per dwelling unit is permitted as an accessory use to a residential
structure, provided that such swimming pool is for the private use of
the residents of the dwelling unit or for their guests.
(1) Pool location. A private outdoor pool may be located within the
required rear or side yards for the district in which the pool is to be
located, except that no portion of the body of water in the pool shall
be located closer than 10 feet from any alley or street, nor closer to
the property line than six feet and no portion of any walks or
accessory pool appurtenances surrounding the body of water shall
be closer than four feet to any property line.
(2) Required fence.
(a) All pools shall be surrounded and enclosed by a four foot high
fence structurally suitable to deter direct access to the body of
water in the pool. Such a fence shall not have openings, holes
or gaps therein larger than four inches in width or, if larger
than four inches in width, no larger than four inches in length
except on doors or gates; provided, however, that if a picket
fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension of the
opening between pickets shall not exceed four inches,
provided, further, that a dwelling house or accessory building
may be used as part of such a fence.
(b) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed
to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely
closed at all times when not in actual use; provided, however,
that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and
forming any part of the enclosure herein above required need
not be so equipped.
(c) Fences shall be constructed of weather resistive materials and
shall be assembled or fabricated with sufficient rigidity to
prevent any substantial alteration or deformation of the lawful
openings, holes or gaps.
(d) The sides of a pool constructed above the ground level shall be
considered to meet the requirements for a fence preventing
direct access to the pool, provided that such sides of the pool
are at least four feet high and provided further that any stairs,
steps or ladders used to reach the water surface of the pool
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:555
shall be removable or capable of being folded up or secured
in a way which will prevent their use when the pool is not in
operation by the residents of the property or their guests.
(3) Required permits.
(a) Permits shall be required for new, enlarged or altered pools 10
feet or greater in diameter and capable of holding three or
more feet of water.
(b) A Northampton Borough electrical permit shall also be
required. Plans shall be required as part of the permit
application process. Plans shall accurately show dimensions
and construction of pool and appurtenances and properly
established distances to lot lines, buildings, walks and fences;
details of water supply system, drainage and water disposal
systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming
pool.
(4) Surface cleaning. All swimming pools shall be provided with a
recirculating skimming device to remove scum and foreign matter
from the surface of the water. Where skimmers are used, there
shall be at least one skimming device for each 1,000 square feet of
surface area or fraction thereof.
(5) Inspection. No swimming pool constructed pursuant to the
issuance of a permit provided for herein shall be used until its
construction, facilities, enclosures, gates, and electrical devices
have been inspected and approved by the Building Inspector and
Electrical Inspector.
(6) Nuisance. No person shall make any noise at a swimming pool if the
noise unreasonably annoys the occupiers of adjoining property.
J. Signs and billboards.
(1) Scope and applicability.
(a) This section recognizes that signs perform an important
function by identifying residences and businesses and that
minimum control of signs is necessary to promote the health,
safety and general welfare by lessening hazards to pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, by preserving property values, by
preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a
blighting influence upon residential, business and industrial
uses, by preventing signs from reaching such excessive size
that they obscure one another to the detriment of all
concerned, and by securing certain fundamentals of design for
the Borough.
(b) The term "sign" shall mean and include any permanent or
temporary structures or part thereof, or any device attached,
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:556
painted or represented directly or indirectly on a structure or
other surface that shall display or include any letter, word,
insignia, flag or representation used, as, or which is the nature
of, an advertisement, announcement, visual communication,
direction or is designed to attract the eye, or bring the subject
to the attention of the public. Flags of any governmental unit or
branch or of any charitable or religious organization, interior
signs not visible from a public right-of-way or adjoining
property, and cornerstones built into or attached to a wall
of a building (erection or commemorating a person or event,
official notices of any court or public office, legal notices
posted pursuant to law and public service company signs as
aids to safety or service) are excluded.
(c) In all permitted districts, signs may be erected, altered,
maintained, used, removed or moved only in compliance with
the provisions of this Section and other regulations of the
Borough relating to the erection, alteration, maintenance, use,
removal or moving of signs and similar devices.
(d) All signs shall require the issuance of a sign permit before
erection or replacement unless Borough Council, by resolution,
specifically exempts certain signs in locations from this
requirement. All signs must comply with all of the regulations
contained herein, regardless of whether a permit is required.
No permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a
sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and
periodic changes of copy.
(e) Signs in the districts existing at the time of passage of this
chapter and which do not conform to the requirements of the
shapter shall be considered nonconforming signs, and once
removed, shall be replaced only with conforming signs;
however, nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired
(including lighting), provided such repainted or repaired sign
does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign. Copy may
also be changed. Nonconforming signs in the business and
industrial districts may be continued and may be replaced
provided the signs do not violate additional regulations of this
chapter. New business signs in residential districts shall be
governed by the sign provisions of that district.
(f) No sign shall be permitted in any ward except as hereafter
provided and shall be erected and maintained only when in
compliance with the provisions in § 250-18K hereafter.
K. Commercial and industrial signs.
(1) Wall signs.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:557
(a) Shall be limited to one per establishment and shall be painted
on or attached to the building pertaining to the use carried on
within the building.
(b) Shall not project more than 15 inches from the face of the wall.
(c) Sign display area for wall-mounted signs shall be determined
by the following formula: two square feet of sign display area
per lineal foot of building frontage. Maximum sign display area
is 150 square feet for wall-mounted signs.
(d) For buildings with frontage on two streets, either frontage may
be used to compute maximum permitted size for signs and the
sign shall be displayed on the side of whichever frontage was
used in the computation. Wall signs may be permitted on both
sides if a freestanding sign is used.
(e) Business signs are permitted in business and industrial
districts in accordance with the following regulations:
Whenever such signs are to be erected in and over an open lot
where the business is not conducted in a building, such as a
used car lot, then the total sign area on any side of that lot shall
not exceed an area equal to three feet times the length of that
portion of said lot that would be occupied by a building if it
were erected in accordance with the zoning code applicable to
the area in which the lot is located; provided further, that the
minimum height to the bottom of such open air signs shall be
10 feet above the basic grade and no more than 25 feet above
grade. If not projecting more than three inches from a wall of
the building, the sign need not conform to the height limit.
Where more than one business or industry is located in a single
building, then the total area of all signs displayed shall not
exceed 50 square feet or 10% of the area of the largest exterior
wall surface of the side of the building on which the sign or
signs are to be placed, whichever is the greater.
(f) Signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling trespassing upon
particular premises or indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, may be erected and maintained,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) Shall be limited to one per business establishment. A
freestanding sign may be erected to serve a group of business
establishments in a building. There shall be only one
freestanding sign for each building, regardless of the number
of businesses conducted in said building.
(b) Sign display area shall be limited to one square foot for each
lineal foot of lot frontage with a maximum of 150 feet of sign
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:558
display area for freestanding signs, maximum area, both faces:
300 square feet.
(c) Shall be set back at least five feet from the street line, except
for business parking signs as provided in and signs for service
stations shall not be located within any street right-of-way.
(3) Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted.
L. Signs in residential districts. The following types of signs are permitted
in all residential districts as follows:
(1) Identification and professional signs. Identification and
professional signs bearing the name of the person or persons on the
premises and said profession, providing the above signs shall not
exceed four square feet in area.
(2) Multifamily dwellings. For multifamily dwellings and for buildings
other than dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding six
square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the
building and the name of the management may be displayed,
provided that on a corner lot, two such signs (one facing each
street), shall be permitted.
(3) Signs of schools, churches, parish houses. Signs of schools,
churches, parish houses or other institutions of a similar public or
semipublic nature may be erected and maintained, provided: the
size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and not
more than one such sign is placed on a property, unless such
property fronts upon more than one street, in which event two such
signs may be erected, one on each frontage.
(4) Temporary signs. Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of
the same lot or building on which it is placed; provided that the
above signs shall not exceed six square feet in area, shall not be
illuminated; shall not project beyond the property lines; and not
more than one sign shall be located for each frontage, provided
that it shall be maintained and removed after consummation of a
lease or sale transaction.
(5) Development signs. Development signs not exceeding 20 square
feet; not more than one sign is placed upon any property for each
500 feet of frontage on which the sign is actually placed. Any such
sign shall be maintained and removed by the developer after
consummation of a lease or sale transaction.
(6) Artisans' signs. Signs of mechanics, painters, and other artisans
may be erected and maintained during the period such persons are
performing work on the premises on which such signs are erected
provided, the size thereof is not in excess of 12 square feet; and
such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:559
(7) Temporary signs.
(a) Any person wishing to erect a temporary sign, used for
announcing special commercial, public or institutional events,
shall secure a permit from the Bureau of Planning, Zoning and
Development. That fee for said permit shall be $10 and shall be
valid for a period of 30 days. Permits may be renewed once
within the same calendar year and 90 days shall elapse from
original issuance date to date of renewal.
(b) In addition to the permit fee, the applicant shall pay a $50
deposit, which shall be refundable only in the event that the
temporary sign is removed at the end of the aforesaid thirtyday
period. Temporary sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area.
(c) Election campaign signs and signs advertising special events
for charitable organizations shall be exempt from the above
permit and deposit requirements; said signs, however, shall be
removed immediately after the election or charitable event.
(8) Real estate signs. Real estate signs, including signs advertising the
sale or rental of premises, are permitted provided the area of one
side of any sign shall not exceed 12 square feet; and signs
indicating the location and direction of premises in the process of
development may be permitted, providing the area of one side of
any such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Real estate "open
house" signs will be permitted only when the house is opened for
inspection. All signs shall be maintained and removed immediately
after consummation of a lease or sale agreement.
(9) Public utility signs. Public utility signs required in connection with
the identification, operation, or protection of a public utility, are
permitted, provided that the area of one side of any such sign shall
not exceed four square feet.
(10) Automotive service stations. Automotive service stations, whose
principal business is the sale of automotive fuel, may display signs
in addition to those herein above authorized. Such additional signs
shall not exceed three in number, each having a total aggregate
display area, including the sign frame and surrounding surfaces, or
not more than 16 square feet on each side. The top of such signs
shall not extend in height more than five feet above the finished
grade of the gasoline service station. Such signs may be fixed or
portable but shall not be located nearer to the street on any side
than the gasoline pump islands that are nearest such street. Such
signs shall not be subject to permits.
(11) Exit and entrance signs. "Exit" and "entrance" signs free of any
advertising for driveways shall be limited to three square feet per
face. These signs shall not be included in total sign area permitted.
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:560
(12) Official traffic signs. Official traffic signs shall be in conformity with
prescribed Pennsylvania Department of Transportation usage as
set forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and other official,
federal, state, county and Borough governmental signs.
(13) Trespassing signs. Signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed two square feet.
(14)Home occupation. Signs for identification of permitted home
occupation, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
four square feet.
M. General regulations.
(1) No sign shall be erected containing information on it which states
or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not
permitted under the provisions of this chapter in the zone in which
the property to which the sign relates is located.
(2) On-site signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product
no longer available shall be removed or changed to advertise the
new use or product immediately after cessation of the original use.
Signs once removed shall be replaced only by signs in conformance
with this chapter.
(3) No sign shall be placed in such a position that it may be hazardous
to traffic.
(4) No sign other than official traffic signs shall be erected within or
projecting over the right-of-way line.
(5) The overall height of any sign shall be limited to 35 feet from
ground level.
(6) Signs shall be erected in conformity with side and rear yard
requirements of the district in which the sign is located, except no
sign or advertising structure shall be erected or placed closer than
50 feet to a side or rear lot line in any residential zone.
(7) Setbacks shall conform with the required front yard of a principal
use in such district except as follows:
(a) Identification signs and real estate signs may be erected no
less than 10 feet from the established right-of-way line of any
street or highway, provided such sign or bulletin board does
not obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections.
(b) Land sales signs shall be erected only upon the property for
sale or being developed and shall be set back from the street
right-of-way at least one foot for each square foot of sign area.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:561
(c) Not more than one land sales sign shall be placed along a
single road frontage on any property in single and separate
ownership, provided that not more than two such signs may be
permitted in any single development.
(d) Commercial or industrial signs in a C-2 zone may be erected
not less than 25 feet from the established property line,
provided such sign does not obstruct traffic visibility. For the
purpose of this chapter, the property line shall be defined as
the legal right-of-way line.
(8) All signs and advertising structures as hereinafter modified may be
illuminated internally or by reflected light, provided the source of
light is not directly visible, except by neon tubes, and is so arranged
as to reflect away from the adjoining premises and provided that
such illumination shall not be so placed as to cause confusion or a
hazard to traffic or conflict with traffic control signs or lights. No
floodlights or spotlights shall be mounted higher than 25 feet above
the ground level.
(9) No sign shall be a flashing or beacon-ray type. Time and
temperature signs are permissible. Temporary flashing signs,
floodlights, promotional or advertising flags, banners, twirling,
rotating, "A" type, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons and an
existing business for special occasions not more than four times a
year in a commercial or industrial district for a period of not more
than a total of 15 days. At no other time shall such device be
permitted.
(10) Removal of signs. Portable or temporary signs in existence at the
effective date of this section which do not comply with the
provisions of this section and all other signs heretofore erected or
displayed without legal authorization shall be removed within 10
days after the delivery of written notice to that effect by the
Building Inspector to the owner or occupant of the premises on
which such signs are located.
(11)No roof sign shall project beyond the exterior wall or walls.
Lighting reflectors for these signs may project beyond the face of
the sign no more than four feet.
(12) Exemptions. Public notices by governmental bodies, traffic control
signs, and other official signs and notices are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
(13)No sign, except traffic directional signs, shall appear in or on any
other location except on the premises or property of the business or
individual so advertised.
(14) Any sign or billboard destroyed or damaged sufficiently as to
require dismantling or replacement, by any cause whatsoever, shall
not be rebuilt or shall not reoccupy its previous space except in
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:562
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it was
located.
(15) When no border is used to enclose a wall sign, a rectangle will be
drawn around the perimeter of the attached letters and symbols at
a height of the tallest letter or symbol to form the enclosure and the
area so enclosed shall not exceed 150 square feet.
(16) All sign provisions of this chapter shall apply to smokestacks, water
towers and other similar structures.
(17) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's
primary purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in itself, shall be
considered a freestanding sign.
(18) All signs, including electrical signs, shall be constructed of durable
material and kept in good condition and repair, shall be subject to
the construction and performance criteria of the applicable
Borough codes and ordinances and will be enforced by the Building
and Zoning Officer of the Borough of Northampton.
N. National advertising signs (billboards).
(1) Definition. A billboard is a panel-type sign with a display area
greater than 30 square feet, generally mounted on a
superstructure which directs the attention of the general public to
a business, commodity, service or form of entertainment
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises.
(2) Permitted zones. Billboards shall be permitted only in commercial
and industrial zoning districts and in accordance with the
conditions listed herein.
(3) Location requirements. Billboards shall be:
(a) Set back at a minimum distance of 35 feet from the right-ofway
line of any street, road, or highway or other public way;
(b) A minimum of 300 feet from residential districts;
(c) A minimum of 100 feet from any building or structure, except
that there shall be a minimum of 600 feet between billboard
structures. If a building is constructed after a billboard has
been erected which then violates this distance requirement,
the billboard shall not be considered nonconforming, and such
billboard shall be permitted to remain as a legal permitted use.
Special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board to a minimum of 300 feet between billboard structures
in undeveloped areas.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:563
(d) Billboards shall not be erected parallel to or at an angle of less
than 45° to any right-of-way, nor shall they be permitted on
buildings or in utility easements.
(4) Size. Billboards shall be limited to one panel, two display faces per
structure. Maximum sign display area is 360 square feet per face.
Special exceptions may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board
up to 600 square feet per face in undeveloped areas.
(5) Height. The top of the billboard shall not be higher than 35 feet
above ground level and the bottom thereof shall be sufficiently high
to provide adequate traffic visibility as determined by the Zoning
Officer.
(6) Illumination. All billboards may be illuminated internally or by
reflected light provided the source of light is not directly visible
except by neon tubes and is so arranged as to reflect away from
adjoining premises and provided that such illumination shall not be
so placed as to cause confusion or a hazard to traffic or conflict
with traffic control signs or lights. No illumination involving
movement or causing the illusion of movement by reason of the
lighting arrangements or other devices shall be permitted. All
illuminated billboards shall conform to the electrical safety
standards of National Electrical Code.120
O. Sign permits.
(1) Permits shall be required and shall be procured from the Zoning
Officer for all signs greater than three square feet. Existing signs in
excess of three square feet shall be recorded by the Zoning Officer
and a permit shall be provided by the Zoning Officer.
Nonconforming signs shall also be recorded and provided a permit.
(2) Alterations or replacement of existing signs shall require
application for a permit from the Zoning Officer. An alteration to a
nonconforming sign shall not increase the degree of nonconformity.
Replacement signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(3) Nothing herein shall restrict the ordinary maintenance of a sign.
(4) The schedule of sign permit fees are based on construction and
installation dollar values, and shall be as established, from time to
time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(5) Any sign permits not issued directly by the Building/Zoning Officer
and requiring a special meeting, the schedule of sign fees shall be
the same as zoning filing fees.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Construction Codes, Art. II, Adoption of UCC.
§ 250-18 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-18
1:564
§ 250-19. Off-street parking and loading.
P. Inspections. All billboards and signs for which permits are required,
other than painted wall signs, shall be inspected annually by the
Building Inspector. A fee for annual inspections shall be established,
from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
Q. Permits for erection of signs and billboards. A separate permit shall be
required for the erection of signs and billboards regulated in this
chapter, except that no permit shall be required for temporary real
estate signs with an area of 12 square feet or less for the sale or lease of
property, professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in
area and for small announcement signs with an area of less than two
square feet.
A. Off-street parking. In all districts, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as set forth in Schedule III121 whenever any building is
erected, enlarged or converted.
B. Off-street loading. Every commercial, industrial, resort or other
building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise shall provide one off-street loading space for
each 25,000 square feet of gross building ground floor area or part
thereof, and each such space shall be at least 300 square feet in area.
An off-street loading space may occupy a part of the required yard if the
space is developed consistent with the design requirements for loading
spaces described in this article. Said loading spaces shall apply only to
any new construction, new uses or to the enlarged section of any
addition which may be approved by the Borough after the effective date
of this chapter.
C. General regulations applying to required off-street parking facilities.
(1) Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of
this section so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, and
provided that any parking facility now serving such structures or
uses shall not in the future be reduced below such requirements.
(2) Change in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a
structure or a change or extension of a use which increases the
parking requirements according to the standards of Schedule III,122
the total additional parking required for the alteration, change or
extension shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
that section.
(3) Continuing character of obligation. All required parking facilities
shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists where
121. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
122. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-19
1:565
the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities
shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision except
in conformity with the requirements of this section. Reasonable
precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of particular
uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to
serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner
as to at no time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
(4) Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the
sum of the spaces required for each use individually. However, the
number of spaces required in a common parking facility may be
reduced below this total by approval of the Zoning Hearing Board if
it can be demonstrated to the Board that the hours or days of peak
parking needed for the uses are so different that a lower total will
provide adequately for all uses served by the facility.
(5) Fractional spaces. Where the computation of required parking
space results in a fractional number, any fraction of the next higher
number shall be counted as one.
(6) Location of off-site parking lot. [Amended 5-3-2001 by Ord. No.
1106]
(a) Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
premises with the principal use served, or, where this
requirement cannot be met, within 300 feet of the principal use
served within the same district.
[1] In the area commonly known as the "Uptown," which is a
C-2 zone, in the event that the Northampton Borough
Zoning Ordinance off-site parking requirements cannot be
met, the permitted commercial uses in this zone shall be
allowed to utilize said municipal parking lot so long as they
are located within any boundary of 300 feet of the
municipal parking lot. The 300 feet shall be measured
from the boundary of the off-site parking lot to the
boundary of the property requiring the off-site parking
space. No measurements shall be made across any arterial
highway and thus locations across the arterial highway
shall not be permitted to utilize the municipal lot.
(b) No adult-oriented facility, bed-and-breakfast establishment,
child day-care center, adult day-care, club, contract
construction services, dance hall, discotheque, domiciliary
care home, dwelling, education services, elderly housing,
family care facility, group care facility, industrial uses of any
nature, including but not limited to automotive repair/service,
beverage/bottling plants, dairy/ice cream manufacturing,
§ 250-19 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-19
1:566
extraction of gravel/sand/stone, farm uses, manufacturing of
apparel/jewelry/novelties/toys, manufacturing of paper/pulp
products, material reusing/recycling facility, paper recycling,
public assembly, sanitary landfill, warehouses, inns, kennels,
lodges, mobile home, hotel, motel, inn, nonconforming use,
nursery, private academic institution, customary farm
occupations, residence, residential group, quarters, dwelling,
apartment, rowhouse, townhouse, rooming and/or boarding
house, cultural sports assembly, school, swimming pool, travel
trailer, townhouse, or any nonconforming use or shall be
allowed to utilize the municipal lot for purposes of meeting the
off-street parking regulations.
(7) Maintenance of parking area. For parking areas of three or more
vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including
driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with dustless, durable, allweather
pavement parking surface, and drained to the satisfaction
of the Borough Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent dust,
erosion or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining
property. All off-street parking stall spaces shall be marked so as to
indicate their location.
(8) Lighting. All parking areas and driveways serving commercial uses
shall be adequately illuminated during the hours of use between
sunset and sunrise.
(9) Shade trees. Off-street parking areas which provide parking for 10
or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a type and
size approved by the Borough. The shade trees shall be located in a
planned manner within the parking lot area.
(10)Home occupation parking requirements. Home occupations shall
provide the following number of off-street parking spaces:
(a) The required number of spaces for the residential structure as
shown in Schedule III.123
(b) The required number of spaces for the most applicable use
listed in Schedule IV124 to which the home occupation is most
similar, or if greater, one off-street parking space for each
nonresident employee and one additional for each roomer,
student, patron, patient, customer or other visitor which the
home occupation serves during any one-hour period of
maximum use.
(c) The total number of off-street parking spaces for a home
occupation may be reduced by the number of legal curb
parking spaces which exist directly abutting the home
occupation.
123. Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Schedule IV is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-19
1:567
(11) Screening and buffering. Screening shall be provided as required
in § 250-22.
D. Design standards. The design standards specified below shall be
required for all off-street parking facilities with a capacity of three or
more vehicles built after the effective date of this chapter.
(1) Minimum parking stall and aisle standards. Parking lot dimensions
shall be no less than those listed in the following table:
Angle of Aisle Width
Parking
(degrees)
Parking
Width
(feet)
Stall Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 10 21 18 21
45° 10 20 15 18
30° 10 18 12 15
Parallel 8 22 12 18
(2) Parking stall access standards. Parking areas shall be designed so
that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicle.
(3) Parking lot access standards.
(a) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
[1] A minimum of 12 feet for one-way use only.
[2] A minimum of 20 feet for two-way use.
[3] A maximum of 40 feet at the street line.
(b) Any use with less than 100 feet of lot frontage on a public
street shall have no more than one accessway to each such
street. Any business or other use with 100 feet or more of
frontage on a public street shall have no more than two
accessways to any one street for each three 300 feet of
frontage. Where more than one accessway is permitted, their
center line shall be placed at least 80 feet apart. On all corner
properties, they shall be spaced a minimum of 60 feet,
measured at the curbline, between the center line of any
entrance or exit drive and the street line or the street parallel
to said access drive.
(4) Direct access to parking stalls. In no case shall parking areas for
three or more vehicles be designed to require or encourage cars to
back into a public street in order to leave a lot.
§ 250-19 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-19
1:568
§ 250-20. Temporary uses, excavations and fill activity.
(5) Lot line setback standards. For all uses except for townhouses and
row house development, all parking spaces and access drives shall
be at least two feet from side and at least eight feet from rear lot
lines.
(6) Street line setback standards. Except where entrance and exit
drives cross street lines, all parking areas for any purpose other
than single-family residences shall be physically separated from
any public street by a concrete curb, sidewalk (where required) and
by a planting strip which shall be not less than two feet in width.
(7) Lighting standards. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any
parking space or spaces shall be so arranged that no direct rays
from such lighting shall fall upon any neighborhood property.
(8) Safety standards. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such
a manner as to at no time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or
unreasonable impediment to traffic or emergency fire or
ambulance access to adjacent buildings. Adequate wheel stops,
curbs and/or other barriers shall be provided to protect buildings
and sidewalks from vehicular encroachment.
(9) Recreation vehicle parking requirements. Off-street parking of one
unoccupied recreation vehicle or boat on any one residential lot is
permitted, provided that the vehicle is located to the side or rear of
the principal residential structure.
(10) Commercial truck parking requirements. The parking of
commercial trucks having a Class 05 or higher Class Pennsylvania
Vehicle Registration is prohibited in residential zone districts
except as a special exception on lots in excess of two acres. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall review the proposed location of such
vehicles. The Zoning Hearing Board standards shall require Class
05 vehicles or higher classes to be parked in the rear of lots within
an enclosed structure and such vehicles shall not be left running
for extended periods (more than one hour) of time. A landscape
plan and landscaping may also be required by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a condition for approval.
(11) Portable carports, storage enclosures, and unattached trailers.
(Unattached trailers are the type which may convey RVs, boats,
snow mobiles, motorcycles, dirt bikes etc.). These structures,
enclosures and unattached trailers shall comply with the
requirements of accessory buildings and they shall be limited to a
rear yard location.
A. Special events or activities. Any applicant may submit a zoning
application for the purpose of requesting permission to undertake or
conduct a special event, activity or use (hereinafter referred to as a
§ 250-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-20
1:569
"temporary use") that shall be temporary in nature. Such a temporary
use shall exist for a period of time not to exceed one year. Said
application shall be submitted to the Borough in accordance with the
special exception use procedure established in Schedule I, Schedule
of the Controls, and the temporary use shall be clearly related to
the requirements for permitted uses set forth in this chapter. Said
application shall clearly set forth the following:125
(1) The exact purpose, nature and location of the proposed temporary
use, including all private and public lands and rights-of-way
involved.
(2) The relationship of the temporary use to other uses permitted in
the zoning district.
(3) The number of employees, spectators, participants or other
persons or agencies, equipment or other paraphernalia to be
involved or used in such temporary use.
(4) Evidence that the Borough will be held harmless from any
unforeseen adverse consequences resulting from such temporary
use and evidence of the availability of sufficient insurance
coverage.
(5) An evaluation of the traffic impact of said use.
(6) The length of time for which a temporary use permit is requested.
(7) Any special requirements, hardships or conditions to be imposed on
the Borough, or residents of the Borough, and on other uses which
may be affected by the temporary use. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall review the proposed application as a special exception use
and shall reach a decision after receipt of a recommendation from
the Planning Commission as required by this chapter. The Zoning
Hearing Board may reject the application or may determine that
the temporary use is needed to support an existing or permitted
use or to serve the needs of the majority of the Borough or
neighborhood residents affected by such use. Any approval of such
a temporary use shall be subject to the applicable safeguards and
procedures established elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Excavations and fill material.
(1) Operations subject to state regulation.
(a) All quarry, sanitary landfill or other non-coal mining operations
are under this chapter as required by Subsection A and are
subject to state law, or to regulations of the PaDEP shall
require necessary permit(s) from the appropriate state agency.
Particular reference is made to the Commonwealth of
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-20 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-20
1:570
Pennsylvania "Non-Coal Surface Mining Conservation and
Reclamation Act No. 1984-219," as it may be amended,126 and
to other requirements relating to the operation of sanitary
landfill areas and to preservation of water quality in the
commonwealth as administered by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Such operations may take place in the Borough only in those
areas where permitted by this chapter.
(c) All applicants for such operations shall submit a copy of any
request for a state permit to the Zoning Officer, together with
any plans required by the state for the reclamation of such
areas. The Zoning Officer shall also require a zoning permit
application form to be submitted to the Borough plus any other
information required to properly evaluate the application.
Approval of any zoning permit for an operation permitted in
the Borough shall be conditioned upon the receipt by the
operator of any permit required from the state.
(d) The Borough may present information to or request a public
hearing to be held on such applications for a permit which are
submitted to the state.
(2) Other excavations.
(a) Any other excavations, regrading of the natural terrain where
ground levels are affected by more than one foot, the removal
of topsoil or other earth products, the placement of fill, or the
alteration of drainage patterns may be permitted by the Zoning
Hearing Board only as a temporary use as required in
Subsection A above. Such excavations must be adequately
drained to prevent the formation of pools of water. The Zoning
Hearing Board may require that such an excavation be
enclosed by a fence if it is deemed to be a menace to the public
health, safety and welfare.
(b) Unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
open excavations shall not be maintained, except those
excavations made for the erection of a building or structure for
which a permit has been issued.
(c) The dumping of earth, gravel, rock or other materials not
subject to decay, noxious or offensive odors may be permitted
in any zone or any vacant land, provided that the existing
grade shall not be raised above the grade of the nearest road,
that hazardous or nuisance conditions are not created, and
that an unsightly appearance or unstable slopes are not
created. Industrial or other operations requiring the dumping
of such materials above the grade of the nearest road may be
126. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq.
§ 250-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-20
1:571
§ 250-21. Performance requirements.
permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception
use if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that such dumping
is not a menace to the public health, safety or welfare or a
nuisance to nearby residential areas.
(d) Operations affecting drainage patterns shall be studied by the
Borough Engineer and appropriate recommendations or
conditions developed for consideration by the Zoning Hearing
Board. Necessary reviews from other affected agencies such as
the Lehigh County Conservation District shall also be secured
prior to the issuance of any permit.
A. No use shall be permitted in any district if it is to be operated in such a
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive, radioactivity, environmental or other
hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air,
persistent odor, solid waste or water pollution; electrical, glare, or other
disturbance which will adversely affect the surrounding area or
premises, or be dangerous to public health and safety.
B. All uses shall be developed in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the quality of the existing environment and of any
natural amenities present on the site. Such uses shall provide for the
preservation and the minimum destruction of natural drainage areas,
minimum grading to minimize the destruction of the ground surface,
the preservation of substantial stands of trees and wetland areas, the
preservation of attractive views and any other natural features existing
on the site.
C. All new uses or conversions shall comply with the following
performance standards:
(1) Noise control.
(a) The sound pressure level of any use (other than the operation
of emergency or time signals, outdoor athletic facilities and the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities,
operations involved in the construction or demolition of
structures) shall not exceed the decibel levels in the
designated octave bands as stated below. The sound pressure
level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave
band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the
American Standards Association (American Standard Sound
Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z
24, 31944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York,
New York, and the American Standard Specification for Octave
Bank Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z
24, 101053, American Standards Association, Inc., New York,
New York, shall be used).
§ 250-20 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-21
1:572
(b) All sound pressure level measurements shall be taken at the
property line of the property where the sound is being
generated, except for properties generating noise in an
Industrial Zoning District, where the sound shall be measured
at the Industrial Zoning District line.
(c) The maximum permissible sound pressure levels for smooth
and continuous noise shall be as follows (all of the decibel
levels stated below shall apply in each case):
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound
Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1,200 46
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
(d) If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is radiated during
sleeping hours, one or more of the corrections shall be added
to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given below.
Type of Operation or Character of
Noise
Correction in
Decibels
Noise occurs between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
-3
Noise occurs less than five percent of
any one-hour period
+5
(e) Noise is of periodic character (hum, scream, etc.) or is of
impulsive character (hammering, etc.). (In the case of
impulsive noise, the correction shall apply only to the average
pressure during an impulse, and impulse peaks shall not
exceed the basic standards given above.)
§ 250-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-21
1:573
(2) Control of smoke, dust and dirt, fumes, vapors, gases and odors.
The Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Act, enacted January 8,
1960, and as amended, shall control the emission of smoke, dust,
dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors, gases or odors. Necessary tests to
determine compliance with the Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control
Act127 shall be required.
(3) Storage of materials.
(a) No materials or waste shall be deposited upon a lot in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by
natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can
contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such
stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply
or recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to
enter any stream or watercourse.
127. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
§ 250-21 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-21
1:574
§ 250-22. Miscellaneous provisions.
(b) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
(4) Glare and heat control. No use shall carry on an operation that will
produce heat or glare perceptible beyond the property line of the
lot on which the operation is situated.
(5) Vibration control. Machines or operations which cause vibration
shall be permitted, but in no case shall any such vibration be
perceptible along the lot lines of any use without the aid of
instruments.
(6) Radiation or electrical emissions, radioactivity or electrical
disturbance. Activities which may emit dangerous radioactivity
beyond enclosed areas shall comply with the codes of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Division of
Radiology. No electrical disturbances (except from domestic
household appliances) shall be permitted to affect adversely, at any
point, any equipment other than that of creator of such
disturbance.
(7) Electric, diesel, gas or other power. Every use requiring power
shall be so operated that any service lines, substations, etc., shall
conform to the highest applicable safety requirements, shall be
constructed, installed, etc., so that they will be an integral part of
the architectural features of the plant, or if visible from abutting
residential properties, substations shall be concealed by evergreen
planting.
A. Screening requirements.
(1) Adequate screening shall be provided along the front, side, and
rear boundaries of any manufacturing or commercial use, or of any
off-street parking or loading area for more than five vehicles which
abuts a residential or institutional zoning district or along the
boundaries of any other use where such screening is required by
this chapter.
(2) Open construction or storage yards and junkyards shall be
screened in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may waive this requirement where
natural terrain considerations eliminate the need for such a screen
or where access considerations or adjoining development would
not substantially benefit from such a screen.
§ 250-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-22
1:575
(4) Such screening shall consist of a visual screen or obstruction of
sufficient height, but not less than six feet high, to effectively
obscure the area being screened from adjoining uses. Such a
screen or obstruction shall consist of a suitable fence or wall or of
appropriate planting materials such as shrubs, hedges or trees
located within a buffer strip having a minimum width of five feet.
Such fence, wall, or planting materials shall be maintained in good
condition without any advertising thereon.
(5) Any space between such fence, wall or planting materials and
adjoining lot lines shall be attractively surfaced and/or landscaped
with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition.
B. Slope of yards. The surface area of any yard or open space adjacent to a
building or structure shall be graded so that surface water will be
drained away from any such structure.
C. Animals and fowls.
(1) In any district the establishment, maintenance, and operation of
boarding stables, dog kennels, boarding kennels, aviaries, or
similar facilities for the housing, boarding, service, treatment, care,
breeding or sale of animals and fowls is prohibited, except for the
C-2 Commercial District.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping of pets
which are the personal property of persons residing on the
premises, provided that such pets shall not create nuisance or
health problems.
(3) All animals in the Borough shall be controlled and maintained in
compliance with the Chapter 83, Animals, Article I, Animal Control
and Maintenance, and Article II, Waterfowl.
D. Size of dwellings.
(1) In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare of
occupants residing in residential dwelling structures, the following
minimum floor areas for human habitation shall be required in all
dwelling units designed for permanent occupancy:
No. of Bedrooms
Minimum Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency unit 450
One bedroom 575
Two bedrooms 700
Three or more 900 + 100 for each additional bedroom
exceeding three
§ 250-22 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-22
1:576
§ 250-23. Mobile homes.
(2) No dwelling unit shall be less than 12 feet wide.
E. Public water and sewer facilities. All buildings within the Borough shall
be served with public water and sanitary sewer facilities when
available, and where such facilities are not available, suitable alternate
facilities meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be provided. Any residential dwelling
unit not served with a PaDEP approved public or central sanitary or
water supply system shall have a minimum net lot area of at least one
acre.
F. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Obscene activities, sales or services. Any use involving activities
which constitute violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, as amended,
relating to display, sale, lending, distribution or exhibition of
obscene and other sexual materials are prohibited in every zoning
district. The exhibition or dissemination of obscene materials, as
defined herein, which do not constitute a violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5903, as amended, shall only be permitted in a zoning district
which clearly lists such a use, and all such uses shall be special
uses as defined herein.
A. Location of mobile homes. Mobile homes erected or placed on
individual lots shall be required to have a building permit and a
certificate of occupancy prior to habitation and to be firmly anchored to
a foundation or slab which is at least the same dimensions as the mobile
home's outside (footprint) dimensions. Mobile homes in mobile home
parks shall be subject to the requirements and standards of this section.
B. License: application and issuance.
(1) No mobile home park shall be operated without a license. Such
license shall expire on January 1 following the issuance, but may be
renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods
of one year.
(2) The application for such license or for the renewal thereof shall be
filed in triplicate with the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied
by the appropriate fee as hereinafter provided.
(3) The application shall be verified by the applicant and shall contain:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) The nature and extent of his interest in the business for which
the license is desired.
(c) Whether or not applicant is the owner of the real property for
which the license is desired and if not, the name, address and
telephone number of the owner thereof.
§ 250-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-23
1:577
(d) If the applicant is not the owner of the real property for which
the license is desired, the application shall be accompanied by
a duly verified statement of the owner of the real property that
the applicant is authorized by him to construct and maintain
the mobile home park and to make application for a license
therefor.
(e) A description of the premises on which the mobile home park is
or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate
same.
(f) The number of units to be contained in said mobile home park.
(g) The date of arrival of each mobile home or trailer unit in the
park.
(h) Name and permanent address of owner of mobile home or
trailer unit.
(i) Make of mobile home or trailer, state in which registered and
registration number.
(j) Year of issuance of registration.
(k) Such other information as may reasonably be required.
(4) The application shall be accompanied by three copies of the mobile
home park plan, drawn to scale and prepared by a civil engineer or
land surveyor duly licensed by the State of Pennsylvania showing in
detail the following:
(a) The extent and area used for mobile home park purposes with
a location insert in smaller scale showing the park location on
the entire property.
(b) Roadways, driveways and sidewalks.
(c) Location of mobile home lots with dimensions and boundary
lines.
(d) Location of parking facilities for cars and two vehicles.
(e) Method and plan of sewage disposal system showing sizes of
pipe and connection locations.
(f) Location and number of auxiliary sanitary facilities including
toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms.
(g) Method and plan of solid waste collection and disposal system.
(h) Plan of water supply showing location of all home and auxiliary
connections and all fire hydrants.
§ 250-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-23
1:578
(i) Plan of electric power and lighting system, with location of
power plug for each lot as well as location and wattage of
streetlighting facilities.
(j) The above prints will bear the approval of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Zoning
Officer.
(5) The Zoning Officer shall immediately submit said application and
plan to the Zoning Hearing Board, who shall promptly consider the
application and render a decision. If approved, the Board shall
endorse the application in writing with the date thereof and direct
the Zoning Officer to issue and record the license. If the application
is disapproved by the Board, they shall direct the Zoning Officer to
notify the applicant in writing of such disapproval together with the
reasons therefor.
(6) Annual fees for mobile home parks shall be as established, from
time to time, by resolution of Borough Council and are to be paid by
the park owner.
C. Mobile home parks; procedure for construction or expansion.
(1) All plans for mobile home park expansion shall be first submitted to
the Zoning Hearing Board for review and action.
(2) If approved by the Board, the Zoning Officer will issue a
construction permit with specific reference thereon to the
approved plan.
(3) When the new section of the mobile home park is completed and
ready for occupancy, and complies with all requirements indicated
by this chapter and the Board, the Zoning Officer may issue a
certificate of occupancy which entitles the owner to apply to the
Borough Secretary for a license for the new section.
D. General design requirements for mobile home parks.
(1) All mobile home parks shall be located on high and well-drained
land and shall have not less than a total land area of five acres.
(2) All mobile home parks shall have paved access roads to and from
any such site and in no instance shall such sites be in conflict with
any other ordinance of the Borough.
(3) All streets within any mobile home park shall be not less than 40
feet right-of-way with a paved width of not less than 20 feet and
shall meet minimum paving thickness and other requirements as
required by the Borough for minor streets. All streets shall be
properly drained and shall be kept free of debris or other
obstructions to provide clear access for fire, police or other
emergency access.
§ 250-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-23
1:579
(4) All mobile home parks shall provide not less than 10% of the total
land area for public open space purposes and such lands shall be
improved whereby the same will be accessible to all families
residing within said tract and whereby such open space may be
used for recreation purposes.
(5) All mobile home parks shall provide to each lot line a continuing
supply of safe and potable water as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as well as a sanitary
sewerage disposal system in accordance with, and as approved by,
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, all such
systems being provided to the lot lines of all lots in any such mobile
home park.
(6) There shall be provided in each mobile home park such other
improvements as the Commission may require whereby such
requirements shall at all times be in the best interests of the public
health, safety and general welfare and may include, but shall not be
limited to, garbage and trash collection and disposal facilities as
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, and an adequate park lighting system.
(7) No lot in any mobile home park shall be less than 50 feet wide and
have less than 5,000 square feet of total lot area exclusive of
easements or rights-of-way.
(8) No structure located on any lot in any mobile home park shall be
closer to any front lot line than 25 feet; to any side lot line than
eight feet; nor to any area lot line than 20 feet.
(9) All lots in any mobile home park shall be well drained and graded to
a point where trailers or mobile homes may be parked so that the
parking of the same shall result in safety to all concerned. In all
instances, as much natural growth as is reasonably possible shall
be preserved by any mobile home park developer.
§ 250-23 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-23
1:580
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations Governing Selected Uses
§ 250-24. Special uses.
Special uses, as enumerated in Schedule I,128 shall be permitted only upon
authorization by the Zoning Hearing Board and review by the Planning
Commission, provided that such uses shall be found by the Zoning Hearing
Board to comply with the following requirements and other applicable
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
§ 250-25. Site plan review.
A. That the use is a permitted special use as set forth in Schedule I hereof.
B. That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.
The Zoning Hearing Board may require the applicant to prepare an
environmental analysis pertaining to the property and application
under consideration by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood where it is to be located.
D. That the use will be compatible with adjoining development and the
principal character of the zone district where it is to be located.
E. That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required
herein.
F. That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided and ingress
and egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic
on abutting and/or nearby streets and intersections.
G. That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the
district where located. The Zoning Hearing Board may rely upon state
and federal requirements to be met by the applicant for special use
permit approval as a condition for Zoning Hearing Board final approval.
A. Purpose and procedure.
(1) Site plan review and the submission of a site plan may be required
herein for certain "special uses" in accordance with the
requirements of the Zoning Hearing Board. At the discretion of the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Board may select one of the following
three options:
(a) No site plan review requirement; or
(b) Option site plan review procedure; or,
128. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-25
1:581
(c) Site plan review.
(2) The following site plan procedure shall be followed to ensure the
safe and efficient movement of traffic, adequate drainage and
connection to utilities, compliance with other applicable
regulations and to promote the development of an attractive and
well planned Borough, to enhance sound site planning and to best
serve the interests of public health, safety and general welfare and
the objectives of this chapter.
B. Optional site plan review procedure. In lieu of submittal of all of the site
plan requirements itemized below, the Zoning Officer, on behalf of the
Board, may require a preliminary sketch site plan, containing lesser
information, for unofficial review by the Planning Commission. Such
sketch site plan shall be for the purpose of indicating to the Planning
Commission the general nature and intent of the proposal which will
enable the Commission to present its initial considerations for the
purpose of guiding the developer in accordance with these zoning
requirements.
C. Site plan requirements. When required by the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Zoning Officer may require an official site plan. The official site plan
shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant shall submit three complete sets of site plans
certified by a registered engineer or registered surveyor.
(2) When a site plan has been officially submitted, it shall be placed on
the Borough Planning Commission agenda for review at its next
regular meeting, provided the official submission is made 10 days
or more before the regular meeting.
(3) Within 45 days after the official submission of a site plan, the
Planning Commission shall make a written recommendation to the
Zoning Hearing Board on whether the plan should be approved or
disapproved. The written recommendation shall include the
underlying findings and reasons affecting the Planning
Commission's recommendation. In making such a recommendation,
the Planning Commission may receive advice and review comments
from the Borough Engineer or any other competent review
authority.
(4) The following information shall be included on the site plan:
(a) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
(b) A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot,
the location, dimensions and height of proposed buildings,
structures, streets, roads, and any existing buildings in relation
to property and street lines. If the application relates to
property which is scheduled to be developed in successive
§ 250-25 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-25
1:582
stages, such plans shall show the relationship of the portion
scheduled for initial development to the proposed layout of the
entire property.
(c) The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces
and yards, landscaping, fences and buffer yards, including
methods and materials to be employed for screening.
(d) The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be
used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street
loading and unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting
such areas.
(e) The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs
and exterior lighting.
(f) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to
be devoted to pedestrian use.
(g) Sewer and water facilities and connections. Provisions to be
made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes, water supply and storm drainage.
(h) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, including information on
total land area, area to be reserved in common open space,
density, maximum building coverage, total area to be covered
with impervious surfaces and other information which will
assist the Commission in determining compliance with this
chapter.
(i) A description of any proposed use in sufficient detail to permit
the Commission to determine compliance with the
performance requirements set forth in § 250-21 and the floodprone
area requirements.
(j) Site contours at five-foot intervals.
(k) All proposed site grading; drainage provisions; road, driveway
and parking lot construction and proposals.
(l) A key map showing the entire project and its relation to
surrounding properties and existing building thereon.
(m) Soils, slopes and floodplain delineations.
(n) Certification by an engineer or surveyor.
(o) Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plan by
owner or developer.
D. Site design guidelines. The following guidelines are divided into nine
categories to assist the applicant in the preparation of site and building
plans and to assist the Planning Commission in the review of all site
§ 250-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-25
1:583
plans. These guidelines are meant to encourage creativity, innovation
and well-designed developments. They not only apply to principal
buildings and structures, but also to all accessory buildings, structures,
freestanding signs and other site features.
(1) Preservation of landscape. Preserve the landscape in its natural
state by minimizing tree and soil removal. Ensure that grade
changes are compatible with the general appearance of
neighboring developed areas.
(2) Relation of proposed buildings to environment. Relate proposed
structure(s) harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings
that have a visual relationship to the proposed structure(s). To
achieve this favorable relationship between existing and proposed
uses, create focal points with respect to avenues of approach,
terrain features or other buildings and relate open space between
all existing and proposed buildings.
(3) Drive, parking and circulation. For vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, give
special attention to the location and number of access points to
public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general
interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
arrangement of safe and convenient parking areas. Design these
vehicular and pedestrian areas to enhance the appearance of and
access to the proposed buildings and structures and to the
neighboring properties.
(4) Surface water drainage. Give special attention to proper site
surface drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect either neighboring properties or the public storm
drainage system. Remove and efficiently carry away all stormwater
from all roofs, canopies and paved areas. Collect surface water in
all paved areas to permit vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(5) Utility service. Place electric and telephone lines underground,
where possible. Locate, paint and undertake any other treatment to
ensure that any utilities which remain above ground will have a
minimal adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(6) Advertising features. Ensure that the size, location, lighting and
materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures
or features will enhance rather than detract from the design of
proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
(7) Special features. Provide needed setbacks, screen plantings and
other screening methods for exposed storage areas, exposed
machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and
structures to help make them compatible with the existing or
contemplated site design and with neighboring properties.
§ 250-25 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-25
1:584
§ 250-26. Traffic impact study requirements.
(8) Performance and traffic impact. Adequately address all problems
identified through the application of the traffic impact study and
analysis.
(9) Land subdivision ordinance requirements. Where the zoning
proposal requires approval under Chapter 215, Subdivision and
Land Development, the site plan may also address the major
requirements of that chapter.
A. At the request of the Zoning Hearing Board, the development projects
will be evaluated by the Zoning Officer to determine the level of traffic
impact on the Borough. The level of traffic impact will be based on the
estimated trip ends generated by the proposed uses in the project. "Trip
ends" are defined as the total number of trips entering and leaving a
specific land use or uses located in a project per day. These trip ends
will be based on the estimated trip generation rates for various types of
land uses based on the latest edition of the publication entitled "Trip
Generation, An Information Report," published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers.
B. The total number of average daily trip ends shall also mean "average
daily traffic (ADT)." Schedule IV, entitled "Trip Ends Per Day," adapted
from the above publication, may be used for estimating the ADT
generated by any proposed project or addition to a project.129 In lieu
thereof, the developer or the Borough may use the above publication
directly if it is considered to provide a more applicable estimate of the
trip ends per day for the specific uses proposed.
(1) Determination of major traffic impact. Any development which has
an estimated ADT (or daily trip ends per day) in excess of 500 shall
be considered to have a "major traffic impact."
(2) Phased projects. In the event that a project is to be phased over a
period of time, not exceeding 10 years, the total traffic impact for
the entire period of phasing shall be used in determining the traffic
impact.
(3) Requirements for projects having a major traffic impact. All
projects which are determined to have a major traffic impact shall
comply with the following:
(a) Compliance with the site plan review procedures set forth in
§ 250-25.
(b) All such projects shall have direct access to an arterial road or
to a collector road in the Borough. In lieu of such access, the
developer shall provide a project road which is capable of
handling the level of traffic to be generated and which is
129. Editor's Note: Schedule IV is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 250-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-26
1:585
proposed for development by the developer to collector or
major road standards, as established by the Borough, from the
project site to the closest existing collector or arterial road.
(4) Major traffic impact study. A major traffic impact study shall
include at least the following:
(a) All projects which have an estimated ADT exceeding 1,000
vehicles per day shall be required to submit a traffic impact
study prepared by a competent authority. The requirements for
such a study are set forth below.
(b) Identification of all major roads and intersections serving and
substantially impacted by the project.
(c) An analysis of how the proposed project users or residents will
use these major roads.
(d) Existing traffic conditions (without the proposed project)
including traffic volumes (ADT) and peak-hour volumes on the
identified major roads, based on PennDOT information, surveys
and trip-generation rates. (In addition, commercial projects
shall provide weekend traffic volume data at peak hours.)
(e) Projected traffic conditions (without the project) based on
trends in growth of traffic for ADT and peak-hour volumes. (In
addition, commercial projects shall provide weekend traffic
volume data at peak hours.)
(f) Estimates of traffic volumes (ADT) weekday peak-hour volumes
and weekend peak-hour volumes after development of all
stages of the project.
(g) Highway and intersection traffic capacities and levels of
service for subsections Subsection B(4)(c), (d) and (e) above, as
defined by the Highway Capacity Manual, must be calculated.
(h) Identification of existing and projected traffic problems on
roads serving the project or substantially impacted by the
project, including highway capacity deficiencies for the various
roads and intersections involved.
(i) Solutions proposed by the developer to alleviate the identified
problems and deficiencies and the proposed cost of these
improvements.
(j) Identification and analysis of high accident areas located in
proximity to the project, as identified by the Borough's traffic
engineer and the effect which the proposed project will have
on the high accident areas and locations.
(k) The competent authority responsible for preparing the major
traffic impact study shall certify to the following:
§ 250-26 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-26
1:586
§ 250-27. Adult-oriented facility guidelines.
[1] That in the preparation of the study that the applicable
Borough Comprehensive Plan and any pertinent Borough
or other traffic or transportation plan or study, as
identified by the Borough Zoning Officer, have been
considered in the preparation of the major impact study.
[2] That in the professional opinion of the competent authority
the completed major traffic impact study is a true and
accurate study which has given adequate consideration to
available information and includes reasonable projections
and analysis to the factors considered and that the study
represents the best opinion of the competent authority on
the traffic impact of the proposed development.
[3] That, if it has not been possible to fully analyze all relevant
factors, then those factors not analyzed shall be identified,
together with the reasons for their exclusion from the
study.
C. The major traffic impact study shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
special use procedures established herein. The Planning Commission
and the Zoning Hearing Board may request additional data or
information to clarify the findings set forth in said study. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall not approve any such special use if it determines
that any traffic problem to be created by the proposed development
cannot be adequately alleviated by the developer.
A. Adult facilities or businesses which contain an adult facility section
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) An adult facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other
adult facility.
(2) An adult facility shall not be permitted to be located within 1,000
feet of any public or private school, day-care facility, public
recreation facility or any house of worship.
(3) No materials, merchandise, film or service offered for sale, rent,
lease, loan or for view shall be exhibited, displayed or graphically
represented outside of a building or structure.
(4) Any building or structure used and occupied as an adult facility
shall be windowless or have an opaque covering over all windows
or doors of any area in which materials, merchandise, film, service
or entertainment are exhibited or displayed, and no sale materials,
merchandise, film or offered items of service or entertainment shall
be visible from outside the structure.
§ 250-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-27
1:587
§ 250-28. Family care facility and group care facility guidelines.
(5) No sign shall be erected upon the premises depicting or giving a
visual representation of the type of materials, merchandise, film,
service or entertainment offered therein.
(6) If all adult facility videotape rental uses are restricted to a discrete
small area of 150 square feet or less within a larger non-adult
facility business, then the requirements under Subsection A(4) and
(5) above only apply to that section of the business which is devoted
to an adult facility videotape rental use area within the business
space.
B. Adult facilities containing obscene activities, sales or services are
prohibited uses. See § 250-22F of this chapter.
A. A family care facility and a group care facility shall meet the following
general requirements:
(1) The site shall be conveniently located in regard to those support
facilities that are essential to the functioning of the specific facility.
These may include public transportation, medical, educational,
recreational, work opportunities, job training, social service, and/or
other facilities deemed necessary for the particular use.
(2) Each site shall be:
(a) At least 500 feet from another such facility (such distance shall
be measured in a horizontal straight line from the nearest
point on one lot to the nearest point on the other lot).
(b) Limited to no more than one facility on either side of one street
along a two-block area.
(c) Limited to no more than one facility within a two-block area.
(d) Approved for all applicable federal, state, county and Borough
licenses and permits.
(e) Operated so that all medical, counseling, or other services be
provided for the sole benefit of those persons residing in the
facility.
(f) Subject to providing off-street parking space for the occupants
plus one per employee for the maximum number of employees
on any one shift.
B. Small and large group care facilities. Additional special requirements
shall be met for a small group care facility, large group care facility as
follows:
(1) Each family care facility shall meet the following requirements:
(a) No more than six residents.
§ 250-27 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-28
1:588
§ 250-29. Miscellaneous use guidelines.
(b) Adequate supervision by people qualified by training and
experience in the field for which the family care facility is
intended.
(2) Each group care facility shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Adequate supervision by people qualified by training and
experience in the field for which the facility is intended.
A. Buffer yard, buffer strip, screening requirements. All buffer yards shall
include a buffer strip with effective screening and shall comply with the
following:
(1) Width of buffer yard. The following three buffer yard widths apply
to this chapter: five feet for off-street parking lots, 30 feet and 50
feet for industrial buffer yards. A thirty-foot yard shall be required
when an industrial land use is proposed adjacent to a public,
semipublic or quasi-public use, including park and recreation
facilities. A thirty-foot buffer yard shall be required when a new
nonresidential land use is proposed in a C Commercial District
adjacent to a residential use located in a residential zoning district.
A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be required when an industrial land
use is proposed adjacent to a residential use located in a residential
zoning district.
(a) Buffer yards shall be measured from the lot boundaries except
when a street is located adjacent to and within the industrial
property. Buffer yards shall be measured from the inside street
line of any boundary line street. Each buffer yard shall include
a buffer strip with effective screening. The remainder of the
buffer yard shall be landscaped as required below in
Subsection A(5)(b) below.
(b) Buffer yards shall be measured from the lot boundary line or
from the near street line where a street serves as the lot
boundary line. Buffer yards may not be part of an existing or
future street right-of-way, but shall be in addition to that rightof-
way.
(c) The buffer yard may be combined with required side or rear
yards, and in case of conflict, the larger yard (buffer or building
set back requirement, whichever is greater) requirements shall
apply.
(2) Use prohibited in buffer yard. Except for fences, walls and/or a
directional sign at each driveway, the buffer yard shall be a
landscaped area free of structures, manufacturing or processing
activity, materials storage and vehicular parking. No driveways or
streets shall be permitted in the buffer yards except at points of
ingress or egress.
§ 250-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-29
1:589
(3) Landscaping responsibility. All landscaping shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the lot, including the installation and
maintenance of all plant material.
(4) Landscape plan. All landscaping designs shall be subject to review
by the Zoning Officer prior to installation. Each applicant shall
submit a planting plan to the Zoning Officer. This plan shall note a
planting schedule which includes the botanical names, common
names, size, quantity, and general remarks for each plant proposed.
Plantings will not be approved unless they conform to the minimum
standards set forth in this chapter.
(5) Buffer yard landscaping requirements. All buffer yards shall
include a dense screen planting composed of trees, shrubs, and
ground cover to the full length of the lot line to serve as a barrier to
visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise throughout the year.
Therefore, deciduous plants alone shall not be an acceptable
screen. Screen planting shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be of such
species and size as will produce, within five years, a visual
screen of at least six feet in height.
(b) The minimum width of landscaped area for a five-foot buffer
shall be three feet; the minimum width of landscaped area for a
thirty-foot buffer yards shall be 20 feet; the minimum width of
landscaped area for a fifty-foot buffer yard shall be 35 feet.
Buffer landscaping shall include trees and shrubs alone or in
combination with ground berms, fences or walls.
[1] Buffer yards shall be planted as follows:
Minimum Required
Buffer Yard Width
(feet)
Minimum Number of
Plant Units* Per 100
Linear Feet of Buffer
5 33
30 80
50 100
NOTES:
* Plant units:
One shade tree = 10 plant units
One evergreen tree = 5 plant units
One shrub = 1 plant unit
[2] The minimum number of plant units shall be limited to no
more than three shade trees counted per 100 linear feet of
§ 250-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-29
1:590
thirty-foot buffer and no more than six shade trees per 100
linear feet of one-hundred-foot buffer.
[3] Existing, healthy trees and vegetation should be preserved
and may be considered as part of the buffer yard
landscaping requirements. Upon review and
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, the Borough
Council may reduce the total buffer yard planting
requirement if existing vegetation, berms, fences and/or
walls accomplish the purpose of the above requirements.
(c) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity, the drip
edge of the plant will not be closer than one foot from any
street or property line.
(d) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently and any
plant material which does not live shall be replaced within one
year.
(e) Fences or freestanding walls, a soil berm or a combination of
these may be required on an individual basis as a supplement
or alternative to required screening. Fences or walls shall be
constructed of approved materials with the finished side facing
the exterior of the lot on which it is located and shall provide
effective screening to a height of six feet unless otherwise
required on an individual site basis by the Borough. Where
fences or walls are relied upon for screening a segment of the
perimeter, the fences or walls along the perimeter segment
shall be broken only at points of vehicular or pedestrian
access.
(f) In circumstances where it is impractical for a screen to meet
all the requirements of this section or would create an undue
hardship, the Borough Council may modify the requirements or
approve acceptable alternatives, which shall satisfy the spirit,
objectives and intent of the screen requirements. (The buffer
should serve as a barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare
and noise.)
B. Crematoriums. Crematoriums shall be screened from any adjacent
residential or commercial developed land use. Any smoke vent pipes
shall be constructed according to requirements of state and local codes
and shall be a minimum of five feet higher than the tallest building
within 500 feet of the smoke vent pipe.
C. Hospital, sanatoriums, private or parochial education institutions.
These special uses shall be permitted only when the applicant meets all
of the following guidelines, standards and requirements:
(1) The parcel of land for this special use shall front on a major street.
The major street shall have a paved cartway width of at least 40
§ 250-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-29
1:591
feet. Vehicular ingress and egress for the special use shall be from
a major street.
(2) The parcel of land for the special use shall be at least 65,000
square feet in size or approximately 1 1/2 acres.
(3) The minimum yard requirements for the special use shall be at
least twice the largest minimum yards required for that zoning
district.
(4) The parcel of land shall be developed with a buffer screen strip
along the inside of the property lines which face residential
properties, vacant lots which are zoned to permit residential use
and which could be developed for residential purposes or which
face any other uses which the Zoning Hearing Board shall deem to
be incompatible with the potential special use noise or land use
activity.
(5) A major traffic and parking impact study shall be prepared by the
applicant. If the special use is deemed to have a major traffic and/or
parking impact, then the developer must provide a plan and
program to mitigate that impact.
(6) Any proposed special use, alteration or enlargement of a special
use shall meet the requirements of § 250-25.
D. Industrial. All structures shall conform with applicable requirements
and standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
for Fire and Panic. Adequate screening and buffer yards shall be
provided to effectively screen off adjoining residential uses and
adjoining areas zoned for residential use. Landscaping and planting
plans for industrial developments shall be prepared and submitted to
the Zoning Officer.
E. Junkyards. Junkyards shall be screened from view from any public
street and any developed lot adjacent to the junkyard. See screening
standards in Article V of this chapter.
F. Residential: townhouse, garden apartment, low-rise apartment
buildings, multifamily structures.
(1) Multifamily housing structures are permitted uses within R-2, R-3,
and R-4 Districts as set forth in Schedule I,130 provided that the
central sewer and water systems are available to service the
dwelling units. The requirements for multifamily housing
developments within Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be met. Minimum lot area, lot width, yard,
building height and maximum lot coverage requirements for
multifamily housing structures shall be those set forth within
Schedule II of this chapter.131 In addition, it shall be required that
130. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-29 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-29
1:592
§ 250-30. Provisions for wireless telecommunications, towers and
antennas.
500 square feet of usable open space, of less than 15% slope
and free of health or safety hazards be provided for each housing
unit. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall comply with
§ 250-22D, Size of dwellings. Adequate screening and buffer yards
shall be provided to effectively screen off adjoining nonresidential
uses and to screen off any existing single-family residential
structures. Landscaping and planting plans for multifamily
developments shall be prepared and submitted to the Borough
Planning Commission for review in compliance with Chapter 215,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) All multifamily residential structures shall conform with applicable
requirements and standards of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for Fire and Panic.
G. Resort facilities.
(1) Any proposed resort facility should include land development
proposals which are compatible with the environmental limitations
of the tract. No structures should be constructed in the floodway.
Any historic buildings, historic canal artifacts, nationally
designated canal walkways, any architecturally significant
buildings and/or any archaeologically significant sites should be
identified. These sites should then be dealt with respect and should
be carefully integrated into the proposed resort facility
development plan.
(2) A major traffic and parking impact study shall be prepared by the
applicant. If this special use is deemed to have a major traffic and/
or parking impact, then the developer must provide a plan and
program to mitigate that impact.
H. Sanitary landfills. The State Department of Environmental Protection
regulations and/or standards for siting sanitary landfills shall be used as
guidelines for Zoning Hearing Board approval.
A. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Borough of Northampton shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in Subsection A(2) through (4), below.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This
section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any
antenna:
131. Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:593
(a) That is under 50 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator; or
(b) Is used exclusively for "receive only" antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section other than the requirements of Subsection B(6) and (7)
below.
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered to be one tower. Measurements for setbacks and
separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of
the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be
added within the perimeter of the AM array as of right.
B. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot, except that no antenna or tower
shall be permitted in a residential district.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zoning district regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of applicant's
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or
antennas, that are either within the boundaries of the Borough of
Northampton or within one mile of the border thereof, including
specific information about the locations, height, and design of each
tower. The Zoning Officer may share such information with other
applicants applying for permits under this chapter or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the boundaries of
the Borough of Northampton; provided, however that the Zoning
Officer is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing
or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(4) Visual impact requirements. Towers and antennas shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Minimum height. The applicant shall request the minimum
tower and/or antenna height above ground level required to
fulfill its technological function.
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:594
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other federal agency with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall
bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of
such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or commonwealth
agency law or regulation. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be a
violation of this chapter.
(7) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in all applicable
Northampton Borough ordinances, including building and property
maintenance, and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, Northampton concludes that
a tower: fails to comply with such codes and standards; and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to
bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to
bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna, at the
owner's expense.
(8) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setback and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in and outside Northampton Borough, irrespective of
municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:595
(9) Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated or
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
(10) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify in writing under oath to the Borough that all franchises
required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless
communication system in Northampton Borough have been
obtained, and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Zoning Officer.
(11) Signs. No portion of any tower or related structure shall be used
for a sign or other advertising purpose, including but not limited to
company name, phone number, banners, streamers, etc.
(12) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of this subsection. No building or facility may be
used as an office or as a broadcast studio. No building or facility
may be used for long-term vehicle storage or for other outdoor
storage. There shall be no employees located on site. The facility
may only be visited for routine maintenance and emergency repair.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a
tower. The parking shall conform to the parking standards of this
chapter. Adequate emergency and service access shall be provided.
Access roads shall comply with Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development. Maximum use of existing roads, public or private,
shall be made. Road construction shall at all times, minimize
ground disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the toe of fill,
the top of cuts or no more than 10 feet beyond the edge of any
pavement. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion
potential.
(13) Multiple antenna/tower plan. Northampton Borough encourages
the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for
approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review
process.
(14) District requirements.
(a) Antennas shall not be permitted in any open space residential
district, CO Conservancy District, R-1 Residential District, R-2
Residential District, R-3 Residential District, R-4 Residential
District, C-1 Commercial Transition District or C-2 Commercial
District.
(b) Towers or antennas shall be allowed by special exception in I-1
Industrial District and I-2 Industrial District.
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:596
(c) Natural and historic preservation. Any tower or antenna shall
comply with all natural resource preservation ordinances. In
addition, no tower or antenna shall be located on a building or
structure that is listed on a historic register, or is in a historic
district.
(15) Demonstration of need.
(a) Unique site. The applicant shall demonstrate, using
technological evidence, that the tower or antenna must go
where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function pursuant to
the company's technological requirement.
(b) Good faith effort. Prior to proposing the construction of a new
tower, the applicant shall demonstrate that a reasonable effort
has been made to site the antenna on an existing structure
within close proximity of the chosen site. At all times, shared
use of existing towers shall be preferred to the construction of
new towers. In addition, documentation shall be provided to
show that the applicant has contacted by certified mail, return
receipt requested, all tower owners within a one-mile radius of
the proposed site and give the physical and/or financial
reasons why shared usage is not practical.
(16) Visual impact assessment. The applicant shall be required to
undertake a visual impact assessment on any proposed new tower
or any proposed modification to an existing tower to include:
(a) A Zone of Visibility Map, provided in order to determine
locations where the proposed tower or antenna may be seen.
(b) Pictorial representations of "before" and "after" views from key
viewpoints, both inside and outside of the Borough, where the
proposed tower or antenna may be seen.
(c) Assessment of alternative tower design and color schemes.
(d) Assessment or the visual impact of the tower base, accessory
buildings, and overhead utility lines from abutting properties
and streets.
C. Permitted uses. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the Borough are deemed permitted without
further zoning approval, provided that the Borough has, in its sole
discretion, entered into a license or lease for the same with third
parties setting forth the criteria for occupancy.
D. Antenna collocation.
(1) Height.
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:597
(a) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a greater
height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height,
to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna.
(b) The height change referred to in the foregoing Subsection
D(1)(a) above will not require an additional distance separation
as set forth in this chapter. Rather, the tower's premodification
height shall be used to calculate such distance separations.
(2) On-site location.
(a) A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation
of an additional antenna may be moved on-site within 50 feet of
its existing location.
(b) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one
tower may remain on the site.
(c) A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured from
the relocated tower location for purposes of calculating
separation distances between towers pursuant to this chapter.
(d) The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned
lands as established in this chapter shall not be permitted.
E. Special exceptions.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
special exceptions for towers or antennas by the Zoning Hearing
Board:
(a) Construction of a tower or placement of an antenna may only
be permitted by special exception in the permitted districts.
Otherwise, towers and antennas shall not be authorized in
Northampton Borough.
(b) Applications for special exception under this subsection shall
be subject to the procedures and requirements of this chapter,
except to property owned by the Borough.
(c) In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Zoning Hearing Board
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(d) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer, as appropriate
within such engineer's competence.
(e) An applicant for a special exception shall submit the
information described in this chapter and a nonrefundable fee
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:598
as established from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
(2) Tower.
(a) Information required. In addition to any information required
for special exception applications generally, applicants for a
special exception for a tower shall submit the following
information:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), zoning classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances
set forth in this chapter, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking, and such other information deemed
by the zoning officer to be necessary to assess compliance
with this chapter.
[2] Legal description of the subject tract or parcel.
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, the nearest property lines of
platted residentially zoned property, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to this
chapter shall be shown on an updated site plan or map.
The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of
the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the
existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable,
the method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A sworn and notarized affidavit by the applicant of
compliance with all sections of this chapter and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.
[8] A sworn and notarized affidavit by the applicant as to
whether construction of the tower will accommodate
collocation of additional antennas for future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
Northampton Borough.
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:599
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures, or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures, to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers
within Northampton Borough based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations, in the event that the proposed tower is
erected.
[12] Accommodation of future users. All towers permitted after
the effective date of this chapter must be engineered to
provide the structural capacity and the space necessary to
accommodate additional new users. The plans submitted
to the Zoning Officer shall clearly indicate which portion(s)
of the tower which will be reserved to future users.
[13] Borough Emergency Communications Network. In
addition to providing the structural capacity and space to
accommodate future commercial users, the applicant must
also dedicate space on the new tower to be used by the
Borough Emergency Communications Network. The plans
submitted to the Borough shall clearly indicate which
portion(s) of the tower that shall be dedicated, free of
charge, to the Borough for this purpose.
(b) Factors considered in granting special exception for towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of special
exceptions generally, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the following factors in determining whether to issue a special
exception:
[1] Height of the proposed tower, which shall not exceed 200
feet;
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
[3] Name of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
[4] Surrounding topography;
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
[7] Proposed ingress and egress;
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:600
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers
and structures, as discussed in this chapter;
[9] Demonstration of need requirement as set forth in this
chapter.
(c) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Zoning Hearing Board that no existing tower, structure, or
alternative technology that does not require the use of new
towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Zoning Hearing Board related to the
availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate
that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of
any of the following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment;
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
unacceptable electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
unacceptable interference with the applicant's proposed
antenna.
[5] The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures (such
as a cable micro-cell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system) is
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:601
unsuitable. However, costs of alternative technology that
exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be
presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
(d) Setbacks. The following setback shall apply to all towers for
which a special exception is required:
[1] Towers must be set back from any adjoining lot line a
distance at least equal to the height of the tower.
[2] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the zoning
district's minimum setback requirements.
(e) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply
to all towers and antennas for which a special exception is
required:
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as
otherwise provided in Table 1.
[b] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with
the minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex
residential units. Includes
modular homes and
mobile homes used for
living purposes.
200 feet or 200% height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Vacant single-family or
duplex residentially zoned
land which is either
platted or has preliminary
subdivision plan approval
which is not expired
200 feet or 300% height
of tower, whichever is
greater. Separation
measured from base of
tower to closest building
setback line.
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:602
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Vacant unplatted
residentially zoned lands.
Includes any unplatted
residential use properties
without an approved,
preliminary subdivision
plan or other valid
development plan
approval, and any
multifamily residentially
zoned land greater than
duplex.
200 feet or 200% height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Existing multifamily
residential units greater
than duplex units
200 feet or 200% height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses
100% of the height of
tower
[2] Separation distances between towers.
[a] Separation distances between towers shall be
applicable for and measured between the proposed
tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a
straight line between the center of the base of the
existing tower and the center of the proposed base,
pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown in Table 2.
[b] Table 2:
Table 2 — Existing Towers — Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet
in
Height
or
Greater
Monopole
Less
Than 75
Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:603
Table 2 — Existing Towers — Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet
in
Height
or
Greater
Monopole
Less
Than 75
Feet in
Height
Monopole 75
feet in
height or
greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than 75
feet in
height
750 750 750 750
(f) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height, with an appropriate
anticlimbing device.
(g) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit
is required:
[1] An evergreen screen can be required to surround the
tower and any other ground-level features such as a
building. The screen can be either a hedge (planted three
feet on center maximum), or a row or evergreen trees
(planted 10 feet on center maximum) and shall blend with
existing vegetation to the greatest extent possible. The
evergreen screen shall be a minimum height six feet at
planting, and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at
maturity.
[2] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
F. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:604
structure, if over 100 square feet of gross floor area or eight
feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area or the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 20% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes, as amended from time to time.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following. In permitted districts, the
equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than 10 feet in
height or 200 square feet in gross floor area. The structure or
cabinet shall be screened by a dense planting screen with an
ultimate height of at least six feet. In all other instances, structures
or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties
which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or
cabinet by an opaque fence eight feet in height minimum or an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted
height of at least 36 inches.
(3) Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor
area or be more than 10 feet in height, and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which located.
G. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
(1) Any antenna or tower that is not operated and for which there is no
intent or attempt to operate, for a continuous period of time of 12
months, shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such
antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days after
receipt of notice from Northampton Borough notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Failure to remove abandoned antenna or tower
within said ninety-day period shall be grounds to remove the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users
of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective
until all users have abandoned the tower or antenna. A sum
sufficient to cover the cost of removal must be posted as cash
escrow or acceptable equivalent with the Borough. The amount
required shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Zoning
Hearing Board based upon the unique characteristics of the tower
or antenna or site. The applicant and/or owner shall cooperate with
the Zoning Hearing Board in supplying all necessary construction
data to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to the approval of any
application. Cost estimates shall be reviewed by the Borough
Engineer with the applicant to pay said fees.
§ 250-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:605
(2) Annual certification and permit. In January of each year, an
inspection shall be performed by an independent engineer
acceptable to the Borough and paid by the applicant, and
verification shall be provided to the Zoning Officer that there have
been no changes in the operating characteristics of the tower or
antenna as approved at the time of the special exception
application including, at a minimum:
(a) Direction of the signal;
(b) Frequency, modulation, and class of service;
(c) Transmission and maximum effective radiated power;
(d) Manufacturer, type and model of equipment;
(e) Height of the antenna or tower;
(f) Name, address and emergency telephone number of the
operator;
(g) Copy of the current FCC license;
(h) Review of all reasonable requests of shared use of the tower.
H. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed,
and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion or a
nonconforming use or structure.
(2) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their use as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall
be permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other
than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. Notwithstanding the above, bona fide nonconforming
towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt
in like kind without having to meet the separation requirements
specified in subsections of this section. The type, height, and
location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity
of array as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild
the tower or antenna shall comply with the then-applicable building
codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the
tower or antenna is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained
or if said permit expires, then the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned.
§ 250-30 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-30
1:606
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 250-31. General procedure.
A. General sequence of steps. All persons desiring to undertake any new
construction, structural alteration, or changes in the use of a building
or lot shall apply to the Zoning Officer for a zoning permit by filling out
the appropriate application form and by submitting the required fee.
The Zoning Officer will then either issue or refuse the zoning permit or
refer the application to the Zoning Hearing Board or other appropriate
agency. After the zoning permit has been received by the applicant, he
may proceed to undertake the action permitted in the zoning permit,
and upon completion of such action, shall apply to the Zoning Officer for
a certificate of occupancy. If the Zoning Officer finds that the action of
the applicant has been taken in accordance with the zoning permit, he
will then issue a certificate of occupancy allowing the premises to be
occupied.
B. Zoning permit types. Under the terms of this chapter, the following
classes of zoning permits may be issued:
(1) Permitted use. A zoning permit for a permitted use may be issued
by the Zoning Officer of his own authority.
(2) Special uses. A zoning permit for a special use may be issued by the
Zoning Officer after review by the Planning Commission and upon
the order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Zoning permit after an appeal or a request for a variance. A zoning
permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the order of the
Zoning Hearing Board and after a public hearing held by the
Zoning Hearing Board for the purpose of deciding upon the appeal
or a request for a variance.
(4) Temporary permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception for a nonconforming
structure or use which it deems necessary to promote the proper
development of the community, provided that such nonconforming
structure or use shall be completely removed upon expiration of the
permit without cost to the Borough. Such a permit shall be issued
for a specified period of time not exceeding one year, and may be
renewed annually for an aggregate period of not more than three
years. Fees for such permits shall be the same as for zoning
permits.
C. Preliminary opinion. A landowner may seek a preliminary opinion from
the Zoning Officer that the ordinance or map under which he proposes
to build is free from challenge. The specific procedure for this opinion is
presented in Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 250-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-32
1:607
§ 250-32. Zoning permit and Zoning Officer.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer who shall be appointed
by the Borough Council. No zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued by him except where all the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with.
A. Zoning permits.
(1) General. No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or
structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the
Zoning Officer, except upon a written order of the Zoning Hearing
Board. No such zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any building where said construction, addition or
alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Information necessary for application. There shall be submitted
with all applications for zoning permits two copies of a layout or
plot plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building
and accessory buildings to be erected, any existing building, and
such other information as may be necessary to determine and
provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(3) Public record. One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be
returned when approved by the Zoning Officer together with such
permit to the applicant upon the payment of a fee as indicated in
this article. The second copy with a copy of each application with
accompanying plan shall become a public record after a permit is
issued or denied.
(4) Sewage disposal. All on-lot sewage disposal installations shall
conform with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations. No plot plan shall be approved by the
Zoning Officer in any zone unless conformity is certified on the
plan.
(5) Issuance of permits.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a zoning
permit, provided he is satisfied that the structure, building,
sign, parking area of premises, and the proposed use thereof,
conform with all requirements of this chapter and that all other
reviews and actions, if any called for in this chapter have been
complied with and all necessary approvals secured therefor.
(b) The issuance of any building, occupancy, or use permit under
the terms of this chapter is not intended to assure, suggest, or
imply that any public access or roadway is available to the
structure, nor does it commit the Borough to provide or to
§ 250-32 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-32
1:608
§ 250-33. Certificate of occupancy.
maintain any public access or roadway to or from the structure
involved.
(6) Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of
this chapter, he shall refuse to issue a zoning permit and the
applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a reversal of
the Zoning Officer's decision.
(7) Expiration of zoning permit. A zoning permit shall expire after one
year if the applicant fails to implement his application as filed with
the Zoning Officer. Extensions of the expiration date may be
granted by the issuing officer upon presentation of sufficient cause.
(8) Revocation of permits. If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning
Officer that the application or accompanying plot is in any material
respect false or misleading, or that work is being done upon the
premises differing materially from that called for in the application
filed with him under existing laws or ordinances, he may forthwith
revoke the zoning permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
person holding the same to surrender it and all copies thereof to
said Zoning Officer. After the zoning permit has been revoked, the
Zoning Officer, in his discretion, before issuing a new zoning
permit, shall require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in
favor of the Borough with sufficient surety conditioned for
compliance with this chapter and all building laws and ordinances
then in force and in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of removing
the building or part thereof if it does not so comply.
(9) Special uses. All such applications shall be accompanied by plans
and such other information as may be required.
A. General. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Officer,
stating that the buildings or proposed use thereof complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Application for certificate of occupancy. All certificates of occupancy
shall be applied for, coincident with the application for a zoning permit.
Said certificate shall be issued within 10 days after the erection or
alteration shall have been approved as complying with the provisions of
this chapter.
C. Record. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all certificates
and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
D. Application mandatory for any construction, alteration or change of
use. No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, or
§ 250-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-33
1:609
§ 250-34. Planning Commission review of applications and appeals.
§ 250-35. Nonconforming use registration.
The Zoning Officer may be responsible to do a systematic survey of the
exterior of properties within the Borough in order to identify and register
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures. Reasons for why the
Zoning Officer identified each register entry as nonconforming should also
be kept on file in the register of nonconforming uses. The Zoning Officer
shall attempt to complete this survey and registration process within 24
months of any major zoning amendment.
§ 250-36. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
repairs to any building shall be issued until an application has been
made for a certificate of occupancy.
A. Referral from the Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall refer to the
Planning Commission for recommendation only all applications for
special uses, and may refer any other applications or appeals.
B. Criteria for review. The Planning Commission shall review such
applications in accordance with applicable criteria.
C. Report to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval, or may recommend approval subject to
conditions, or modifications and shall report its findings to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 30 days of receipt thereof; such report shall state
all recommended conditions and modifications and the reasons for such
recommended approval or disapproval.
A. Complaints of violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs,
any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints
must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer who shall
properly record such complaint and immediately investigate and report
thereon to the Borough Council. Provided that the Zoning Officer may, if
warranted, investigate without a written complaint, and if he finds a
violation shall himself file a written complaint.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of any ordinance enacted
under this act or prior enabling laws, the Borough Council or, with the
approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any
aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property
or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building,
structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises,
any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any
such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action
§ 250-33 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-36
1:610
shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior to the time
the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Borough
Council of the Borough. No such action may be maintained until such
notice has been given.
C. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this chapter or prior enabling laws has occurred, the
Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
D. Jurisdiction. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction
over proceedings brought under Subsection E.
E. Violation, penalties and enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this chapter or prior enabling laws shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a
§ 250-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-36
1:611
§ 250-37. Appeal from Zoning Officer.
municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied, or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining that
there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter, each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the Borough
whose ordinance has been violated.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. Procedure for appellant.
(1) An appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board from any ruling of any
administrative officer administering any portion of this chapter
may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, Board, or
bureau or department of the Borough affected hereby. Such appeal
shall be taken to the Zoning Hearing Board by filing with the
Secretary thereof a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
therefor.
(2) All applications and appeals made to the Board shall be in writing
on forms prescribed by the Board. Every application or appeal shall
refer to the specific provision of this chapter and shall exactly set
forth the interpretation that is claimed, the plans for a special use
or the details of the variance that is applied for, in addition to the
following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant/appellant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the district lot and/or
lots to be affected by such proposed change or appeal.
(c) A brief description and location of the district lot to be affected
by such proposed change or appeal.
§ 250-36 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-37
1:612
(d) A statement of the present zoning classification of the district
lot and/or lots in question, the improvements thereon and the
present use thereof.
(e) A reasonably accurate description of the present
improvements, and the additions or changes intended to be
made under this application, indicating the size of such
proposed improvements, material and general construction
thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot plan of the
real property to be affected, indicating the location and size of
the lot and size of improvements thereon and proposed to be
erected thereon.
(3) A mediation option is available at the option of the appellant.
Specific procedures for the mediation option are presented in
Article X of this chapter.
B. Procedure for Zoning Officer.
(1) The notice of appeal in any case where a permit has been granted
or denied by the Zoning Officer shall be prescribed by the Board
after notice of such action granting or denying the permit has been
mailed to the applicant. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit
to the Zoning Hearing Board all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken, or in lieu thereof
certified copies of said papers.
(2) It shall be competent for the Zoning Officer to recommend to the
Zoning Hearing Board a modification or reversal of his action in
cases where he believed substantial justice requires the same but
where he has not himself sufficient authority to grant the relief
sought.
C. Procedure for the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall decide each appeal within 45 days after a final hearing. At the
hearing any party shall appear in person or be represented by an agent
or attorney. The Zoning Hearing Board decision shall be filed in its
office and be a public record. In the exercise of its functions upon such
appeals or upon exceptions, the Zoning Hearing Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from or may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination in accordance with the provisions hereof. If the Board
fails to render a decision within the period required by this clause, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant.
D. Expiration of appeal decision. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning
Hearing Board, a decision on any appeal or request for a variance shall
expire if the applicant fails to obtain any necessary zoning permit, or
comply with the conditions of said authorized permit within six months
from the date of authorization thereof.
§ 250-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-37
1:613
§ 250-38. Public hearings and notice.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
an appeal or other matters referred to it and give public notice thereof
by the publication in the official paper as required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and as currently described in § 250-7 of this
chapter.
E. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Officer certifies for the
Zoning Hearing Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, they would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court
having jurisdiction on application, on notice to the Zoning Officer and
on due cause shown. Further requirements and procedures for a stay of
proceedings are presented in Article VIII.
F. Appeal from decision of Zoning Hearing Board. All decisions of the
Zoning Hearing Board are subject to court review in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and applicable laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. When appealing action of the Zoning Officer. In case of an appeal
alleging error or misrepresentation in any order or other action by the
Zoning Officer, the following persons shall be notified: the appellant and
the person or persons, if any, who benefit from the order, requirement,
regulation or determination.
B. Public hearings to be held by Board. Upon filing with the Board of an
appeal or a request for a variance as required by the terms of this
chapter, or for such other purposes as provided herein where the Board
deems it in the public interest, the Board shall fix a time and place for a
public hearing thereof as follows:
(1) Public notice. A public notice shall be given in advance of any
public hearing required by Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. The public notice shall be as defined in this chapter.
(2) Notice to appellant. By mailing a notice thereof by certified mail to
the appellant.
(3) Notice to local officials. By mailing a notice to the President of
Council, the Planning Commission and the Borough Secretary.
(4) Notice to interested parties. By mailing a notice thereof to abutting
property owners, to every association of residents of the Borough,
and any other interested party who shall have registered their
names and addresses for this purpose with the Board.
§ 250-37 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-38
1:614
§ 250-39. Filing fees.
Such fees as shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of
Borough Council, and shall be paid at the office of the Zoning Officer upon
the filing of an application.
(5) Posted notice. A notice shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(6) Nature of notice. The notice required shall be posted upon
instructions from the Board and shall state the location of the
building or lot in question and the general nature of the question
involved.
C. Adjournment of hearing. Upon the day for hearing any application or
appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board may adjourn the hearing for a
reasonable period for the purpose of causing such further notice as it
deems proper to be served upon such other property owners as it
decides may be interested in said application or appeal.
D. Required interval for hearing on applications and appeals after denial.
Whenever the Board, after hearing all the evidence presented upon an
application or appeal, under the provisions of this chapter, denies the
same, the Zoning Hearing Board shall refuse to hold further hearings
on the said or substantially similar application or appeal by the same
applicant, his successor, or assign for a period of one year, except and
unless the Zoning Hearing Board shall find and determine from the
information supplied by the request for a rehearing, that changed
conditions have occurred relating to the promotion of the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare and that a
reconsideration is justified. Such rehearing would be allowable only
upon a motion initiated by a member of the Zoning Hearing Board and
adopted by the unanimous vote of the members present, but not less
than a majority of all members.
§ 250-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-39
1:615

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Hearing Board and Zoning Officer
§ 250-40. Organization and expenditures.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,132 a Zoning Hearing Board is hereby
established in Northampton.
B. Appointment.
(1) The Board shall consist of five members to be appointed by Council.
The terms of office of the five-member Board shall be five years and
shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. In order to achieve this one-Board-member-per-year
replacement, the Council shall follow a revised schedule of Board
member terms.
Term Expiration Dates
Start of Initial Term
Initial Term
(years)
12-31-1992 3
12-31-1993 4
12-31-1994 4
12-31-1995 5
12-31-1996 5
(2) After this initial term, the successors to all five Board members
shall be appointed on the expiration of their respective terms to
serve five years. An appointment to fill a casual vacancy shall be
only for the unexpired portion of the term. Such appointments to fill
such vacancies shall be made in the same manner as the original
appointment.
(3) The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member
shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of this
section, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full
extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically
the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings,
and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this chapter
and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other
office in the Borough, including membership on the Planning
Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 250-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-40
1:617
any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled
to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant
to Subsection E, Expenditures for services, unless designated as a
voting alternate member pursuant to Subsection D, Organization of
Board.
C. Removal of members. A member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be
removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council taken after
such member has received 15 days' advance notice of intent to take
such vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
D. Organization of Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board,
but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties
may waive further action by the Board as provided in § 205-44,
Hearings and decisions.
(2) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum
is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be
needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until
the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority
among all alternates.
(3) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of
the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business, which records shall be the property of the Borough, and
shall submit a report of its activities to the Borough Council as
requested by the Borough Council.
E. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Borough Council,
but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be
paid to the members of the Borough Council. Alternate members of the
Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Borough
Council, for the performance of their duties when designated as
§ 250-40 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-40
1:618
§ 250-41. Jurisdiction and functions.
alternate members pursuant to Subsection D above, but in no case shall
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
the members of the Borough Council.
A. Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use
ordinance, except those brought before the Borough Council
pursuant to curative amendments in Article IX of this chapter.
(b) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial
zoning ordinance of the Borough and a Zoning Hearing Board
has not been previously established, the appeal raising
procedural questions shall be taken directly to court.
(c) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer,
including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the
issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the registration or
refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(d) Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance.
(e) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and
flood hazard ordinance.133
(f) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance.134
(g) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency
charged with the administration of any transfers of
development rights or performance density provisions of this
chapter.
(h) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under any
procedure to obtain a preliminary opinion as per the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.135
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Flood Damage Prevention.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Flood Damage Prevention.
135. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 250-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-41
1:619
(i) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or
municipal engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as
the same relate to development not involving subdivision and
land development ordinances nor planned residential
development ordinance applications.
(2) The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(a) All applications pursuant to approval of subdivisions or land
developments.
(b) Applications for curative amendment to a zoning ordinance.
(c) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
municipal engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provisions thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to application for land
development under Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development. Where such determination relates only to
development not involving Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development, application, the appeal from such determination
of the Zoning Officer or the municipal engineer shall be to the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Subsection A(1)(i) above.
B. Zoning Hearing Board's functions; variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application
and may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The
Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made, where relevant, in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
§ 250-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-41
1:620
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this act and this chapter.
C. Zoning Hearing Board's function; interpretation. The Board shall, upon
appeal of a decision by an administrative official, decide any question
involving the interpretation of any provision of this chapter, including
determination of the exact location of any district boundary if there is
uncertainty with respect thereto.
D. Zoning Hearing Board's function; special uses. Where this chapter
states that special uses or special exceptions shall be granted or denied
by the Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board
shall hear and decide requests for such special uses in accordance with
such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.136
E. Referral to Planning Commission.
(1) The Zoning Officer or the Board may refer the application to the
Borough Planning Commission for review and recommendations to
the Board. The Zoning Officer and/or the Hearing Board shall
delineate those issues which they feel should be the focus of the
review. If the Board or Zoning Officer has not submitted the
application to the Borough Planning Commission, then the
applicant may ask the Planning Commission for its review and
comment; however, the time required for this applicant request
review shall not affect the time requirement for Zoning Hearing
Board action. The Board may refer any other pertinent matters for
review and recommendations, and defer any decision thereon for a
period of not more than 45 days pending a report from the Planning
Commission. Upon failure to submit such report with the
Commission's recommendation, the Planning Commission shall be
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 250-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-41
1:621
§ 250-42. Procedure for Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 250-43. Time limitations.
deemed to have recommended approval of the application for
appeal.
(2) Nothing in this section shall require the approval of Borough
Council of any Planning Commission recommendations.
(3) The Zoning Officer should receive a copy of any Planning
Commission recommendations to the Board or to Borough Council
in regard to a property and/or applicant who has a decision pending
before the Board. Therefore, a complete record of pending or
potential changes related to a Board issue under consideration will
be available for the Board to consider.
A. The Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by
law, by this chapter and by any procedural resolutions adopted by the
Board. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in
writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application
shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter involved, and shall
exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the
special permit is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for
and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be
granted, as the case may be. The application shall be completely filled
out by the applicant or the application may be returned to the applicant
before any action is scheduled by the Board.
B. All meetings and hearings shall be public and in accordance with state
and local law.
C. Every decision of the Board shall be by written order, each of which
shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in the particular
case.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceedings with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by an appropriate municipal officer, agency or body
if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he
had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had
been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in
interest.
B. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision on a tentative plan finding (pursuant to any future
planned residential development) or from an adverse decision by the
Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map
pursuant to § 250-48 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
§ 250-41 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-43
1:622
§ 250-44. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative or preliminary approval.
C. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner(s) shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the Borough
Council shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time
and in such manner as shall be prescribed in this section and in Article
VII of this chapter. In addition to the written notice provided herein,
written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior the hearing.
(1) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings
may include compensation for the secretary and members of the
Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing
Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
(2) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
§ 250-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-44
1:623
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
H. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision with the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
§ 250-44 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-44
1:624
§ 250-45. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals under Section § 250-41A(1) may be filed with the Board in writing
by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough, or any
person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 250-41B and for special
exception under § 250-41D may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 250-46. Stay of proceedings.
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because
of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
J. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 250-45 and during its
pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any
agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless
the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to
the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the development or official action shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
§ 250-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-46
1:625
§ 250-47. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.
For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer shall be appointed
and shall not hold any elective office in the Borough. The Zoning Officer
shall meet qualifications established by the Borough and shall be able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough a working knowledge
of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in
accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit
any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to this
chapter. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his
employment.
§ 250-48. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed to build is
free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development (through Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development, or any planned residential development requirements) may
be too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner may advance the
date from which time for any challenge to the ordinance or map will run
under § 250-43 above by the following procedure:
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived
by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such a petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
§ 250-46 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-48
1:626
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval consistent with § 250-43 and the
time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the Board
shall run from the time when the second notice thereof has been
published.
§ 250-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-48
1:627

ARTICLE IX
Amendment Procedure
§ 250-49. Amendments.
The Borough may, on its own motion or by petition amend, supplement,
change, modify, or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map, by
proceeding in the manner set forth below.
§ 250-50. Public hearing.
§ 250-51. Review by Planning Commission.
Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the
Borough or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning Commission at
least 30 days before the public hearing for report on the proposed
amendment. If the Planning Commission shall fail to file such a report
before the public hearing, it shall be presumed that the Planning
Commission has approved the proposed amendment, supplement or
change.
§ 250-52. Review by County Planning Agency.
The Borough Council shall submit the proposed zoning ordinance
amendment to the County Planning Agency at least 30 days prior to the date
of the Borough Council public hearing on the Zoning amendment.
§ 250-53. Opportunity to be heard.
At the public hearing, an opportunity to be heard shall be given to any
citizen and all parties in interest.
A. The Borough shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. A public notice as defined in this chapter shall be
published as notification to the public of the proposed amendment.
B. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing.
C. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
§ 250-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-54
1:629
§ 250-54. Enactment of amendment.
The adoption of an amendment shall be by simple majority vote of the
Borough Council.
§ 250-55. Copy to County Planning Agency.
Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Agency.
§ 250-56. Curative amendments.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of a zoning ordinance or map or any provision thereof, which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest, may submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council
with a written request that this challenge and proposed amendment be
heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.137 The Borough Council
shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request as
provided in Section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the
Borough Planning Commission and County planning agency as provided
in this Article IX, and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as
provided.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 250-38, Public
hearings and notice, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall, for purposes of this section, be references to the Borough
Council. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this subsection and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision
shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire zoning
ordinance and map, but only for those provisions which specifically
relate to the landowner's curative amendment and challenge.
C. The Borough Council of the Borough which has determined that a
validity challenge has merit may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Borough
Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 250-54 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-56
1:630
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
D. Procedure for municipal curative amendments. If the Borough
determines that its zoning ordinance or any portion thereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Borough shall declare by formal action its zoning ordinance or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration and proposal, the Borough Council of
the Borough shall:
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the zoning ordinance which may include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[2] Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision;
or
[3] Reference to the entire ordinance which requires
revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the
zoning ordinance to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm
the validity of, its zoning ordinance pursuant to the provisions
required by this section in order to cure the declared invalidity of
the zoning ordinance.
(3) Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in Subsection
D(1), the Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or
consider any landowner's curative amendment filed under this
section, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a
report subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the
grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in
§ 250-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-56
1:631
the resolution required by Subsection A. Upon completion of the
procedures as set forth in the curative amendment Subsection D(1)
and (2), no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
D and § 250-60, Validity, shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended zoning ordinance for which there has
been a curative amendment pursuant to this section.
(4) The Borough, having utilized the procedures as set forth in
Subsection D(1) and (2), may not again utilize said procedure for a
thirty-six-month period following the date of the enactment of a
curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of its zoning
ordinance, pursuant to curative amendment Subsection D(2);
provided, however, if after the date of declaration and proposal,
there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the
Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to prepare a curative amendment to its
ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 250-56 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-56
1:632
ARTICLE X
Interpretation and Validity
§ 250-57. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to
interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the
use of buildings or premises, or upon the height or bulk of a building, or
requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 250-58. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon
petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation
of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience of
welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the municipality
in which the building or proposed building is located have notice of the
hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, crossexamine
witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the
rights of a party to the proceedings.
§ 250-59. Mediation option.
The Borough may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized by this chapter. In exercising such option, the
following procedures shall apply:
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in Article VIII, Zoning Hearing Board
and Zoning Officer, of this chapter, and Article X-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,138 may utilize mediation as an aid in
completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the Zoning
Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board initiate
mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in Article VIII of this chapter
and Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code once
they have been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as
modifying any principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. Any
municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that, in each
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 1100-A et seq.
§ 250-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-59
1:633
§ 250-60. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The Borough Council hereby declares that it would have passed
this chapter and each section or part thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.
§ 250-61. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions.
case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate,
develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter,
provided there is written consent by the mediating parties, and by
an applicant or municipal decision making body if either is not a
party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decision making body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.139
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits
or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest
shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 250-41A(1); or
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 250-59 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-61
1:634
(2) To the Borough Council under § 250-41A(2)(b), together with a
request for a curative amendment under § 250-56.
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of
another by an ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desires
to challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
§ 250-41A(1)(a).
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B above shall be
governed by the following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Board that it hold a
hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for
the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by curative
amendment under § 250-56, his application to the Borough Council
shall contain, in addition to the requirements of the written request
hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the use or
development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or
development permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such
plans or other materials shall not be required to meet the standards
prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the
issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of
the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for
evaluating the challenged ordinance or map in light thereof.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the landowner from first
seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the governing body
under Subsection A(2) above, the request also shall be
accompanied by an amendment or amendments to the ordinance
proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Borough Council, the municipal
solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings
referred to in § 250-41A(2)(b).
(4) The Borough Council may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its
behalf and to present their witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Borough Council or the Zoning Board, as the case may be, shall
determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is defective,
as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by a Borough
Council is found to have merit, the Borough Council shall proceed
as provided in § 250-56.
(a) If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to
have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
§ 250-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-61
1:635
include recommended amendments to the challenged
ordinance which will cure the defects found. In reaching its
decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
[1] The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities,
water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
[2] If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of the ordinance or map;
[3] The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed
by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
features;
[4] The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected
or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts; and
[5] The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
(b) The Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case
may be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing.
(c) If the Borough Council or the Zoning Board, as the case may
be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to in Subsection C(5)(e), a denial of the request
is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of
the last hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
shall commence its hearings within 60 days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
§ 250-61 NORTHAMPTON CODE § 250-61
1:636
§ 250-62. Repealer.
The Borough of Northampton Zoning Ordinance 1018, November 16, 1989,
as amended and incorporated into the Northampton Code of Ordinances
as Chapter 27, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. All other
existing ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, to
the extent of such conflict and no further, are hereby repealed.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in
Subsection D;
(2) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment;
(3) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing
on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by
the landowner and Borough.
G. Where, after the effective date of this act, a curative amendment
proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application
by the Borough Council pursuant to § 250-41A(2)(b) or a validity
challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
§ 250-41(A)(1)(a) or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a
curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal
or challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision
or land development, the developer shall have two years from the date
of such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative
approval pursuant to Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land Development,
or any planned residential development provisions of a Borough
ordinance. Within the two-year period, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or
plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights
of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained
validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan,
the provisions of the applicable Chapter 215, Subdivision and Land
Development, section shall apply. Where the proposal appended to the
curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved
but does not require further application under any subdivision or land
development ordinance, the developer shall have one year within which
to file for a building permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent
change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely
affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment
or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods, the
court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding
such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
§ 250-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-62
1:637
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1993 Code to 2012 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1993 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected Officials
§ 101, Salary of Mayor Ch. 56, Art. I
§ 102, Compensation of Councilmen Ch. 56, Art. II
Part 2, Appointed Officials
A. Borough Manager Ch. 38
B. Independent Auditor Ch. 4
Part 3, Administrative Procedures and
Policies
A. Collection Procedures for Money Owed
Borough
Ch. 24, Art. I
B. Economic Development Administration NCM
Part 4, Northampton Borough Municipal
Authority
Ch. 8, Art. I
Part 5, Planning Commission Ch. 47
Part 6, Educational Service Agency Ch. 15
Part 7, Police Department Ch. 50
Part 8, Retirement; Pension Plans A&B, NI; C. ; D. REP
A. Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan NI
B. Police Pension Plan NI
C. Mandatory Retirement Age Repealed by Ord. No. 1152
D. Deferred Compensation Plan REP
Part 9, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 31
Part 10, Personnel Policy and Benefits
A. Policy Repealed by Ord. No. 1181
B. Merit System Rules and Regulations NI
§ 250-62 NORTHAMPTON CODE § DT-1
1:638
Chapter/Title From 1993 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 11, Emergency Management Agency Ch. 19
Part 12, Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow Ch. 140, Art. I
Part 13, Drug Free Workplace Policy NI
Part 14, Attorney's Fees Ch. 156, Art. I
Ch. 2, Animals
Part 1, Animal Control and Maintenance Ch. 83, Art. I
Part 2, Prohibiting the Feeding of Waterfowl Ch. 83, Art. II
Ch. 3, Bicycles
Part 1, Bicycle Registration Ch. 90
Ch. 4, Buildings
Part 1, Street Address Numbers Ch. 162
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Code Enforcement Officer Ch. 105, Art. I
Part 2, Adoption of BOCA Building Code REP
Part 3, Adoption of National Electric Code REP
Part 4, Adoption of BOCA Plumbing Code REP
Part 5, Adoption of BOCA Property
Maintenance Code
Repealed by Ord. No. 1136
Part 6, Adoption of BOCA Fire Prevention
Code
REP
Part 7, Adoption of CABO One and Two
Family Dwelling Code
REP
Part 8, Adoption of BOCA Mechanical Code REP
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Tampering with Public Property Ch. 184, Art. I
Part 2, Loitering Ch. 171, Art. I
Part 3, Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places Ch. 74, Art. I
Part 4, Use of Firearms and Other Weapons Ch. 118
Part 5, Cruising Ch. 171, Art. II
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, Fire Protection Personnel Ch. 28
Ch. 8, Flood Plain Regulations Superseded by Ord. No.
1104; see now Ch. 125
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Conditions Creating Nuisances Ch. 135, Art. I
Part 2, Food Services Ch. 135, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:639
Chapter/Title From 1993 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 3, Prohibiting Storage of Motor Vehicle
Nuisances
REP by 1144
Part 4, Prohibiting Storage of Abandoned
Equipment
REP by 1144
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Fair Housing Policy Omitted
Part 2, Moving of Household Goods Ch. 152
Ch. 12, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Part 1, Licensing of Amusements Ch. 78
Part 2, Transient Retail Businesses Ch. 175, Art. I
Part 3, Utility Poles Ch. 228, Art. I
Part 4, Audible Alarms Ch. 70
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 234
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Use of Recreational Facilities Ch. 167, Art. I
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Regulations Ch. 190
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Collection and Disposal Superseded by Ord. No.
1178
Part 2, Recycling Superseded by Ord. No.
1178
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Activities in Existing Street Rights-of-
Way
A. Excavations and Openings Ch. 210, Art. V
B. Warrants of Survey Ch. 210, Art I
C. Utility Installations and Appurtenances Ch. 210, Art. II
D. Erection and Relocation of Utility Poles Ch. 228, Art. II
Part 2, Street Construction and Assessments Ch. 210, Art. III
Part 3, Sidewalk Construction Repealed by Ord. No. 1139
§ DT-1 NORTHAMPTON CODE § DT-1
1:640
Chapter/Title From 1993 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 4, Removal of Snow and Ice from
Sidewalks
Ch. 210, Art. IV
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 215
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Earned Income and Net Profits Tax Amended in its entirety by
Ord. No. 1180; see Ch.
220, Art. I
Part 2, Occupational Privilege Tax Superseded by Ord. No.
1155; see Ch. 220, Art. VI
Part 3, Per Capita Tax Ch. 220, Art. II
Part 4, Realty Transfer Tax Superseded by Ord. No.
1145; see Ch. 220, Art. V
Part 5, Tax Exemptions for Property
Revitalization
Expired
Ch. 25, Trees (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Water Conservation Ch. 240, Art. I
Part 2, Stormwater Management Ch. 203, Art. I
Ch. 27, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No.
1100; see Ch. 250
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory NI
B. Bond Issues and Loans NI
C. Contracts and Services NI
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
NI
E. Plan Approval NI
F. Public Property NI
G. Rehabilitation Program NI
H. Sewers NI
I. Streets and Sidewalks NI
J. Water NI
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances NI
Disposition List
Chapter DL
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:641
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1184 11-15-2012 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1185 11-15-2012 Street opening NCM
1186 12-20-2012 Tax rate 2013 NCM
1187 4-18-2013 General obligation bonds NCM
1188 6-20-2013 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan amendment
See Ch. 43
1189 9-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 250, table only
1190 9-19-2013 Nonuniformed employees
defined contribution pension
plan
See Ch. 43
1191 Tax rate 2014 NCM
1192 1-16-2014 Street opening NCM
1193 6-5-2014 Flood damage prevention Ch. 125
1194 11-6-2014 Rapid entry systems Ch. 186
1195 10-2-2014 Parks and recreation: use of
facilities amendment
Ch. 167, Art. I
1196 10-2-2014 Municipal claims: attorney's
fees amendment
Ch. 156, Art. I
1197 12-18-2014 Tax Rate 2015 NCM
1198 3-5-2015 Property Maintenance:
Adoption of Standards
amendment
Ch. 180, Art. I
1199 3-5-2015 Firearms and Weapons
amendment
Ch. 118
1200 4-2-2015 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 234
1201 4-16-2015 Solid Waste: Collection and
Disposal; Recycling
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
1202 12-17-2015 Tax Rate NCM
1203 3-3-2016 Solid Waste: Collection and
Disposal; Recycling
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
1204 6-16-2016 Street Renaming NCM
1205 12-15-2016 Tax Rate 2017 NCM
§ DT-1 NORTHAMPTON CODE § DL-1
1:642
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1206 12-21-2017 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
1207 9-20-2018 Rental Property: Residential
Rental Unit Regulation
Ch. 188, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:643