8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 1/411
Township of North Versailles, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1077]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class Township Code, the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of North Versailles, County of Allegheny,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 300, together with an Appendix, is
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of North
Versailles, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of North
Versailles," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles, and it is the intention of said Board
of Commissioners that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective
date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by
this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that
such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township
of North Versailles which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 2/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 3-15-2012.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the
Township prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Township or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Township.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township or other
instruments or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 3/411
O.
P.
Q.
R.
A.
[1]
B.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Township.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions
of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical
and style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention
of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above,
changes and revisions of a substantive nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the
Board of Commissioners, and it is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of
the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added.
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, deleted) 2-21-2013 by Ord. No. 1077." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 4/411
A.
B.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the
office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon
adoption, such copy or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and
such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in
the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books. to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and directed by him or her to
keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the
office of the Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation
adopted by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the
Board of Commissioners shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements to said
Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice
of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices
of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the
law of the Township to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 5/411
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after February 22,
2013.
Chapter 4. Auditor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 2-21-1977 by
Ord. No. 736 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 102, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 40.
Treasurer — See Ch. 58.
§ 4-1. Qualifications.
The audit of the accounts of the Township of North Versailles shall be made by a certified public
accountant registered in Pennsylvania, or by a firm of certified public accountants so registered, or a
competent public accountant, or a competent firm of public accountants.
§ 4-2. Appointment.
After final adoption of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles
shall annually appoint such Independent Auditor by resolution adopted at least 30 days prior to the
close of the fiscal year then closing.
§ 4-3. Powers and duties.
Such independent auditor shall have and possess all the powers and perform all the duties provided
under law for elected auditors.
§ 4-4. Compensation.
The compensation of any such type of Appointed Auditor shall be fixed by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 4-5. Abolishment of position of elected auditor.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 6/411
[1]
[1]
When an Independent Auditor is appointed as herein provided, the office of any elected auditor is
hereby abolished.
Chapter 7. Authorities, Municipal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
Article I. North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority
[Adopted 12-18-1961 by Ord. No. 503[1] (Ch. 1, Part 2B, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
Editor's Note: By Ord. No. 996, adopted 2-19-2002, Ord. No. 503 was amended to extend the term of
the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority through the year 2041.
§ 7-1. Desire to organize.
It is the desire of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles in the County of
Allegheny in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and said Board of Commissioners hereby signifies its
intention to organize an authority under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended.[1]
Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of
2001 (6-19-2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et
seq.
§ 7-2. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms and provisions of said
Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set
forth in full, as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
OF THE
NORTH VERSAILLES TOWNSHIP SANITARY AUTHORITY
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania
In compliance with the requirement of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved the second
day of May, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the Municipal
Authorities of the Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, that a Municipal
Authority be established under the provisions of the aforementioned law, the Township of North
Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, desiring that a Municipal Authority be established and
that a Certificate of Incorporation be issued to said Authority, does hereby certify:
(a) The name of the Authority shall be: North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority.
(b) The Authority is formed under the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
(c) North Versailles Township Authority has been organized under the Act of June 28th, 1935, P.L.
463,[1] as amended and is in existence in the Township of North Versailles. No other Authority
has been organized under the provisions of the Act of June 28th, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended,
or the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and is in existence within said Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 7/411
[1]
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of North Versailles, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
The names and addresses of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, are as follows: (Here followed the names and addresses of the
Township Commissioners.)
(e) The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of said Authority
are as follows: (Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office of the first Board
members.)
All of whom reside in and are citizens of the Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
WITNESS the hands of the President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners and the seal of
the Township.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH VERSAILLES
/s/ George Jacobs
President, Board of Commissioners
Attest:
/s/ Donald F. Bill
Secretary
(TOWNSHIP SEAL)
Editor's Note: The Municipalities Authorities Act of 1935 (Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463) was
superseded in 1945, which act was subsequently repealed. See now the Municipality Authorities Act,
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 7-3. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The said proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed by and on behalf of the
Township of North Versailles, by the President of the Board of Commissioners of said Township and
the seal of said Township shall be thereto affixed, attested by the Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners of said Township, and filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth. The Solicitor is
hereby authorized and directed to cause to be published the notice of intention to file the Articles of
Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by the aforementioned Act.
§ 7-4. Project.
The project to be undertaken by the said Authority is to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain and
operate, own, lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof
and sewage treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial waste.
§ 7-5. Compensation.
[Amended 9-23-1963 by Ord. No. 539]
Each member of the Board of North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority shall receive a salary of
$25 for attendance per meeting of the Board of said Authority, but for no more than 15 meetings per
annum, being 12 regular monthly meetings, and three other, additional or special, necessary meetings,
which salary provision shall be effective as of the date of the incorporation of said North Versailles
Township Sanitary Authority under this article.
Chapter 10. Board of Commissioners
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 8/411
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 44.
Article I. Compensation of Commissioners
[Adopted 12-18-1998 by Ord. No. 942 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 103, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 10-1. Rate.
The rate of compensation for the office of Commissioner in North Versailles Township is set at $3,250
per year.
§ 10-2. Applicability.
This rate of compensation shall only be applicable to persons elected for terms of office to commence
on January 1, 1996, and thereafter. Hereinafter, when persons take office as North Versailles Township
Commissioners, they shall be entitled to the rate set forth in § 10-2 above. A person who is presently
sitting as Township Commissioner with an unexpired term shall not be entitled to receive an increase in
the rate of compensation for and during the present term of his or her office. If such person is
reelected, then that person may receive the rate of compensation set forth in this article.
§ 10-3. Effective date.
This article shall become effective the first day of January 1996.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Health Care Benefits, adopted 8-19-2010 by Ord. No. 1050, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1082.
Chapter 15. Emergency Management Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 7-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 785 (Ch. 1, Part 3A, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 15-1. Creation.
[Amended 7-20-1987 by Ord. No. 854]
There is hereby created an Emergency Management Board of North Versailles Township to be
composed of five residents of the Township to serve at the will of the Board of Commissioners of North
Versailles Township. All of said persons shall serve without pay and shall be appointed by simple
resolution of the Board of Township Commissioners. From among the five, the resolution will designate
a Chairman or Director of the Board and a Secretary of the Board. The Chairman shall be responsible
for establishing meeting dates and supervising the work of the Management Board. The Secretary will
record all minutes, resolutions, correspondence and the functions of the Board.
§ 15-2. Powers and duties.
The duty of the Board shall be to see to the compliance with the statute referred to hereinabove[1] and
further to do the following:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 9/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
[1]
A.
Prepare and maintain an emergency management plan for the Township;
Equip and provide for an emergency operations center or centers;
Organize, prepare and coordinate all available resources in an emergency;
Provide and see to the training and exercise of personnel to insure prompt, efficient and effective
disaster emergency services;
Recommend the adopting of mutual aid agreements with adjacent political subdivisions for
reciprocal emergency assistance;
Organize and coordinate all locally available manpower, government materials and supplies;
Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the effects of any anticipated disasters;
Recommend the adoption of such rules and regulations pursuant to the statute as will be deemed
to be appropriate under the circumstances and to see to the execution and enforcement thereof;
Cooperate and coordinate with all public and private agencies to achieve the purposes of this
chapter;
Maintain all rules, regulations and orders of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of
Allegheny and federal government pertaining to emergency situations;
Provide prompt and accurate information regarding emergencies and conditions regarding any
local disasters;
Provide periodic reports to the Township Board of Commissioners regarding progress,
proceedings, planning, education and training of all personnel.
Editor's Note: So in original; may refer to statute cited in the preamble of Ord. No. 785.
§ 15-3. Subject to Board of Commissioners.
All functions of this Board shall be subject to the absolute control and regulation of the Township Board
of Commissioners. All agreements, regulations, rules, contracts, functions and expenses must first be
submitted to the Township Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles for ultimate
adoption and approval before the same may have legal import and effect.
Chapter 20. Firemen's Relief Association
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-4-1932 by
Ord. No. 91; amended in its entirety 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 854 (Ch. 1, Part 4, of the 1987 Code of
Ordinances). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police force — See Ch. 48.
§ 20-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in providing fire protection
and/or emergency services in the Township of North Versailles: North Versailles Township
Firemen's Relief Association.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 10/411
B.
C.
[1]
(a)
(1)
A.
The above-named association has been formed for the benefit of its members and their families in
case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
The above-named association of the Township is designated the proper association to receive
such funds as are due and payable to the Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of
Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 20-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Board of Commissioners shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the Commonwealth the
name(s) of the active associations and the percentage of service they contribute to the protection of
the Township. Such certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 20-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Township Treasury all such sums of money that may hereafter
be paid into the Township Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes
paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of December 18, No.
205, Section 701 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.[1] Such monies received by the Township Treasurer from the State
Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of receipt. The funds
shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of service established in the certification to the
Auditor General and with other provisions of the Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 895.701 et seq.
Chapter 21. Fire Protection Policy
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 8-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 1090. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 20.
§ 21-1. Recognized fire companies.
North Versailles Township Board of Commissioners will recognize three fire companies, Sta. 211 (West
Wilmerding); Sta. 212 (Crestas); Sta. 213 (Fire Department of North Versailles).
§ 21-2. Residency requirement.
The President and Fire Chief shall reside in the Township of North Versailles.
§ 21-3. Personnel records and documentation.
All North Versailles Township fire departments are to maintain a complete list of active firemen
personnel records. All records are expected to be copied and placed on file at the North Versailles
Municipal Building.
Personnel records are to include the following:
First and last name.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 11/411
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
Home address.
Home phone/cell phone.
Emergency contact numbers of family and/or friends.
Classification and/or title among their corresponding department.
Driver's license number.
Work permit if the personnel is a minor.
Any changes in personnel records should be given to the Township Manager within 30 days
of the change.
All North Versailles Township fire departments shall be subject to background checks completed
by the Chief of Police for all active firemen and personnel. Background checks are required for all
current and new fire personnel who are considered active members who respond to emergency
calls including Department Chief, Assistant Chief, and/or any other management positions.
Background checks on all personnel are to be turned into the Township upon completion. An
active firefighter is defined as a member of the fire department in good standing and is qualified to
respond to and extinguish fires or perform other fire department emergency services and has
actively participated in such activities during the past year.
Act 151 PA criminal history check. Any persons found to have a criminal record which
includes a felony going back five years shall not be recognized and shall not be permitted to
be a member of any North Versailles Township fire department. See § 21-6A below.
Act 34 child abuse records. Any persons found to have a child abuse record will not be
recognized and shall not be permitted to be a member of any North Versailles Township fire
department. See § 21-6B below.
Driving record status. Any persons having a suspended license shall not be permitted to drive
any fire equipment or municipally owned equipment.
Personnel identification cards shall be issued to all designated drivers of emergency vehicles.
Section 75 Pa. C.S. 1606(a) states that "No person, except those specifically exempted in
subsection (b), shall drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person has been issued and
is in immediate possession of a valid commercial driver's license and applicable
endorsements valid for the vehicle he is driving." Subsection b(3), (4) exempt persons who
are volunteer firefighters and members of rescue or emergency squads with Class C licenses
and who have a certificate of authorization from their fire chief while operating a fire or
emergency vehicle registered to the fire departments or municipality.
No North Versailles Township firefighting personnel shall be permitted to operate a
commercial motor vehicle unless they have completed an Emergency Vehicle Operations
Course or have a Pennsylvania commercial driver's license or a certificate of
authorization from their Fire Chief.
Certification of completion of an emergency vehicle operations course shall be submitted
to the Township Manager to be kept in the personnel file.
Maintaining records. Two copies of all records are to be made. One copy must be filed at the
North Versailles Municipal Building, and one copy must be filed at the corresponding
department to which fire personnel are listed and recognized. Any changes to these records
are to be given to the Township Manager within 30 days of the change.
North Versailles Township fire departments will supply to the Township Manager all training and
certification records for each of their firemen who are recognized as active firefighters and/or any
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 12/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
person who responds to emergency calls. This list will specify all certifications, training courses
and hours completed. All records will include the following:
Name of firefighter and/or emergency personnel.
Certifications and training received and/or completed.
Classification and/or title of personnel within their corresponding department.
Dates on which certification and/or training was acquired.
All firefighting personnel are to complete and abide by North Versailles Township Minimum
Training Standards for Firefighters as recognized by their given classifications and duties
within their corresponding fire department.
All firefighting personnel must provide a signed statement that they have reviewed and
understand the North Versailles Safety and Fire Protection Policies. Said statement shall be
submitted to the Township to be kept in the individual's personnel file. The home department
of the personnel is required to keep a copy of the signed statement on file.
§ 21-4. Equipment and vehicle maintenance.
Firefighting safety equipment status checks.
All firefighting equipment is to be checked regularly by the department Chief or qualified
personnel; said qualified person may be an outside entity or in-house personnel. All
manufacturers' suggested inspections and maintenance should be followed along with state
inspection, air packs flow test, all air breathing systems, ladders, hoses, and pump test. State
and/or federally mandated documentation shall be provided to the Township Manager upon
demand.
§ 21-5. Minimum training standards for firefighters.
The following will serve as the minimum training standards for all fire departments in North Versailles
Township. All training courses, classes, certifications and attendance documentation must be provided
by a state, county or nationally accredited, certified and recognized instructor. If a question exists as to
the propriety of an instructional course, the Township shall determine if such course is acceptable.
Active firefighter.
Essentials of Firefighting (all four modules) or Fundamentals of Firefighting.
Structural Burn Session (final module of essentials).
Hazardous Materials Operations Level.
Yearly: A refresher course is required.
Note: New and current firefighters and emergency personnel shall have one year to enroll and
two years to complete the listed training standards. The time period shall be automatically
tolled if a firefighter is serving in active military duty. A firefighter shall make their best effort to
complete the required training in the time required. If a firefighter is unable to comply with the
stated timeframe for completion of training because of illness or work or school studies, said
firefighter may make a request to the Township for an extension of the required time period.
§ 21-6. Criminal history.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 13/411
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
(a)
(1)
A.
No individual with a criminal record which includes a felony offense or higher shall be eligible to
apply for any position within the North Versailles Township Volunteer Fire system until a period of
at least five years has passed from the last date associated with the last crime committed, e.g.,
the day of the dismissal, the day of disposition or the last day of probation.
No individual convicted of a sex crime or child-related crime shall be eligible to apply for any
position within the North Versailles Township Volunteer Fire system regardless of the time-period
lapsed. Said crimes include but are not limited to the following: rape (including spousal, date and
statutory), sexual assault or abuse, sexual battery, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse, child
abuse, possession or manufacture of child pornography or sex with a minor.
§ 21-7. Dispatch.
All Township fire departments shall be dispatched for the following:
Structure fires from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
School alarms.
Senior citizen buildings.
Nursing homes.
All Township equipment shall be utilized before calling for mutual aide unless equipment is needed
that is not available through Township fire companies.
Township fire departments shall respond to all emergency calls when dispatched regardless of the
nature (public service) unless they cannot crew.
In the event that a Township fire department does not respond to a 911 call out within the
Township, the next available Township fire department shall be dispatched.
No Township fire department officers shall respond to an emergency call outside their fire district
with their own vehicles in emergency status (lights on).
§ 21-8. Zero-tolerance levels.
There shall be zero tolerance for alcohol use, drug use, or theft within North Versailles Township's
volunteer firefighters or emergency personnel. Any persons found stealing or using alcohol or
drugs during emergency calls; when the tones are activated; when acting as or performing the
duties of a firefighter; and when covered by the Township's Workers Compensation Insurance
Policy shall be suspended immediately pending further investigation. Any fire department
personnel who fail to report such action may also be subject to suspension.
A police report is required to be filed immediately when there is an accident involving an
emergency vehicle.
§ 21-9. Tax monies.
Fire tax monies can be used for the following subject to final approval by the Board of
Commissioners:
New equipment.
New equipment shall only be for the use and aid of fire and rescue operations.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 14/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
Fire department utility bills. The Township may approve the use of tax monies to pay the utility
and fuel bills, provided that original documentation, i.e., bills, invoices, receipts, are supplied
to the Township Manager. The use of tax monies for utility bills shall be subject to the
following:
Approved utilities include the following: gas, water, ground phone line, sewage and
electric.
Nonapproved utilities include but are not limited to the following: cellular phones and
cable services.
Fire halls that contain a social club cannot submit 100% of their utility bills. These fire
halls will be evaluated by the Board of Commissioners who will determine what portion of
the utility bills are for firefighting purposes.
Emergency vehicles.
Approved expenditures for emergency vehicles include the following: purchase,
maintenance and fuel.
Training and certification.
Approved training and certification costs include the following: reasonable meal and
lodging costs, cost of the class, and vehicle mileage. Mileage shall be reimbursed at the
current rate set by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). These costs will only be paid
upon successful completion of the training and/or certification.
Nonapproved costs relating to training and certification include but are not limited to the
following: entertainment, per diem monies, extracurricular activities, and all other
expenditures deemed inappropriate by the Township.
National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS) and Pennsylvania Fire Incident Reporting
System (PennFIRS).
Background checks.
It is mandatory that all monies spent are to be used to better the firefighting services supplied to
the citizens of North Versailles. Firefighting purposes include:
Training.
Personal protective equipment and fire safety protection.
Fire department utilities.
Emergency vehicles, purchase and maintenance.
Building costs (i.e., mortgage or loans for fire halls). One hundred percent of the mortgage or
loan payment will not be approved if the building contains a social hall. The Board of
Commissioners will determine what portion of this mortgage or loan payment is for firefighting
purposes.
Fire hall maintenance. Bills for buildings that are used for social clubs or storage buildings will
not be approved.
Radio and communication devices.
Required hand tools.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 15/411
(9)
(10)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Background checks.
Audits.
It is prohibited to use tax funds for social or recreational halls.
It is prohibited to use tax funds for any type of personal use.
It is prohibited to use tax funds to secure additional loans. Money acquired from the fire tax is not
a guaranteed income. The decision to impose a fire tax is a decision made by the Board of
Commissioners on a year-to-year basis.
At the end of each fiscal year an audit may be required of the fire tax money disbursed to and
received by the North Versailles Township's fire departments. Any mishandling of funds may result
in the forfeit of funds for future years. Additionally, the Township of North Versailles may pursue
legal action if the Board of Commissioners deems it necessary.
§ 21-10. Noncompliance and violation of policies.
At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, any noncompliance and/or violation of this document,
North Versailles Safety and Fire Protection Policies, shall be viewed as grounds for any of the following
actions:
Probation periods.
Withholding of fire tax funding.
Partial forfeit of fire tax.
Complete forfeit of fire tax.
Discontinuation from dispatch.
Discontinuation of being recognized by North Versailles Township.
Chapter 25. Library
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 5-13-1974 by
Ord. No. 696 (Ch. 12, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 25-1. Establishment.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles does hereby establish a public library
to be known as "The North Versailles Public Library," to provide free public library services, and the
said North Versailles Public Library is hereby authorized to act as an agency of the Township of North
Versailles, to provide free public library services to the residents and taxpayers of the Township for and
on behalf of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 25-2. Operation.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles shall operate and maintain, and
assist in the operation and maintenance of the said North Versailles Public Library, in accordance with
the provisions of the Library Code adopted by Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324.[1]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 16/411
[1]
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
[3]
C.
D.
[1]
Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4101 et seq.
§ 25-3. Board of Library Directors.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles, in accordance with the
provisions of Article IV of Section 411 of the Library Code,[1] shall designate seven persons to
serve as its representatives on the Board of Library Directors of the North Versailles Public Library,
with each representative to serve a term of three years, with two or more terms expiring in
successive years, and have all the powers, duties and authority set out under the provisions of
said Library Code.
Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4411.
Under Article IV of Section 413 of the Library Code,[2] the said Library Board shall designate a
Treasurer of the Board of Library Directors of said library agency, and shall give bond to the
Township of North Versailles with satisfactory surety in such an amount as the Library Board may
determine.
Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4413.
The Board of Library Directors shall prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Versailles, by November 1 of each year, and shall furnish and file such reports
as are required under Article IV, Sections 413 and 414, of the Library Code.[3]
Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. §§ 4413 and 4414.
The said North Versailles Public Library, through its Board of Library Directors, shall give free
library service to the residents and taxpayers of the Township of North Versailles.
Chapter 31. Manager
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1062. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 31-1. Adoption by reference.
The title, caption and recitals stated above are hereby incorporated into this chapter as if fully stated
herein.[1]
Editor's Note: Said text is included in Ord. No. 1062, which is on file in the Township offices.
§ 31-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as "the North Versailles Township Manager Ordinance."
§ 31-3. Position created.
There is hereby created in the Township of North Versailles the office of Township Manager.
§ 31-4. Appointment; removal or resignation.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of the members of the Board of
Commissioners. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners, and he may
be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days before such removal is
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 17/411
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
to become effective, the Board of Commissioners shall furnish the Manger with a written statement
setting forth its intention to remove him/her and the reasons therefor. The Manager shall give the
Board of Commissioners at least 30 days' notice of his/her intention to resign. The Board of
Commissioners may enter into employment contracts concerning the position of Township Manager for
a definite term in accordance with applicable law.
§ 31-5. Compensation.
The salary and benefits of the Manager shall be established by the Board of Commissioners by
resolution. Said salary and benefits may thereafter be amended by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 31-6. Residency.
The Township Manager need not be a resident of North Versailles Township.
§ 31-7. Bond.
The Manager shall give a bond to the Township of North Versailles with a bonding company as surety
in an amount to be approved by the Board of Commissioners. Said bond is to conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his/her duties; the premium for the bond is to be paid by the Township of North
Versailles.
§ 31-8. Responsibility for administration.
Subsequent to appointment and after assuming office, the Township Manager shall be the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Township of North Versailles. He or she shall be responsible to the Board
of Commissioners as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township
of North Versailles. The powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall be vested
with the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other Township officers.
§ 31-9. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, the powers and duties of the Township
Manager shall be as follows. The Township Manager shall:
Supervise and direct all Township Offices and employees except as otherwise provided by law.
Neither the Board of Commissioners nor any of its members shall give orders to any subordinate
of the Township Manager unless voted upon at a public meeting of the Board of Commissioners.
Prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners, before the close of each fiscal year, an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager shall obtain from the head of
each department, agency or board, or any qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and such other supporting data as the Township Manager requires. The Township
Manager shall review such estimates with the Finance Committee Chairman and may revise them
before submitting the budget to the Board of Commissioners.
The Township Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board of Commissioners.
The Township Manager shall develop long-range fiscal plans for the Township with the help of
the Finance Committee. Such plans shall be presented annually to the Board of
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 18/411
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
I.
Commissioners for review and adoption.
The Township Manager shall submit to the Board of Commissioners, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and the administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding year.
Attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners and, upon request, its committees. The
Township Manager shall receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of Commissioners and
its committees.
Prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of Commissioners and supply facts pertinent
thereto.
Keep the Board of Commissioners informed as to the conduct of Township affairs, submit periodic
reports on the condition of the Township finances and submit such other reports as the Board of
Commissioners requests and make such recommendations to the Board as they deem advisable.
See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and privileges granted by the Township
are observed.
Employ, by and with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, experts and consultants to
perform work and to provide advice in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
See that all money owed to the Township is promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken
for the security and collection of all of the Township's claims.
Be the Purchasing Officer of the Township, and purchase in accordance with the provisions of the
First Class Township Code[1] all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Township. Keep an account of all purchases and, from time to time or
when directed by the Board, make a full written report thereof. The Township Manager shall also
issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval to the Board, governing the procurement of all
municipal supplies and equipment.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 31-10. Complaints.
All complaints regarding Township services shall be referred to the office of the Township Manager.
The Manager or a department head designated by the Manager shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 31-11. Pension plans.
The Township Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of all Township pension plans.
§ 31-12. Service as Township Secretary.
The Township Manager shall serve as Secretary of the Township and assume all the functions and
duties as are prescribed to a Township Secretary in the First Class Township Code and cause
appropriate records to be made, preserved and certified, as required by law or other action of the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 31-13. Employee or personnel issues.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 19/411
[1]
[1]
[2]
The Board of Commissioners and its members shall deal with any employee/personnel issue through
the Township Manager.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-14. Authorization.
The Board of Commissioners for the Township of North Versailles is hereby authorized and directed to
execute any and all documents, and perform any and all functions necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
Chapter 36. Pensions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Social Security
[Adopted 5-20-1968 by Ord. No. 621 (Ch. 1, Part 5A, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 36-1. Social security plan.
The social security plan and agreement to extend to its employees the basic protection accorded by
the Federal Social Security Act,[1] which amending plan and agreement, consisting of five pages, is
incorporated herein by reference in its entirety and made part hereof, has been presented to the Board
of Township Commissioners and is hereby approved and accepted with all its terms and provisions,
subject to approval thereof by the Secretary of Labor and Industry, who is authorized to include the
Township of North Versailles in any modification of the Federal-Commonwealth Agreement entered
into between the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
pursuant to Section 218 of the Federal Social Security Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 310 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 418.
Article II. Police Pension Plan
The Township of North Versailles Police Pension Plan, as amended, is on file in the Township's
office.
Article III. Municipal Employees Retirement System
[Adopted 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 1048]
§ 36-2. Enrollment in system.
North Versailles Township, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System, hereby elects to change its member benefits in that system as authorized by the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, as amended,[1] and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements
and provisions of said Article and the Law, as the case may be, and to assume all obligations, financial
and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities by said amendment, as the case may be. All
references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated between the Pennsylvania Municipal
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 20/411
[1]
[2]
[1]
Retirement Board and the municipality under the provisions of Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement Law.[2]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.401 et seq.
§ 36-3. Membership.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all full-time
municipal employees of the Township. Membership for elected officials is optional. The election by
elected officials to join the system must be made within one year after the employee first enters the
service of the Township. Membership for elected officials, part-time employees not currently
employees, employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis, and individuals paid only on a fee
basis is prohibited.
§ 36-4. Accrual of benefits.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or partial year thereof that the
member was employed by the Township from original date of hire or the expiration of the member's
probationary period if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement dated November
6, 2008, shall accrue based on all credited service granted and earned in accordance with this section.
§ 36-5. Payment of obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and the agreement between the
Board and North Versailles Township shall be made by the Township in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 36-6. Agreement to provide benefits.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the system shall provide the benefits set forth in the
agreement between the Board and North Versailles Township, dated November 6, 2008. The passage
and adoption of this article by North Versailles Township is an official acceptance of said agreement
and the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit package. North Versailles
Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or which may be created due to
the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
§ 36-7. Plan authorization; repeal of prior provisions.
North Versailles Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the Township's
Municipal Pension Plan and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance Number 978
either immediately or on July 1, 2008, which is the effective date of the agreement dated November 6,
2008, between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board and North Versailles Township,
whichever is later.
§ 36-8. Filing of copies; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 21/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
employees of North Versailles Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
effective the first day of February 1965, with the revised plan structure reflected in the agreement
dated November 6, 2008, effective the first day of July 2008.
Chapter 40. Personnel Policies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Drug and Alcohol Policy
[Adopted 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 943 (Ch. 1, Part 8, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 40-1. Applicability.
All employees of North Versailles Township who operate equipment for which the operator must
possess a CDL are covered by this article.
§ 40-2. Declaration of policy; conditions of employment.
It is declared to be the policy of North Versailles Township that drugs and alcohol will not be permitted
in the workplace, that all commercial drivers must be in full compliance with the UCDL Act and that
North Versailles employees will be governed by this article and the UCDL Act.[1]
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of illegal drugs or alcohol is
prohibited in the Township workplace.
Illegal drug usage, whether on or off the job, may adversely affect an employee's job performance
and jeopardize the safety of other employees and the general public. As such, it is just cause for
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
Employees are not permitted to perform safety-sensitive functions within four hours after using
alcohol. Employees are not permitted to use alcohol during work hours. No driver shall use alcohol
for eight hours following an accident or until he or she undergoes a postaccident alcohol test,
whichever comes first.
If an employee reports to work in a condition giving a supervisor reasonable cause to suspect the
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs, the employee may be required to submit to blood or a breath
and urine drug test. If the tests reveal that the employee has an alcohol level greater than 0.04 or
has illegal drugs in his or her system, the employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment. An employee with an alcohol level of 0.02 to 0.039 will not
be permitted to perform safety-sensitive functions for 24 hours.
When there is reasonable cause, vehicles, lockers and/or related personal areas may be searched
without prior notice to ensure a work environment free of alcohol and illegal drugs. Any employee
found to have illegal drugs in his or her vehicle, locker and/or related personal area will be subject
to immediate disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
Any employee who may be undergoing medically prescribed treatment with a controlled substance
which may limit his or her ability to perform on the job must report this treatment to his or her
supervisor prior to beginning work. Failure to report as required by this subsection shall be cause
for disciplinary action.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 22/411
G.
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
It is a condition of continuing employment with the Township for an employee to notify the
Township if he or she is convicted under federal or state statute for the use, sale or distribution of
drugs. Such notification must occur within five days of conviction.
Editor's Note: The Uniform Commercial Drivers License Act (UCDL Act) is codified at 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1601 et seq.
§ 40-3. Drug and alcohol testing circumstances.
The Township may, at its option, conduct drug testing for the following reasons: preemployment
testing, at random, with reasonable suspicion, post-accident, fitness for duty and follow-up to a positive
drug test. Alcohol will be tested for all the above circumstances.
Preemployment. Prior to employment, all applicants will be required to undergo drug screening.
Applicants who test positive will be denied employment. Failure to consent to this screen will be
considered as withdrawal of one's application for employment.
Random testing. To encourage year round avoidance of illegal drugs, and to be in compliance with
governmental regulations, Township will conduct random tests of CDL drivers at an annualized
rate of 50% for drugs and 25% for alcohol. Those to be tested will be selected at random, which
means that every driver, whether previously tested or not, has an equal chance to be tested every
time tests are conducted. Once an individual is notified of the test, he or she must go to the
collection site immediately.
Reasonable suspicion testing. May be conducted based upon, among other things:
Direct observation of drug use or possession and/or physical symptoms of being under the
influence of an illegal drug or alcohol.
A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior.
Arrest, indictment or conviction for a drug or alcohol related offense or identification of the
employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug possession, use or
trafficking.
§ 40-4. Post-accident testing.
Such testing shall be required for drivers and codrivers who are involved in an accident where death
occurs or when the driver issued a citation by the police for a moving violation. The drug and/or alcohol
test shall be conducted as soon as possible after the accident takes place.
§ 40-5. Return to duty testing.
An employee found to have engaged in prohibited drug and alcohol conduct shall submit to return to
duty drug and alcohol testing prior to performing safety-sensitive functions.
§ 40-6. Follow-up testing.
Employees who have engaged in illegal drug or alcohol use shall be required to submit to drug and
alcohol testing a minimum of six times for 12 months following the incident. The number of tests may
be greater, at the discretion of the Township or the designated substance abuse professional. Cost of
follow-up testing will be borne by Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 23/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 40-7. Drug testing.
Urine specimens will be screened for the following classes of drugs and at the cutoffs listed below:
Immunoassay GC/MS
Drug
Screen Cutoffs
(ng/ml)
Confirmation Cutoffs
(ng/ml)
Amphetamines 1,000 500
Cannabinoids (marijuana) 50 15
Cocaine and metabolite 300 150
Opiates 300 300
Phencyclidine (PCP) 25 25
§ 40-8. Alcohol testing.
The alcohol test will be conducted by a certified breath alcohol technician (BAT) using an evidential
breath testing (EBT) device which is approved by the National Highway Safety Administration
(NHTSA), or by blood sample at a hospital selected by the Township from time to time. Tests will be
conducted in an area where confidentiality of results is assured. If the alcohol breath testing indicates
an alcohol concentration 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test must be done 15 minutes to 20 minutes
later.
§ 40-9. Collection sites.
Township must follow the guidelines established by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) for
collection, handling and storing blood and urine specimens and must meet chain of custody
requirements. Alcohol testing can be done by a certified breath alcohol technician (BAT) using an
approved evidential breath testing (EBT) device, or by taking a blood sample at a hospital with
appropriate hospital personnel.
Unobserved specimen collection. Individuals shall be permitted to provide urine specimens in
private and need not be directly observed at the discretion of the Township.
Observed specimen collection. Must occur under the following conditions:
When the specimen falls outside the range of 90.5° F. to 99.8° F. or shows signs of
contamination.
When a previous urine specimen provided by the individual was determine by the laboratory
to have a specific gravity of less than 1.003 and a creatinine concentration below 0.2 g/l.
When the collection site person observes conduct clearly indicating an attempt to substitute or
adulterate the sample.
§ 40-10. Approved laboratories.
Only laboratories certified by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the Department of
Health and Human Service (DHHS) to conduct workplace testing programs will be used to analyze
urine specimens. The NIDA/DHHS certification indicates that the laboratory meets the highest
standards for drug testing.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 24/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
§ 40-11. Review of test results.
The Township, from time to time, will designate a qualified person to review and interpret test results
obtained through drug testing. The person shall be knowledgeable in the medical use of prescription
drugs and the pharmacology and toxicology of illicit drugs.
The designated person will receive test results from the laboratory and evaluate them before
notifying the Township. Prior to notifying the Township, the person will conduct a medical interview,
via phone or in person, to discuss the individual's medical history and other biomedical factors. He
will receive all medical records made available by the tested employee or in the possession of the
Township to determine if there might be a legitimate medical reason to a confirmed positive test. If
there is, the person will report the test as negative.
If the designated person is unable to reach the person who tested positive, he shall report his
efforts to contact the driver to the Township. As soon as possible, the Township shall request the
driver to contact the designated person prior to dispatching the driver or within 24 hours,
whichever is sooner.
Reports of drug test results. The designated person will forward results only to the person
designated by the Township to receive such results. He shall report whether an individual's test is
negative or positive. If positive, he will identify the substance for which the test was negative.
§ 40-12. Split sample testing.
After the designated person informs a driver that he will be reported to the Township as testing positive
for illegal drug use, the driver has the right to request that the split sample be tested at another
NIDA/DHHS laboratory. The driver must make this request to the designated person within 72 hours
after the MRO driver evaluation call or visit. The cost of the second laboratory analysis and MRO
review will be borne by the driver.
§ 40-13. Reports of alcohol test results.
Following a confirmed alcohol test of 0.02% or greater, the person in charge of the testing process
must immediately report the results to the Township representative designated to receive this
information. This is done so that the Township can take steps to ensure the driver testing positive will
not drive his or her vehicle. The designated Township representative must provide the testing sites with
a telephone number where the representative can be reached at all times.
§ 40-14. Disciplinary actions.
A driver who is found to have a breath or blood alcohol concentration of 0.02% or greater, but less
than 0.04% shall not be allowed to perform safety-sensitive functions for at least 24 hours
following the administration of the test.
A driver testing positive for drugs or having a breath or blood alcohol concentration of 0.04% or
greater will not be allowed to perform safety-sensitive functions until he or she has a negative drug
or alcohol test.
If a driver refuses to submit to required drug and alcohol testing, he or she will not be allowed to
perform safety-sensitive functions. In this event, it will be deemed to be a confirmed illegal drug
and/or alcohol use.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 25/411
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
If a driver fails to appear for testing, it will be considered as a refusal to test and the driver will not
be allowed to perform safety-sensitive functions. In this event, it will be deemed to be a confirmed
illegal drug and/or alcohol use.
Termination of the employee is mandatory after a third confirmed finding of illegal drug or alcohol
use.
§ 40-15. Substance abuse professional.
Under DOT/FHWA drug and alcohol regulations, any driver who engages in prohibited drug or alcohol
conduct shall be referred to a substance abuse professional (SAP) for an evaluation and possible
referral to a counseling or treatment program. The SAP may make specific recommendations for
follow-up drug and alcohol testing which could last as long as 60 months from a driver's return to duty
date. No driver may return to duty without a negative drug and alcohol test and a evaluation by the
SAP that the driver has properly followed the rehabilitation program presented by the SAP. The cost of
SAP service shall be borne by the individual.
Article II. Sexual Harassment
[Adopted 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 999]
§ 40-16. Findings.
Harassment on the basis of a person's sex by a supervisor, coworker or other person is a
discriminatory practice which violates federal law and regulations. Aside from being illegal, sexual
harassment undermines the integrity of individual work relationships and damages the morale of the
entire work force.
§ 40-17. Policy.
It is the policy of the Township of North Versailles to prohibit all forms of illegal discrimination including
that which is based upon a person's sex. Accordingly, any practice or activity which constitutes sexual
harassment is strictly forbidden within Township workplaces and may, if substantiated in accordance
with this policy, result in disciplinary action.
§ 40-18. Definitions.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct
of a sexual nature when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of a
person's employment; or
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a basis for employment
decisions affecting that person; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with a person's work
performance; or
Such conduct creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 26/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
A.
B.
§ 40-19. Sanctions.
Sexual harassment is a serious violation of work rules of the Township and, if proven, shall be grounds
for the imposition of discipline including, but not limited to, discharge without support or prior
occurrence or disciplinary action.
Chapter 44. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 2-16-1970 by
Ord. No. 636 (Ch. 1, Part 3B, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Commissioners — See Ch. 10.
Airport district overlay — See Ch. 81.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 44-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,[1] there is hereby created in the
Township of North Versailles a Planning Commission consisting of five members whose terms
shall be for a period of four years each, excepting that the members first appointed shall be
appointed:
One member for a one-year term;
One member for a two-year term;
One member for a three-year term;
Two members, each for a four-year term.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
The powers and duties of said Planning Commission shall be as set forth in said act.
Chapter 48. Police Force
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 36, Art. II.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Article I. Police Department
[Adopted 3-13-1937 by Ord. No. 119 (Ch. 1, Part 6A, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 48-1. Creation.
A police force is hereby created and established, and designated as the Police Department in and for
the Township of North Versailles.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 27/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 48-2. Powers.
The powers of policemen constituting said police force are that:
They shall be ex officio constables of the Township and may, without warrant and on view, arrest
and commit for hearing any and all persons guilty of a breach of the peace, vagrancy, riotous or
disorderly conduct, or drunkenness, or who may be engaged in the commission of any unlawful
act tending to imperil the personal security or endanger the property of the citizens, or violating
any of the ordinances, of the Township for the violation of which a fine or penalty is imposed;
They shall have authority to issue and execute all criminal process for the violation of the
Township ordinances, which may be issued by a Magisterial District Judge of the Township of
North Versailles;
They shall charge the same fees and costs as pertain by law to constables for similar services, but
such fees and costs shall be paid to the Township Treasurer for the use of the Township.
§ 48-3. Composition.
Said police force or Police Department shall consist of one or more policemen to be appointed and
designated by the Board of Township Commissioners as the Chief of Police, and other police officers
as the Board of Commissioners shall designate from time to time who shall serve until their successors
are duly designated and qualified.
§ 48-4. Compensation.
The salaries of such policemen are to be fixed and provided for under the budget ordinance; and are to
be payable semimonthly, with no additional fees or compensation thereto, excepting public rewards
and the expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties.
§ 48-5. Regulations.
The Township police, when on duty, shall wear a badge or shield with the words "North Versailles
Township Police" inscribed thereon, to be provided by the Township of North Versailles, which is to
remain the property of said Township.
The Chief of Police and other members of police force shall obey the orders of the Board of
Township Commissioners issued through the Police Committee.
The Board of Township Commissioners are to prescribe all necessary rules and regulations for the
organization of the police force or Police Department of the Township.
The President of the Board of Township Commissioners is empowered to appoint a Police
Committee of three members, to remove any of said committee members, and to fill any
vacancies occurring therein; to designate the Chairman thereof; said committee shall have the
power and duty of superintendence and jurisdiction of all matters pertaining to the Township
police.
Article II. Police Review Board
[Adopted 2-22-1993 by Ord. No. 916 (Ch. 1, Part 3C, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 28/411
§ 48-6. Creation.
There is hereby created a North Versailles Police Review Board, hereinafter referred to as "Board."
§ 48-7. Purpose; authority.
The purpose of the Board shall be to investigate and review conduct, allegations of conduct,
allegations of misconduct or any other police problems which are submitted it. The Board shall have
the authority and power to interview witnesses and to conduct informal hearings dealing with all
personnel matters and complaints regarding North Versailles Township Police. The Board shall have
the same authority to investigate and subpoena witnesses in dealing with police and police problems
as would the Board of Commissioners or any other committee or office thereof. The Board shall be
deemed to be a duly authorized arm of the North Versailles Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 48-8. Timing of meetings.
The Board shall meet and consider police personnel problems when called to do so by the
Chairperson of the Police Review Board, the Township Board of Commissioners, the Township Police
Committee or the President of the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 48-9. Investigation.
When called upon to meet, the Police Review Board will gather data, interview witnesses, obtain
statements and undertake such other activity in its discretion that it deems to be reasonable under the
circumstances in order to form a factual basis regarding any allegations or problems. The North
Versailles Township Police and all North Versailles Township employees will have the same duty to
cooperate and report to the Board as he or she would have to report to the Board of Commissioners or
any authorized committee of North Versailles Township.
§ 48-10. Report.
Thereupon, the Board will report to the Board of Commissioners, the President or Police Committee,
as the case may be, and recommend what action should or should not be taken. The report and
opinions of the Board are advisory only.
§ 48-11. Composition; compensation; meetings.
The Board shall be composed of three individuals, one of whom will be designated by the Township
Board of Commissioners as Chairman of the Board. Each member shall serve at will and shall receive
no remuneration except such remuneration as he or she may receive in the regular course of their
duties and functions for North Versailles Township. The Board shall meet from time to time at times
and places as selected by the Chairman at the request of either the Chairman of the Board, the Police
Committee of the Township, the Board of Township Commissioners or President of North Versailles
Township.
Chapter 58. Treasurer and Tax Collector
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 12-17-1984 by
Ord. No. 828; amended in its entirety 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 871 (Ch. 1, Part 1, § 104, of the 1987
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 29/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Code of Ordinances). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 4.
Taxation — See Ch. 270.
§ 58-1. Compensation for Treasurer and Tax Collector.
The annual total compensation for the Township Treasurer is hereby established and fixed as
$9,000; that is, $500 as Township Treasurer and $8,500 as Tax Collector for the Township of North
Versailles, which includes, but is not limited to, receiving and collecting taxes and all other monies
excluding delinquent liened taxes and municipal lien claims for the Township of North Versailles,
accounting therefor, or acknowledging, signing checks, warrants, documents, instruments,
receipts, contracts or any other papers whatever required of him or her in the discharge of his or
her duties as Township Treasurer as required by law.
Tax Collector.
[Added 1-31-2013 by Ord. No. 1076]
The annual compensation for office of elected Tax Collector commencing on January 1, 2014,
is hereby set at $10,000 annually.
The elected Tax Collector shall be entitled to office space in the municipal building at no
charge.
In addition to the compensation, the Township shall pay reasonable expenses for the
functions of office only insofar as they are related to the collection of taxes for the Township.
These expenses shall include actual printing and postage.
§ 58-2. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect commencing with the term of the next elected Township Treasurer to
begin on January 1, 1990.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 75. Adult Uses
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Article I. Obscene Acts and Materials
[Adopted 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 769 (Ch. 13, Part 4, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 30/411
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE
Having knowledge of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or other
content which appears in a motion-picture film, publication, or live theater production, or
knowledge of the acts of obscenity, assignation, or prostitution which occur in any place.
LIVE THEATER PRODUCTION
Any dramatic musical or comedic production performed in the presence of a live audience.
MASSAGE
Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human body, for remedial, hygienic or other
purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, or any similar treatment, accomplished by
hand or by the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR
Any building or structure or portion thereof, located within the Township, which is open to
members of the general public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services
are offered.
MATTER
A motion-picture film, live theater production, publication, or all three.
MODEL STUDIO
Shall mean:
Any place there is conducted the business of furnishing figure models who pose in the
nude for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person, or for the purpose of
being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly
depicted for persons who pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity,
for the right or opportunity to so depict the figure model, or for admission to, or for
permission to remain upon, or as a condition for remaining upon the place; or
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing or providing or procuring,
for a fee or other consideration, compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the
nude to be observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college, public or private
school, or any governmental agency wherein the person, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation so operating has met the requirements established by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to
issue and confer, a diploma, degree or honorary diploma; or
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing or procuring
figure models solely for any studio described in Subsection B(1) of this subsection,
defined immediately hereinabove.
MOTION-PICTURE FILM
Any:
Film or plate negative;
Film or plate positive;
Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive form, designed for
exhibition by a project on a screen; or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 31/411
E.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images on a screen.
NUDE
Completely without clothing; or
With the human male or female genitals, public area or buttocks with less than a full opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
OBSCENE MATTER
Any matter:
Which the average adult person, applying contemporary community standards, would find,
when considered as a whole, appeals to prurient interests; and
Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of:
Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
Masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of the genitals or genital area; and
Which the matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational, or
scientific value.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity.
PLACE
Any building, structure or space, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or
not, or unimproved ground.
PUBLICATION
Any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing, printing, illustration, picture, sound recording, or a
motion-picture film which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited in
a coin-operated machine.
SALE
A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for valuable consideration, and
shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or
whereby any valuable consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of possession of,
obscene matter.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of North Versailles.
§ 75-2. Obscene films, live theater productions and publications.
Any and every place in the Township where obscene motion-picture films or live theater
productions are publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition; and any and
every place in the Township where obscene publications are publicly disseminated or sold, or
possessed for the purpose of such dissemination, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Any and every obscene motion-picture film or live theater production which is publicly exhibited in
the Township, and any and every obscene publication which is publicly displayed, disseminated or
sold, or possessed for such purpose in the Township, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
per se.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 32/411
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
From and after service on the place, or its manager, or acting manager, or person then in charge
of such place, of a true and correct copy of this article and a true and correct copy of the summons
and complaint to abate a nuisance, all moneys paid thereafter as admission price to such
exhibitions or productions, or purchase price of such publications, are also declared to be a public
nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
§ 75-3. Massage parlors and model studios.
Every massage parlor or model studio, which, as a regular course of business, is used for the
purposes of obscenity, assignation, or prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio
in or upon which acts of obscenity, assignation, or prostitution, are held or occur, is declared to be
a public nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated, and prevented.
From and after service on the place, or its manager, or acting manager, or person then in charge
of such place, of a true and correct copy of this article and a true and correct copy of the summons
and complaint to abate a nuisance, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for services
rendered to customers are also declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
§ 75-4. Presumption of knowledge of nuisance.
Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct copy of this article and a true
and correct copy of the summons and complaint to abate a nuisance or notice by the Township
Secretary of the character of the obscene film, production, publication, or place, any and every
person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain, manage, conduct or operate a place in
the Township which is declared to be a public nuisance, as set forth and stated in § 75-2 or 75-3 of
this article, is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such nuisance for the purpose of this
article, and may, thereafter, be responsible for its maintenance, and liable therefor.
The places and matters declared to be public nuisances under § 75-2 or 75-3 shall be abated as
provided for herein.
§ 75-5. Actions taken; posting of bond.
The Township Secretary of the Township Board of Commissioners for the Township of North
Versailles, or any citizen of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania residing within the Township, may
maintain an action of an equitable nature in the name of the Township, in the latter case upon the
relation of such citizen, to abate a nuisance.
No bond shall be required of the Township. If such action is instituted by a private citizen, a bond
may be required in the amount of not less than $500, to secure to the defendants the proximate
damages which may be sustained, including attorney's fees in the discretion of the Court, if it is
found that there were no reasonable grounds for said action.
Immunity from liability is hereby granted all officials of the Township of North Versailles who may
initiate or vote to institute and prosecute under this article.
§ 75-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Civil.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 33/411
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
Money damages may be recovered:
For compensation for loss or harm suffered in person or property by the Township or
private citizen flowing from such nuisance; and
As exemplary or punitive damages for the purpose of providing an example or to punish
the offender, where it is shown that the offender has been guilty of malice. "Malice"
means an intent to do a wrongful act, that is, an intent to maintain, permit, or allow a
nuisance to exist.
Preliminary and permanent injunctions may be issued to prevent the further maintenance of a
nuisance and to prevent the further sale or exhibition of obscene motion-picture films, live
theater productions and publications. The procedures for obtaining such injunctions shall be
governed by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure, preserving the right of trial by jury
upon the application for permanent injunction. Upon the trial on the merits of the permanent
injunction, if the court and/or jury finds a place to be a nuisance, the court may issue an order
closing the place to all uses and purposes for the period of one year. If the offenders of
persons owning, in control or in charge of such place certify that the nuisance has been
abated and that the films, productions, or publications found to be obscene shall not be
exhibited, sold or otherwise disseminated and, at the discretion of the court, post a bond in an
amount not to exceed the value of the personal property possessed or contained at such
place for the maintenance of the nuisance, the court may release such person or persons
from the closure order. The release shall remain in effect for one year or until the nuisance is
found to exist at the place before the expiration of one year. The bond shall be deposited with
the court prior to the release of any closure order and shall be returned to the person posting
said bond, without interest, at the expiration of one year, provided that the nuisance is not
maintained or reestablished within that year. Prior notice of at least 30 days must be given the
Township of the filing of a petition to return any bonds.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, and/or to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. There may be criminal and civil prosecution for
the same violations of this article, and neither shall be a bar to the other.
§ 75-7. Forfeiture; cost of abatement; manner of collection.
If the existence of the nuisance is established at trial, a judgment shall be entered which shall
permanently enjoin the defendants, and any other person with notice or knowledge of the action
and judgment, from maintaining the nuisance at said place and the defendants from maintaining
such nuisance elsewhere, and the entire expenses of such abatement action shall be recovered
by the plaintiff as costs.
The cost of abatement shall include the following: investigative costs; court costs; reasonable
attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for, and trial of the case, and appeals therefrom, and
other costs allowed on appeal; printing costs of trial and appellate briefs, and all other papers filed
in such proceeding. Such cost of abatement may be made a special assessment against the place
or the parcel of land upon which such place is located. Upon its determination by the Court, an in
rem lien may be entered against such property and a personal obligation against any person, and
shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are
collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection
and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 34/411
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Upon judgment for the plaintiff in legal proceedings brought pursuant to this article, an accounting
shall be made by such defendant or defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration received
by them which have been declared to be a public nuisance under § 75-2 or 75-3 of this article.
Such moneys or their equivalent and any valuable consideration received shall be forfeited to the
general fund of the Township or to the Township as property of the Township if any valuable
consideration received be not money.
Article II. Adult Dancing Establishments
[Adopted 11-18-1996 by Ord. No. 949 (Ch. 13, Part 8, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 75-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Any business wherein employees, agents or independent contractors perform dance routines or
adult-oriented dancing entertainment as characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specific
anatomical areas. This definition shall include any establishment, whether or not it is licensed by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board to serve alcoholic beverages.
§ 75-9. Prohibited and restricted acts; construal of provisions.
An adult establishment shall observe the following requirements:
Any dancing which exposes to view by patrons or spectators on the premises at any time the
bare female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point,
which shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include
any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or
in part, is prohibited.
Any dancing which exposes to view by patrons or spectators on the premises at any time the
human genitals, pubic region or cleavage of the human buttocks is prohibited.
Any dancing known as straddle dancing, lap dancing, face dancing or any similar type of
dancing known by any other name in which an employee, agent or independent contractor,
whether fully clothed or not, uses any part of his or her body, whether directly or through a
medium, to massage, rub, stroke, knead, caress or fondle the genitals or pubic area of a
patron while on the premises, or the placing of the genitals or pubic area of an employee,
agent or independent contractor in contact with, or in approximate contact with, the face or
any other area of the body of a patron while on the premises is prohibited.
Any person engaged in displaying or exposing anatomical areas while dancing is prohibited
from simulating sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee, independent contractor
or other person on the premises of an adult dancing establishment.
No person in an adult dancing establishment shall engage in the display or exhibition of
specific adult-oriented anatomical areas while performing or dancing, except while said
person is positioned in or occupying an entertainment area consisting of a platform or other
structure raised not less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above the immediately
surrounding main floor area and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet and while
the person so displaying or exhibiting is positioned not less than three feet from any patron or
spectator.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 35/411
(6)
(7)
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
No spectator or patron shall be present in the entertainment area described above during the
course of any performance or dancing involving the display or exhibition of specific adultoriented
areas.
No person maintaining, managing, owning or operating an adult dancing establishment shall
allow or permit the construction, maintenance or use of areas partitioned or screened from
public view that are designed to be occupied or are commonly occupied, alone or together, by
any person or persons on the premises of such establishments for performances, private or
otherwise, involving the display of or exhibition of specific adult-oriented anatomical areas
while performing or dancing, or to permit any employee or patron to violate any provision of
this article.
Nothing in this article pertaining to adult dancing establishments shall be construed to permit or
authorize any act or activity that is prohibited by state law, and these sections are meant to be in
addition to any acts or activities that are so prohibited.
§ 75-10. License and fee.
Every person who engages in operating an adult dancing establishment, as defined herein, shall
obtain a license to operate such establishment and pay to the Township of North Versailles a
license fee in the annual amount of $500. Such license must be renewed annually by application
of the person to whom the license was originally granted. Said license fee shall be used by the
Township of North Versailles to offset its expenses in exercising its police and regulatory powers
involving adult dancing establishments.
Each application for an adult dancing establishment license shall be accompanied by a
photograph or drawing of the signs to be displayed on the exterior of the establishment with an
indication as to the dimensions of the same.
§ 75-11. Qualifications for obtaining license.
Every person or entity engaged in or having any interest in the operation of an adult dancing
establishment before being issued a license shall be required to meet the following specifications:
Applicant must be free of convictions for the following: any felony; any conviction relating to
prostitution; any conviction involving the presentation, exhibition and/or performance of an
obscene production; and any conviction involving the maintenance of a nuisance with the same or
similar business within the last two years. Applicant shall not have had any adult entertainment
establishment license revoked for cause within the last two years.
Applicant must submit to fingerprinting by the Township Police Department or its designated
representative.
Applicant and any person or entity having any connection to the establishment cannot owe any
fees or taxes of any kind or nature to the Township of North Versailles.
Applicant's premises must meet all established health, zoning, fire, building, plumbing and BOCA
codes and cannot provide direct interior access to residential living quarters. Applicant shall file a
floor plan which clearly exhibits all entrances, exits, stairways and all rooms in the building and
their intended uses.
In the event applicant does not own the premises to be licensed, a copy of the lease agreement
between the applicant and the property owner shall be submitted along with the application to the
Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 36/411
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
[1]
(8)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 75-12. Hours of operation.
Adult dancing establishments shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 2:00
a.m. the following morning on Monday through Saturday. Such establishments are prohibited from
operating on Sundays with the exception of 12:01 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
§ 75-13. Permitted areas of operation.
Adult dancing establishments may be located within the Township of North Versailles in the specially
created zone permitting such use as and known as Zone B-1 within the North Versailles Zoning
Ordinance.[1] Such establishments are prohibited from being located or operated in any other zone
within the Township of North Versailles.
Editor's Note: The reference to 'Zone B-1' refers to the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time Article II
of Chapter 75 was adopted; see now Chapter 300, Zoning, for current provisions.
§ 75-14. Suspension or revocation of license.
License suspension or revocation can occur upon:
Conviction by the licensee, his employees, agents or independent contractors for any offense
occurring on the licensed premises involving or related to:
The production, presentation, exhibition or performance of any entertainment that is deemed
obscene.
Disorderly conduct.
Maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business.
Prostitution, solicitation for the purpose of prostitution or loitering for the purpose of
prostitution.
The sale, transfer, possession or use of any controlled substance.
The display or exhibition by an employee, agent or independent contractor in the
establishment of less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region,
the cleavage of the human buttocks or any portion of the human female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of areola at its highest point, any part of the entire lower portion
of the human female breast, excluding cleavage.
Any violation of any other section of this Code.
Any violation of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 47 Pa.C.S.A. § 1-101 et seq.
Noncompliance with any health, zoning, fire, building and/or plumbing codes adopted by the
Township of North Versailles.
The filing of a false application.
A conviction for permitting the on-premises sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any
adult dancing establishment not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
Any illegal on-premises conduct by patrons that results in a criminal conviction of a patron.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 37/411
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A violation by any licensee or his agents, servants or employees for any action occurring in, on or
at the premises covered by the license, in violation of any provision of this article or any other
ordinance of the Township of North Versailles, or of any criminal or penal statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania against gambling, disorderly conduct or any other criminal or
penal offense; a judgment of conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction shall be conclusive
evidence of such violation.
The occurrence in, on or at the premises covered by the license of any condition which is a
nuisance or obnoxious to the morals and general welfare of the public.
§ 75-15. Hearing on revocation or suspension of license.
When North Versailles officials have reasonable cause to believe that a license should be revoked or
suspended for any of the reason assigned herein, such official shall enumerate the same and notify the
licensee in writing of the hearing date and time and alleged charges. The notice to the licensee shall
be mailed to the address shown on the license. At the hearing, the evidence shall be transcribed.
Following the hearing, North Versailles Commissioners shall make a decision which will be reduced to
writing and forwarded to the licensee. Upon a decision by the Commissioners to revoke or suspend a
license issued under this article, all business activity at that location shall cease immediately for the
period of suspension or revocation.
§ 75-16. Operation standards.
Dressing rooms shall be provided for all dancers and performers.
A barrier including, but not limited to, a handrail, half-wall or other similar device must be
constructed that separates the performing area from the patrons.
Employees shall not be permitted to loiter in an open doorway or entrance of the licensed
premises.
All doors to the licensed premises must be closed, except for the limited time necessary to allow
for ingress and egress during the hours of operation.
No one under the age of 21 shall be permitted as a patron or employee during the hours the
premises are open for business.
No person who has been convicted of any prostitution-related offense within the last two years
shall be employed.
Adult dancing entertainment activities or photographs of the same shall not be displayed within
any licensed premises in such a manner as to be open to the general public view from outside the
licensed premises.
§ 75-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a
competent authority, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense plus costs
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 81. Airport District Overlay
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 38/411
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 7-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 1070. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 81-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create an Airport District Overlay that considers safety issues around
the Allegheny County Airport, regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures and objects
of natural growth, creates appropriate zones, establishes the boundaries thereof and provides for
changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones, creates the permitting process for use within
said zones and provides for enforcement, assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and
judicial review.
§ 81-2. Relation to other zone districts.
The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any underlying zoning district. Where
identified, the Airport District Overlay shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction
in addition to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
§ 81-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
AIRPORT ELEVATION
The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above sea level. The
elevation of the Allegheny County Airport is 1,250 feet above mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD
Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required
for flight or aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14
CFR 77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA
Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as
provided for in this chapter and Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania laws relating to aviation).[1]
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and extending
outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each
end of the runway based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach surface is the
same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach.
The approach surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[2] is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface
at a slope of 20 feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The
conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[3] attached hereto and made a part of this chapter, is
based on the conical surface.
DEPARTMENT
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 39/411
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT
For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on
the Zoning Map,[4] the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation that is constructed by
swinging arcs of various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then
connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the planned
approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[5] is derived from the horizontal
surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY
A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater
than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE
Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY
A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with
only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision
instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION
Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height
set forth by this chapter.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY
A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of
paved runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line. The primary
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[6] is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY
A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE
An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without
limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission
lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE)
An imaginary surface that extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to
the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically. The transitional
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,[7] is derived from the transitional surface.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 40/411
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
TREE
Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY
A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY
A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.'
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 81-4. Establishment of airport zones.
There are hereby created and established certain zones within this chapter, defined in § 81-3 and
depicted on Figure 1[1] and illustrated on the Allegheny County Airport (AGC) Airspace Plan
(Drawings 6, 7, and 8 of 14 of the AGC Airport Master Plan, as amended), all hereby adopted as
part of this chapter, which include:
Approach Surface Zone.
Conical Surface Zone.
Horizontal Surface Zone.
Primary Surface Zone.
Transitional Surface Zone.
Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Township offices.
The North Versailles Township Zoning Map is hereby amended.
§ 81-5. Permit applications.
As regulated by Act 164[1] and defined by 14 CFR 77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person
who plans to erect a new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain any
object (natural or man-made), in the vicinity of the airport shall first notify the Department's Bureau
of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the
proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The Department's BOA response must
be included with this permit application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's BOA
returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered in
compliance with the intent of this chapter. If the Department's BOA returns a determination of a
penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance
from such regulations as outlined in § 81-6.
Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures
which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 41/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
§ 81-6. Variances.
Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance with 14 CFR 77, Subpart B
(FAA Form 7460-1 as amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will
depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air
space. In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the following categories the
FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
No objection. The subject construction is determined to not exceed obstruction standards and
marking/lighting is not required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a
variance shall be granted.
Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to create some
level of encroachment into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under
this determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon implementation of mitigating
measures as described in § 81-9, Obstruction marking and lighting.
Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to be a hazard and is thus
objectionable. A variance shall be denied and the reasons for this determination shall be
outlined to the applicant.
Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not
be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial
justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this chapter.
§ 81-7. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use shall be made of land or water within the
Airport District Overlay in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
Allegheny County Airport.
§ 81-8. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. No
nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to grow higher, so as to increase the
nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once substantially abated (subject to the underlying Zoning
Ordinance),[1] may only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 81-9. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be conditioned according
to the process described in § 81-6 to require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in
question to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person requesting the permit or
variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure
both ground and air safety.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 42/411
[1]
[1]
§ 81-10. Violations and penalties.
Penalties prescribed in the Township's underlying Zoning Ordinance[1] shall apply.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 81-11. Appeals.
The appeal procedure shall be governed by the Township's underlying Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 81-12. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter
and any other regulation applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.
Chapter 85. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 3-19-1984 by
Ord. No. 816 (Ch. 10, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48, Art. I.
Automatic fire detection systems — See Ch. 145, Art. I.
False alarms — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
§ 85-1. Title.
This chapter shall be titled "the North Versailles Township Alarm System Ordinance."
§ 85-2. Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable under this chapter:
ALARM SYSTEM or ALARM SERVICE
Any means used by any subscriber or provider, as those terms are used in this chapter, for the
purpose of notifying or otherwise utilizing the services or efforts of the North Versailles Township
officials, directly or indirectly, regarding a burglary, attempted burglary, breaking, breaking and
entering, trespassing or any other act which may or may not be deemed to be a criminal act; or
any other device which is, however, designed to cause some police or official action or
investigation by North Versailles Township officials. It shall also include any burglar alarm or
warning device whatsoever which results in the summoning of North Versailles Township Police or
Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM
An alert by any alarm system which is or which is intended to be transferred or transmitted to the
North Versailles Township Police or Fire Department or other Township official, which discloses
following investigation that there was no burglary, attempted burglary, break-in, breaking and/or
entering, or any other act which would ordinarily have caused the initiation of police investigation,
police action or other official Township action.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 43/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
PREMISES
Any improvements on real estate which utilize an alarm system.
PROVIDER
Any person or entity in the business of providing alarm systems or alarm system protection to any
premises within the Township of North Versailles.
SUBSCRIBER
Any owner, user, occupier, or lessor of any type of premises which are equipped with an alarm
system, whether installed maintained and serviced by a provider, any other entity or the
subscriber.
§ 85-3. Providers of alarm service.
Every provider of alarm system to premises within the Township of North Versailles must register with
the Township Secretary within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. If any provider intends to
provide alarm systems or service hereinafter, said provider must register with the Township of North
Versailles prior to entering into any contracts or in fact providing such service.
The application of every provider shall bear the following data: the name of the entity, the date of
incorporation, the principal office, the name of its liability insurance carrier with policy number and
coverage, names and addresses of all officers, name and address of the person in charge of
services to be rendered in North Versailles Township, a telephone number or numbers where the
North Versailles Township Police or officials may have access to a responsible person 24 hours
per day, every day of the year.
The provider must supply a written explanation of how the provider's alarm system works.
The provider must provide a list enumerating the name and address of every entity and premises
to which the provider provides alarm services in the Township of North Versailles. This list must be
updated to include additions and deletions every three months; that is, on the first day of January,
April, July and October of each year.
The Secretary shall keep a record of all such applications, shall supply a duplicate copy to the
Chief of Police, and may request other reasonable data as the Secretary sees fit. It shall be the
duty of the Chief of Police to record each and every false alarm as defined herein and to report the
same to the Secretary by the first day of the following month.
§ 85-4. False alarms.
For every false alarm which occurs arising out of the use of any alarm system, there is hereby
imposed a service charge in the amount of $25. Subscribers and providers shall be jointly and
severally liable therefor. The Township Secretary shall bill each and every person responsible for
each false alarm, which sum shall be payable within 30 days of the date of invoice. The invoice
shall be deemed to have been received if mailed by the Township Secretary postage prepaid to
the addresses given by the provider.
If there shall be more than two false alarms for any one premises in any calendar month, the
service charge for each false alarm in excess of two shall be $50.
The failure to pay the false alarm service charge shall be deemed to be a civil and a criminal
wrong. The Township of North Versailles shall have the right to collect said service charge by
simple action in assumpsit, and shall have the same right to lien, collect and enforce said charge
in the same manner as heretofore provided by Act of Assembly for the enforcement, liening and
claiming of municipal claims against subscribers and/or providers.[1]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 44/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 200, Municipal Claims and Liens.
§ 85-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 88. Amusement Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 971. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 110.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 88-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as "the North Versailles Township Amusement Device Ordinance."
§ 88-2. Repealer; effect on prior actions.
Ordinance No. 817 is hereby repealed, as are all other ordinances or parts of ordinances insofar as
they conflict with the provisions of this chapter; however, such repeal shall not affect any act done or
any liability or violation accrued under any such prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded, and all
such liabilities or violations shall continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if such repeal
or supersession had not been made; and any offense or violation committed and any penalty or
forfeiture incurred under such ordinance herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the
same manner as if this chapter had not been approved.
§ 88-3. Word usage; construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed
and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular.
Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
The word "may" is permissive.
North Versailles Township intends to favor the public interest as against any private interest.
The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter shall not be considered to
control but may be used to aid in the construction thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 45/411
H.
A.
B.
C.
General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be restricted by preceding particular
words.
§ 88-4. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases, used in this chapter or
in an application for license of amusement devices, shall have the meaning given to them in this
section.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE
The amusement devices and apparatus to be covered by this chapter shall be divided into three
classes.
[Amended 7-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1068]
Class I. Class I devices include poker machines, video slot machines, video sweepstakes
machines, and any other type of purely amusement wagering/gaming device permitted by
law.
Class II. Class II devices include machines which offer prizes for amusement such as stuffed
animals, toys, candy or other items.
Class III. Class III devices include machines and apparatus used for entertainment and public
participation for sport which includes, but is not limited to, darts, jukeboxes, pool tables,
pinball machines, shuffleboard machines and children's video games.
APPLICANT
Any individual, partnership or corporation who seeks to obtain a license for an amusement device
under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF AMUSEMENT DEVICES
The document filed by an applicant requesting a permit to possess in the Township of North
Versailles any video or mechanical amusement device, and/or other electronic device, machine or
apparatus whatsoever, for the playing of games and amusement.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT
Any restaurant, bar, tavern, retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business, whether or not in
operation.
GAMBLING DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus used for the playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo or other
casino games by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus designed and/or specifically equipped to be used for the
playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or other casino gambling games by the insertion
therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token, which has, or is designed to facilitate the
ready use of, a knock-off or knockdown device or other capability for erasing or eliminating
accumulated playing credits.
PROPRIETOR
Any individual, partnership or corporation who owns, leases or maintains the business
establishment in which any video or mechanical amusement device is placed for the use,
patronage, recreation or amusement of the public or of persons in or about the business
establishment.
VENDOR
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 46/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
Any individual, partnership or corporation who is the lawful owner of any video or mechanical
amusement device for which a license is sought under this chapter, or any individual, partnership
or corporation who makes, assembles, sets up, maintains, sells, lends, leases, gives away, or
offers for sale, loan, lease or gift, any video or mechanical amusement device for which a license
is sought under this chapter.
VIDEO OR MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE
Any device, machine or apparatus used for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc,
slug or token, including but not limited to claw machines, electric or electronic dart boards,
gambling devices, pinball machines, and video games.
§ 88-5. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall at any time have in his possession, within
the Township of North Versailles, any video or mechanical amusement device for the playing of games
and amusement without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided in this chapter.
§ 88-6. Application for license.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, desiring to procure a license as required in § 88-5 of this
chapter, shall apply therefor in writing to the Township Secretary. Said application shall set forth the
following information:
The name and residence of the vendor of each video or mechanical amusement device to be
licensed;
The name and residence of the proprietor of the business establishment in which each video or
mechanical amusement device is to be located, used or installed;
If vendor and/or proprietor are citizens of the United States;
The manufacturer, name of machine, serial number, type and fee for each machine, video or
mechanical device, or apparatus to be located on the premises, installed or used;
A verification by the vendor and proprietor that the facts set forth in the application are true and
correct to the vendor's and proprietor's personal knowledge information or belief, and that any
false statements therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to authorities;
That the vendor and proprietor have been provided a copy of this chapter and that he/they have
read and agree to be bound by all terms and provisions hereof;
That a license does not sanction or condone the use or possession of any illegal gambling device,
whether illegal per se or as modified;
That the legal use or possession of an unlawful gambling device, either per se or as modified, may
result in a criminal prosecution by law enforcement officials.
§ 88-7. Persons ineligible for licenses.
The Township Secretary shall not issue a license for any video or mechanical amusement device to
any person who:
Is not a citizen of the United States;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 47/411
B.
[1]
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Is not 21 years of age;
Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition for possessing or using
a video or mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania[1] within three years of the date of application.
Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 88-8. Conditions for issuance.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed from the date of application
during which time the Township Secretary may, at his or her discretion, investigate the facts set forth in
the application.
The Township Secretary shall refuse to issue a license for any device that the applicant has not
affirmed is not designed, or intended to be used, for gambling purposes.
A license shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
That obtaining or displaying Township license does not sanction or permit the use of any
device for gambling purposes or possession of an illegal gambling device, either per se or as
modified;
That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an unlawful gambling device,
either per se or as modified, he may be prosecuted by North Versailles Township or other law
enforcement officials.
§ 88-9. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices
whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, either per
se or as modified, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
§ 88-10. License fees.
No license shall be issued until the following annual fees shall have been paid by the applicant to
the Township Secretary for each and every device to be installed or used.
The annual license fees are as follows:
Class I: $500.
Class II: $250.
Class III: $50.
These license fees may be changed from time to time by the North Versailles Township Board
of Commissioners in their sole discretion as they see fit by simple resolution.
The above annual fees paid shall be a license fee until December 31 of each year; except,
however, should any such device be installed after July 1 of any year, and an application therefor
is made after such date: then in such event, the license fee for that particular year until December
31 is as follows:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 48/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 88-11. Issuance and display.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, and if the application fully complies with
this chapter, the Township Secretary shall issue a disc, plate, or sticker setting forth the number of the
license for each machine so licensed, and said disc, plate or sticker shall be attached and fastened to
the respective machine or device so that the same may be clearly observable and readable. Discs,
plates or stickers issued for a particular machine or device are not transferable to another machine or
device. All discs, plates or stickers issued by the Township for video and mechanical amusement
devices shall state that the video or mechanical amusement device is for amusement purposes only,
that it is not a gambling device and that only games and not money may be won on the machine or
device.
§ 88-12. Inspection.
The Township or its agents may, during regular business hours, conduct inspections of any business
establishment where any video or mechanical amusement device licensed under this chapter is
located, installed, placed or used, to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 88-13. Revocation, debarment and contraband declaration.
In the event any applicant, vendor or proprietor falsifies any information on an application for
license of amusement devices, or violates this chapter, the Township shall immediately revoke all
licenses issued under this chapter to such applicant, vendor or proprietor.
Moreover, in the event a vendor or a video or mechanical amusement device or a proprietor of a
business establishment is convicted of possessing or using a video or mechanical amusement
device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township shall
revoke each license issued to such person as an applicant, vendor, or proprietor.
Additionally, the Township shall not issue a license of amusement devices to any person who has
been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative disposition for possessing or using a
video or mechanical amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania within three years of the date of application.
Any video or mechanical amusement device used or possessed in violation or the Crimes Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or this chapter, may be deemed contraband and forfeited in
accordance with the provisions set forth in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501(d) (relating to scattering rubbish).
§ 88-14. Suggestion of nonprosecution prohibited.
Because the Township intends to foster compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States regarding illegal possession and/or use of gambling devices, no
Township employee or agent may promise, suggest or insinuate, either expressly or by implication, that
the applicant, licensee, proprietor or vendor who illegally uses or possesses any device used or
intended to be used for gambling purposes shall not be prosecuted.
§ 88-15. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person or persons, firm, partnership
or corporation, violating any of the provisions of the chapter shall constitute a summary offense, and
upon conviction by the issuing authority for the magisterial district which includes the Township of
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 49/411
North Versailles, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600, and costs of
prosecution, and in default or payment thereof may be committed by the issuing authority to the
Allegheny County Jail in conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for a period not
to exceed 10 days. Each and every day that any machine or device is used and operated in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this chapter and shall be subject to
separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
Chapter 92. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Article I. Dogs
[Adopted 6-4-1917 by Ord. No. 41; amended in its entirety 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 2, Part 1,
of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meaning indicated, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
OWNER
Any person having a right of property in any dog or having custody of any dog, or any person who
harbors or permits a dog to remain on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE
Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park, or any other public land, or upon property of
another person other than the owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control of the
owner or any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 92-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such dog or dogs to run at large
in the Township.
§ 92-3. Seizing of dogs.
Any police officer or dog warden may seize any dog found at large in Township. Such dogs are to be
impounded in a licensed kennel.
§ 92-4. Licensed dogs.
Owners of licensed dogs are to be notified by registered or certified mail, with return receipt, that the
dog is impounded and will be disposed of in five days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt
has been received, and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in
accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.[1]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 50/411
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(5)
A.
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 92-5. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours and, if not claimed, may be
destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 92-6. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitute a threat to public health and
welfare may be killed by the police or dog warden.
§ 92-7. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $15 to the Township as well as
reasonable fees for keeping the animal in a kennel.
Any person allowing an animal to run at large a third time in violation of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600; and/or to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 92-7.1. Restraining of dogs; unattended dogs.
[Added 7-21-2016 by Ord. No. 1103]
It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, chain, tie, restrain or cause an unattended dog
to be fastened, chained, tied or restrained to houses, trees, fences, garages, stakes or other
stationary or highly immobile objects by means of a rope, chain, strap or other physical restraint
for the purpose of confinement, except in circumstances where all of the following requirements
are satisfied:
The tethering is not for a period exceeding 45 minutes, as long as the dog is not in danger or
a nuisance or does not put the public in danger, except in extreme weather conditions
addressed below; and
The tether is attached to the dog by a non-choke-type collar and attached to the stationary
object by swivel anchors, latches, or similar devices in a manner which prevents the tether
from becoming entangled around any object so as to limit the dog's freedom within the
tethered area, or to prevent the dog, or any of its appendages, from becoming entangled by
the tether; and
The tether must be of a type commonly used for the size of the dog involved and if the tether
is a chain, it may not be thicker than one-half of an inch; and
The tether shall be at least three times the length of the dog as measured from the tip of its
nose to the base of its tail, but no less than 10 feet in length and shall allow the dog
convenient access to the dog house; and
The dog has easy access to:
Potable drinking water;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 51/411
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
Edible food; and
Adequate shade and/or shelter within the tethered area.
The dog is periodically monitored while tethered for the aforementioned reasonable period of
time; and
The dog is not tethered outdoors during any period in which a severe weather warning has
been issued for Allegheny County by the National Weather Service; and
The dog is not tethered outdoors for a continuous period of time greater than 1/2 hour if the
temperature during such period remains entirely either:
Below 32° F.; or
Above 90° F.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any dog outside and unattended as follows:
During any period in which a severe weather warning has been issued for Allegheny County
by the National Weather Service; and
For a continuous period of time greater than 1/2 hour if the temperature during such period
remains entirely either:
Below 32° F.; or
Above 90° F.
"Outside," for purposes of this section, shall mean any unattended dog that is outside subject
to the weather and elements, which expressly includes, but is not limited to, a dog in a
securely fenced-in yard or a dog in a kennel. The dog shall be considered "outside"
regardless of access to an outdoor doghouse or similar structure.
The duly authorized enforcement agents of the Township of North Versailles shall include the
designated Township Dog Control Officer and Township Code Enforcement Officer, who are the
primary agents to enforce this section. Additionally, North Versailles Township police officers and
all of those vested with the authority as an enforcement officer or agent under the Pennsylvania
Animal Cruelty Law are also permitted to enforce this section. The Township expressly reserves
the right to appoint by resolution any additional agents of the Township to enforce the provisions of
this section.
The Township's designated enforcement agents and police authority having jurisdiction, the
Humane Society agent(s), or any officer, employee or agent of the Township, is hereby authorized
to notify any owner or occupant of any premises in violation of this section, either personally or by
posting such notice upon the premises, that such owner must bring the outdoor dog tethering
violation into compliance with this section within one day of receipt of such notice. Upon the failure
of such owner or occupant to bring his or her tethering situation into compliance with this section
within such period of time, any of the foregoing individuals authorized by the Township to enforce
this section are hereby authorized to enter upon such premises and to temporarily remove such
dog from the property.
Any removed dog will be held at the Animal Rescue League or other designated or authorized
facility. Prior to any hearing regarding the violation, such dog owner may regain possession of any
confiscated dog upon an adequate showing that his or her tethering situation has been brought
into compliance with this section. No confiscated dog shall be considered surrendered to the
confiscating party unless expressly surrendered by the dog owner or adjudicated as forfeited as
provided in the Pennsylvania Animal Cruelty Law after a hearing on the matter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 52/411
F.
G.
H.
[1]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall commit a summary offense, and shall,
upon being found guilty by a Magisterial District Judge, after hearing, pay a fine not to exceed
$600, together with all enforcement and shelter costs in the event a dog must be confiscated, and
all court costs as permitted by law. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense, which
shall be subject to prosecution as such. Enforcement and prosecution of any violation of this
section may be conducted by the Township as provided herein or by its agent and counsel as
provided in the Pennsylvania Animal Cruelty Law.
If any provision of this section is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then it is
the intent of the Board of Commissioners that it would have ordained the balance of this section
irrespective of such invalid portion.
This section will take effect immediately.
Article II. Noise Disturbances
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 92-8. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles, finding that excessive levels of
sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the people as well as to their
comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety and being therefore a public health and welfare
hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective
regulation of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound within the Township.
§ 92-9. Prohibited acts.
It shall be illegal within the Township of North Versailles for any person or persons to own, possess,
harbor, or control any animal or bird which makes any noise continuously and/or incessantly for a
period of 10 minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any
person any time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is physically situated in or
upon private property, said noise being a nuisance, provided that at the time the animal or bird is
making such noise no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon
which the animal or bird is situated, nor is there any other legitimate cause which justifiably provoked
the animal or bird.
§ 92-10. Exceptions.
This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful any agricultural operations
protected from the nuisance suits by Act No. 1982-133.[1]
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 92-11. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Article III. Requirements for Keeping Certain Animals
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 53/411
A.
B.
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 2, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 92-12. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL
Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any household pet.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL
Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated or raised in this area and climate as livestock
or for work or breeding purposes, or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET
Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal normally and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at
large in the dwelling of its owner.
LARGE ANIMAL
Any wild or domestic animal of the bovine, equine or sheep family.
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL
Any wild or domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare, guinea pig, rat, mouse, or chinchilla; and
any wild or domestic fowl such as a chicken, turkey, goose, duck, or pigeon (excepting
homing pigeons).
WILD ANIMAL
Any animal, including bird, fowl, or reptile not normally or ordinarily domesticated; not
normally or ordinarily raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes; or not capable of being kept as a household pet.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 92-13. Certain animals prohibited.
[Amended 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 874]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any chickens, pigs, hogs or swine at any place within the
Township of North Versailles.
§ 92-14. Number of animals permitted.
[Added 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 874]
No household shall house, keep or maintain more than a total of five dogs and/or cats combined at any
one time. This section shall become effective on May 1, 1989.
§ 92-15. Keeping of animals regulated.
[Amended 2-20-1989 by Ord. No. 874]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 54/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except household pets, except as
provided in this section:
Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be closer than 100 feet to the
exterior limits of any dwelling or of any property line.
Except as prohibited by § 92-14, small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which
shall be closer than 25 feet to the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any property line.
The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure sufficient to prevent such
animal from running at large, and such enclosure shall be of a size and construction conducive to
the animal's health, and adequate sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be collected daily in a
container or receptacle that, when closed, shall be rat-proof and fly-tight, and after every such
collection shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least twice a week, every
such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so collected to be disposed of in such manner as
not to permit the presence of fly larvae.
Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be stored and kept in a ratproof
and fly-tight building, box, container, or receptacle.
§ 92-16. Household pets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as provided in this section:
If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its owner, such owner shall be
required to follow such procedures and practices as to the number of such pets to be kept there,
and as to sanitation, to insure that no public nuisance shall be created or maintained and no threat
to the health of persons living elsewhere than in such dwelling shall be created.
If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the provisions of § 92-15 of
this article, insofar as the same applies to small animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such
household pet.
§ 92-17. Violation of state law.
Any violation of this article that would also violate any state law shall be prosecuted under that state
law and not under this article.
§ 92-18. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article IV. Pigeons
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 2, Part 4, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 92-19. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 55/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARRIER PIGEON
Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or
are banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or with an identification or
registration number stamped on the band.
LOFT
Any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed.
RACING PIGEON
Any pigeon registered with any national pigeon racing organization.
§ 92-20. Permit requirements.
The authorized officer shall issue a carrier pigeon permit to the owner of any carrier pigeons if:
Identification marks stamped on each carrier pigeon or band are recorded with the Township
of North Versailles;
The loft is found on inspection to be in compliance with regulations prescribed by the
Township and is maintained in a clean, orderly condition and kept in good repair; and
The construction of a loft complies with the Township's building code regulations.
The requirements of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North Versailles relating
to restrictions on the location of stables and poultry enclosures shall not apply to a loft for which a
permit has been issued.
The owner of any carrier pigeons shall pay an annual fee for a carrier pigeon permit as determined
by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to resolution, and no permit as required by this article
shall be issued until the prescribed fee shall have been paid. The Township shall keep a record of
all permits issued under this article.
§ 92-21. Authorization of loft construction.
Any person to whom the authorized officer has issued a carrier pigeon permit may erect and maintain
a loft of carrier or racing pigeons in the Township of North Versailles.
§ 92-22. Exercise and training.
Any owner of carrier pigeons to whom the authorized officer has issued a carrier pigeon permit, or
person acting for him, having in his charge or possession and under restraint and control carrier
pigeons, shall be allowed to fly the pigeons for necessary exercise and training, but not more at any
one time than 25 pairs.
§ 92-23. Inspection of pigeons and lofts.
Any owner of carrier pigeons to whom the Board has issued a carrier pigeon permit shall permit
employees or officials of the Township and the Board to enter upon their property for the purpose of
making an inspection of pigeons and lofts at reasonable times.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 56/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 92-24. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 100. Burning, Open
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 9-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 1045. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 145.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 222, Art. I.
§ 100-1. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the Township of North Versailles.
This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural
gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
This chapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace,
fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation.
This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in
a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
§ 100-2. Open burning of trees, logs, brush and stumps.
The Township of North Versailles shall allow the burning of clean, dry wood products only.
Said burning shall only be permitted in an approved outdoor rated fireplace, fire pit, chimenea or
fifty-five-gallon drum.
No burning shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
All burning shall take place a minimum of 15 feet away from the nearest structure.
All outdoor burning/fires are to be attended at all times by an individual not less than 18 years of
age.
Adequate means of fire extinguishment must be available at all times when outdoor burning is
taking place.
Burning at construction sites for the purpose of providing warmth shall only be permitted if the
weather is at or below 32° F. and said burning shall only take place in a fifty-five-gallon drum
suitable for sustaining such fire.
Persons utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs
and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 57/411
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner, when wind and
weather conditions minimize adverse effects and do not create a health hazard or a visibility
hazard on roadways, railroads or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with
all local and state fire protection regulations.
No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond,
stream, or water body.
The Fire Chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the Township of
North Versailles, who presents credentials, may inspect any property for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-3. Open burning of refuse.
As used in this chapter, "refuse" means any waste material including building supplies, garbage,
grass and leaves. It does not include trees, logs, brush, stumps, and other vegetative matter.
Open burning of refuse from a residential, commercial or industrial establishment is prohibited.
§ 100-4. Suspension of open burning.
The Fire Marshal and the Township Board of Commissioners shall have the power to suspend open
burning if they believe that such suspension is best for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
North Versailles.
§ 100-5. Violations and penalties.
The Township of North Versailles shall have the power to impose a fine of not more than $250 for each
violation of this chapter.
§ 100-6. Authorization.
The Board of Commissioners for the Township of North Versailles is hereby authorized and directed to
execute any and all documents necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
Chapter 106. Cable Television
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 1-17-1983 by
Ord. No. 810 (Ch. 13, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 106-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of North Versailles Cable Television Ordinance."
§ 106-2. Contract with franchisee.
This chapter shall become effective and is approved to be effective January 1, 1984. An adjudication
was made and accepted by the franchisee; it is the intent of the Township of North Versailles to grant
and create only those rights and restrictions which are authorized by state, federal and local law. The
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 58/411
[1]
[2]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
contract attached hereto[1] is hereby approved and the officers of the Township are authorized and
directed to execute the same on behalf of the Township.[2]
Editor's Note: Said contract is on file in the Township offices.
Editor’s Note: Former § 106-3, Subsidy for needy and senior citizens, added 7-16-1984 by Ord. No.
821, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1114.
Chapter 110. Circuses and Carnivals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 13, Part 6, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 88.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 110-1. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
AMUSEMENT RIDE
Any device of the nature commonly a part of an amusement park or carnival, including
but not limited to merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, roller coasters, which may be
permanently or temporarily installed or used in the Township of Versailles; or
Any coin-actuated device, installed or located for amusement purposes in or upon which
one or more individuals may ride or be moved.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
In this chapter the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 110-2. Permit fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any circus or carnival at any location within
the Township, or to operate any amusement ride therein, without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the designated official. The applicant must provide proof of adequate insurance
coverage (as determined by the Township Solicitor), and shall pay, for the use of the Township, the
following fee, a fee as set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time by resolution.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Provided further: the issuing officer may, at his discretion, refuse to grant a permit in any case or
may suspend or revoke a permit already granted, where he, in his judgment, has reason to believe
that the holding of such circus or carnival, or the operation of any amusement ride, as the case
may be, could endanger the public health, morals, welfare or safety. Provided further: at the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners, the permit fee may be remitted in the case of a circus or
carnival the proceeds of which are applied to purely charitable uses or in the case the application
for such permit shall have been made by and on behalf of any organization connected with the
municipal government or with any public school district. Provided further: if any permit shall be
refused, suspended or revoked, an appeal from such refusal, suspension or revocation may be
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 59/411
made by the applicant or by the person to whom such permit had been issued, as the case may
be, to the Board of Commissioners, but no portion of a permit fee shall be refunded in case of
suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be made in writing within 30 days of the decision.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 116. Communications Apparatus
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 9-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 957 (Ch. 5, Part 5, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean and include any and all communication apparatuses.
AERIAL and ANTENNA
Any device, rod or wire used to receive and/or transmit radio waves.
BOCA BUILDING CODE
The BOCA codes adopted by the Township of North Versailles as defined in Chapter 5 of the
North Versailles Township Code of Ordinances.[1]
BUILDING INSPECTOR
That person or entity named by the North Versailles Township Board of Commissioners from time
to time.
COMMUNICATION APPARATUS
Any device, implement or thing used to send and/or receive signals including, but not limited to, an
aerial, antenna, dish antenna, freestanding antenna, parabolic dish and satellite dish.
DISH ANTENNA
Includes a parabolic or satellite dish.
FREESTANDING ANTENNA
One that is not attached to any other structure.
PARABOLIC DISH and SATELLITE DISH
A directional microwave antenna, which may be concave and may have a reflector, used to
receive and/or transmit communication signals.
SIGNAL
An electrical, microwave, sound or light signal.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 60/411
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
Editor's Note: See now Ch. 120, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 116-2. Restricted use of communication apparatus.
Hereinafter, no communication apparatus may be erected, changed, altered, or used, whether
attached to another structure or tower or as a freestanding communication apparatus, except in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 116-3. Permits.
An accessory structure permit shall be required prior to the installation or construction of any
communication apparatus.
Permits may be obtained by submitting an application to the Building Inspector on forms prepared
by the officer. All applications must include the following data:
A description of the communication apparatus, including make, model, full dimensions,
capacity and schematic drawings of the means of wiring.
A plot plan of the real estate where the communication apparatus is to be installed, showing
how it is to be installed, on what structure it is to be installed, the means of installation, all
property lines, power and utility lines, all improvements, all existing communications
apparatuses, all existing elevations and all proposed elevations.
For communication apparatuses proposed to be erected upon any other structure, including a
freestanding tower or other edifice of any nature, engineering calculations regarding weight,
location on the structure, structural integrity, and the location of all existing equipment of any
nature, and communication apparatuses on the structure and the proposed communication
apparatus.
Detailed drawings, including such sufficient engineering specificity which, in the discretion of
the Building Inspector, is necessary so that he is able to ascertain all circumstances and data
to adequately assess the installation. The drawings shall minimally include method of
connection to the structure.
The following fee schedule shall apply:
Dish antennas having a radius of two feet or less shall pay a permit fee of $5.
Communication devices other than dish antennas which are 12 feet in height or less and are
used exclusively for private, noncommercial use shall pay a permit fee of $5.
All other communication devices shall pay a fee in the amount of $50.
In the event it is necessary for the Building Inspector to make an on-site inspection to assess
the application, the applicant shall pay the Township the sum of $50 for each such inspection.
The fee schedule provided for herein may be change by the Township of North Versailles
hereinafter by simple resolution.
§ 116-4. Applicability to zoning districts.
Communication apparatus shall be permitted in all zoning districts with the following restrictions:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 61/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
No communication apparatus shall be nearer to a lot line than the total height of the overall
apparatus from the ground.
No communication apparatus shall be erected in the front yard or front area of any building or
structure.
There shall be no more than one communication apparatus on any single lot.
Freestanding dish antennas or those resting on the ground shall not exceed a diameter of 12
feet and may not exceed 15 feet in overall height.
In respect to freestanding towers existing on April 21, 1997, the date of the moratorium
passed by North Versailles Township, no additional communication devices may be installed,
except in compliance with this chapter.
In all residential-zoned districts the following restrictions will apply:
Roof-mounted communication apparatuses may only be on a portion of a roof which slopes
away from the front of the lot of such building and no part of the communication apparatus
shall project above the ridgeline of said building.
No roof-mounted communication apparatus may exceed four feet in diameter or depth.
In all zoning districts except residential, no roof-mounted communication apparatus may exceed
12 feet in diameter or depth.
The restrictions in this section shall not be applicable to government buildings. If a building is a
government building and the same is conveyed to a nongovernment owner, then this exception
shall no longer exist and the new owner must apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 116-5. Technical requirements.
Every communication apparatus must be in compliance with the standards and provisions of the
BOCA building codes in this chapter. Snow load provision will be waived when the communication
apparatus is properly equipped with a heater to prevent the accumulation of ice.
No projection of any communication apparatus or supporting structure may be in such proximity to
any electric or telephonic line so as to constitute a danger in the discretion of the Building
Inspector.
All connections to any supporting structure shall be properly flashed so as to be watertight. In the
event of removal of a communications apparatus, repairs must be made to any roof so that it
remains watertight.
Chapter 120. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 4-19-2004 by
Ord. No. 1015. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractors — See Ch. 124.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 145.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
§ 120-1. Incorporation of preamble by reference.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 62/411
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
The "whereas" clauses are incorporated and made a part of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: The full text of Ord. No. 1015 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 120-2. Election to administer and enforce.
North Versailles Township does hereby elect to adopt, administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., as amended from
time to time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry.
§ 120-3. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code published in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405, as amended from
time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the North Versailles Township
Building Code.
§ 120-4. Administration and enforcement.
North Versailles Township shall enforce the Uniform Construction Code through an official, duly
appointed by resolution, to be known as the "Code Enforcement Officer," and/or by retention of code
officials, and/or by third-party agencies to act on behalf of the Township and/or by intermunicipal
agreements with local governments or with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry as the
Board of Commissioners sees fit from time to time.
§ 120-5. Plumbing standards.
In lieu of the International Plumbing Code, North Versailles Township adopts the Allegheny County
Health Department Plumbing Code as its standard plumbing code, as permitted by 35 P.S.
§ 7210.503(a).
Enforcement. North Versailles Township does hereby designate the Allegheny County Health
Department, Plumbing Section, through its contractual relationship with the Township, to be the
duly certified and authorized plumbing inspection third-party agency, meeting all of the statutory
requirements set forth in the Uniform Construction Code Act, 35 P.S. § 7210.701 et seq., as
amended.
§ 120-6. Appeals.
Appeals from a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be made to a Board of Appeals which
shall be established by simple resolution in conformity with the requirements of the applicable
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If
enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other local governments, said
Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating local governments.[1]
Editor's Note: By Ord. No. 1067, adopted 3-15-2012, the Township authorized participation in the Joint
UCC Construction Code Construction Appeals Board. Said ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 120-7. Effect on other provisions.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were heretofore adopted on or before
July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 63/411
B.
C.
A.
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of
the code, as amended from time to time.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect on the effective date of
this chapter the requirements of which are less than the minimum requirements of the code are
hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of North Versailles Township not governed by the
code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 120-8. Fees and charges.
Fees and charges assessable for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the code
shall be established by resolution from time to time.
§ 120-9. Backfilling and grading following demolition.
[Added 7-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1084]
Definitions. Whenever used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning
prescribed as follows:
ABUTTING LAND OR STRUCTURE
Real estate not within the affected site but in such close proximity as to be affected by the
demolition activities.
AFFECTED SITE
Any parcel of land upon which a structure exists and shall be inclusive of all the real estate
under common contiguous ownership as the land where the structure is situate, and which
land is the subject of demolition as used herein.
BUILDING INSPECTOR
The person occupying that office at the Township of North Versailles.
CALL ONE
Pennsylvania One-Call System, Inc., which implements the Pennsylvania Line Protection Act.
CONTRACTOR
That person, persons or entities who or which are actually carrying out and performing
demolition on an affected site as used herein.
DEMOLITION
The razing, removal and disposal of any improvement on land or on an affected site, including
a building or structure.
DUG OUT HOLES
Voids which develop in the foundation area due to the demolition process.
ENGINEER
The engineer of North Versailles Township.
OWNER
The person or entity having title to the affected site.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
All public rights-of-way including sidewalks, alley and streets.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 64/411
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
SANITARY SEWERS
Those sewer lines and accouterments used for the conveyance of domestic, commercial or
industrial sanitary waste.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made improvement on a parcel of land.
SURFACE WATER SEWERS
Non-sanitary sewer lines used for the purpose of carrying surface and rainwater.
WALLS
The supporting portion of a structure which support a building or other structure or which
supply lateral support to abutting land.
Whenever any structure or improvement on land in the Township is razed, demolished or
otherwise removed, the work must be carried out in compliance with the standards set forth
herein. Such land shall then be deemed to be an affected site. It shall be unlawful for any razing,
demolition or removal work to be undertaken except in compliance with this section.
The following rules are established to govern demolition activities on an affected site or elsewhere
in the Township of North Versailles.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the land and contractor performing the
demolition on an affected site to first disconnect all utilities including the plugging of surface
water sewers and sanitary sewers. Prior to commencement of work, the owner and contractor
must utilize Call One services to ascertain the presence of easements and utility lines and to
take measures to assure that such lines, easements and utilities are not disturbed or
damaged. All holes, pits and cavities on an affected site resulting from demolition must be
filled and the affected site put back as nearly as possible to its natural state.
Material used for backfill must be clean fill and free from organic and animal matter. Four
inches of topsoil must be placed on the surface of the land on the entire affected property and
seeded with grass seed - Lesco Fine Fescue Links Blend sown at a rate of four to five pounds
per 1,000 square feet. For subsurface fill no masonry or other materials larger than eight
inches in any dimension is permitted; no combustible material of any kind is permitted.
Backfilling shall be compacted in layers no greater than eight inches in depth.
All trees, trash, tires, weeds, rubbish, garbage and other material shall be removed from the
entire premises of the affected site. Owner and contractor shall be responsible for the removal
of these items until final inspection and approval by the Building Inspector or Engineer. Owner
and contractor are responsible to determine perimeter boundaries of the subject property.
If "dug out" holes are to be utilized, the owner and contractor must obtain approval from the
Township Engineer or Building Inspector, or their representative, prior to putting in place any
backfill material so that the Inspector or Engineer can be present at the time the dug out hole
is used. In the event an owner or contractor should fail to notify the Engineer or Building
Inspector in advance of intent to backfill, they shall be responsible to reexcavate to the
basement floor for proper inspection.
In order to cap a sanitary sewer or surface water sewer, the owner and contractor are
obligated to first notify the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority whose representative
must be present at the time of capping. In addition owner and contractor shall be obligated to
notify the Allegheny County Health Department, Plumbing Division, prior to commencement of
work and [1] obtain a permit, if applicable, [2] obtain plan approval and [3] arrange for final
inspection for the permanent sealing of a sanitary sewer service line and all water service
connections.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 65/411
(a)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
D.
In regard to waterlines, the owner and contractor are obligated to first notify the entity
supplying water to the affected site and locate all lines and take precaution to see that
the same are capped; approval must first be obtained by the entity suppling water to the
affected site.
Owner and contractor must obtain a demolition permit from the Building Inspector for each
structure to be demolished prior to the start of work at the prevailing fee schedule. Permits
shall be valid for a period of six months.
Final grade of the affected site shall be sloped and configured to direct drainage away from
abutting properties.
All materials, debris, etc., removed from an affected site may only be deposited at a landfill
approved by Department of Environmental Protection.
Owner and contractor shall confine all work operations to the limits of the affected site and
shall not deposit any debris, rubbish, materials onto a public right-of-way or private property.
At no time and under no circumstances shall any structure or parts thereof be set on fire.
All public sidewalks and rights-of-way must remain undisturbed and free of obstructions.
Blasting or explosives may not be utilized.
Metal track equipment may not be operated on paved streets unless approved protection is
utilized and only with the approval of the Township Engineer.
The exterior walls (supporting walls) of any structure which abut a public right-of-way shall be
left in place to assure continuing lateral supporting to such street or alley. Such walls shall be
removed to the elevation of the public right-of-way. Walls (nonsupporting walls) parallel to a
public right-of-way shall be removed to an elevation of 18 inches below the abutting right-ofway.
Walls (bracing walls) perpendicular to and directly connected to a supporting wall shall
be left in place at the same height as the supporting wall and sloped away on a two-to-one
slope.
The Engineer or designated representative shall have the authority to stop work if the owner
or contractor fails to comply with the standards herein or if a condition is found to exist which
poses a threat to public safety.
Owner and contractor must comply with all prevailing federal, state and/or local laws and
regulations pertaining to work on and disposal of asbestos or other hazardous or toxic
materials. This includes the obligation to be duly licensed by the Allegheny County Health
Department.
The owner and contractor are responsible for safety on the affected site and in the immediate
environment and to that end shall furnish, erect and maintain barricades, lights and/or
warning "Keep Out" signs at places and locations where the placing of such protective
devices are warranted or as directed by the Township representative.
The owner and contractor shall be responsible for all demolition activities and to make certain
that such activities do not create dangerous conditions to abutting structures or members of
the public. Owner and contractor shall not deface, mar or damage any abutting land or
structures, and shall be obligated to repair any such damage within a reasonable time.
All obligations set forth herein are the joint responsibilities of the owner and the contractor.
If an interested party is aggrieved by a decision of the Township representative or the application
of the within standards, that person may file for a variance from the Township Building Inspector. If
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 66/411
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
the Building Inspector refuses the relief sought, the interested person may file an appeal with the
North Versailles Township Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the date when the Building
Inspector made the decision.
Violations of this section shall be deemed to be civil in nature. For each violation of this section,
any person or entity found guilty shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each violation.
Every day for which a violation exists shall be a separate violation.
If any provision of this section shall be in conflict with any pre-existing ordinance, the more
restrictive provision shall govern.
Chapter 124. Contractors
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Article I. Working Hours
[Adopted 9-20-1999 by Ord. No. 974]
§ 124-1. Findings; intent.
The Township Board of Commissioners finds that the Township is largely residential and that there are
significant numbers of families residing within the Township. The prevailing sense and attitude in the
Township is that nonemergency nocturnal and weekend outdoor work activity should be restricted or
reduced for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the community.
§ 124-2. Regulation of hours.
It is hereby ordained that no contractor, builder, paver or other entity performing public or private work
in the Township shall conduct nonemergency outdoor work on any day prior to 7:00 a.m. or after dusk.
§ 124-3. Work performed on Sundays.
It is further ordained that no contractor, builder, paver or other entity performing public work on behalf
of the Township shall conduct nonemergency outdoor work on Sundays unless given written
permission by the Township Code Enforcement Officer in advance of such work. The granting of such
permission shall be solely within the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, but the following
factors shall be utilized as guidelines:
The urgency of the need to complete the work;
The contractor's dependence on weather conditions in completing the work;
The nature of the work to be completed as related to its potential to disrupt and interfere with the
residents of the Township;
Such other factors as may be relevant.
§ 124-4. Emergency work.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 67/411
In the event of emergency, an agent and/or contractor may conduct outdoor construction work during
the periods prohibited by this chapter, but shall make a reasonable attempt to obtain the permission of
the Township Code Enforcement Officer in advance of conducting such work. If such contractor is
unable to contact the Code Enforcement Officer, he shall report the nature of the emergency and
provide a description of the work necessitated by such emergency, including the dates and times
thereof, within 24 hours of performing the same.
§ 124-5. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer is empowered to prepare, publish and distribute rules and regulations
to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-6. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a civil summary offense. Any such person or entity
found guilty shall be subject to a fine of $100 and costs for each offense.
Chapter 130. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 7-15-1974 by
Ord. No. 697 (Ch. 6, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 130-1. Curfew established.
[Amended 6-12-1978 by Ord. No. 749]
It shall hereinafter be unlawful for boys and girls 16 years of age and under (such persons hereinafter
are defined for purposes of this chapter as "children") to be or remain in or about or upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks, public places or places of public convenience in the Township of North Versailles
after the hour of 9:00 p.m. prevailing time. During the period of time from June 1 to August 31 of each
year, it shall not be lawful for such persons to be in and about public places subsequent to 10:00 p.m.
prevailing time. It shall not be a violation of this chapter if such child is accompanied by a parent,
guardian, or other adult person having legal custody of such child, or where such other reasonable
explanation is found in the sole discretion of the juvenile officer or police personnel of the Township of
North Versailles. As a warning, a bell, horn, or other device may be sounded at 15 minutes before the
established curfew hour, to be known as the "Curfew Warning," after which all such children shall be
required to be at home or off the streets except as herein provided. The curfew hour must be observed
and complied with whether a curfew warning is sounded or not, the sounding of the curfew being a
matter of convenience at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 130-2. Parental responsibility.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of
any of the children above designated to allow or permit any such child, ward or other person under
such age, while in such legal custody, to go or be in or upon any streets, alleys, parks, or public places
in said Township after the time prohibited in § 130-1 of this chapter, except as therein provided.
§ 130-3. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 68/411
[Amended 6-12-1978 by Ord. No. 749; 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; and 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any child as above designated found upon the Township streets, alleys, parks, or public places within
the Township, in violation of § 130-1 of this chapter, shall be taken into custody by the Township police
and delivered to his or her parents, guardian, or person having the legal custody of said child, and
report thereof made immediately to the Secretary of the Township of North Versailles, who shall make
a record thereof in a book to be kept for that purpose. If said parent, guardian or person having the
legal custody of said child shall again allow him or her to be on said streets, alleys, parks or public
places in violation of § 130-1 of this chapter, said parent, guardian or person having the legal custody
of said child so offending shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days and a like fine or imprisonment shall be
imposed on any person aiding or abetting in the violation of the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 130-4. Repeated offenses.
Said children who shall violate this chapter more than three times shall be reported to a society or
organization whose purpose is to take charge of incorrigibles and delinquents and proceedings be then
taken in the Juvenile Court of Allegheny County for their permanent welfare, and a like procedure shall
be taken in cases where the arrest of the parent or guardian shall not be effective, or where for any
other reasons the provisions of § 130-1 of this chapter cannot be made effective by fines and penalties
imposed thereunder.
§ 130-5. Police discretion.
The police officers of the Township in taking children into custody shall use their discretion in
determining age, and in doubtful cases may require positive proof, and until such proof is furnished,
the officer's judgment shall prevail.
Chapter 140. Firearms and Air Guns
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 10-11-1948 by
Ord. No. 238 (Ch. 6, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed in this
section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AIR GUN
Any air gun which does not contain air under high pressure from pumping or other means but
which derives its force from a spring which is set by a simple cocking operation and discharges
missiles through a smooth barrel at a muzzle velocity of less than 400 feet per second.
FIREARM
Any pistol, revolver, rifle or shotgun which discharges a bullet, cartridge, shell, shot or other
missile propelled by the burning or explosion of gun powder.
§ 140-2. Discharge prohibited.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 69/411
[1]
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no firearm or air gun as defined in this chapter shall
be fired or discharged anywhere within the corporate limits of the Township of North Versailles, except
under proper supervision at duly established target ranges and except by those persons and in those
circumstances permitted by the Act of the General Assembly of June 24, 1939, P.L. 872, as amended,
[1] or any other law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Editor's Note: See now 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
§ 140-3. Toy air guns.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no toy air gun as defined in this chapter shall be fired
or discharged within the corporate limits of the Township of North Versailles, except under supervision
at duly established target ranges and except where the firing or discharge of the toy air gun and the
flight of its missile are confined entirely to the user's own property or the premises of another with his
express consent.
§ 140-4. Hunting.
[Amended 11-21-1966 by Ord. No. 605]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced at all times, including hunting season.
§ 140-5. Parental responsibility.
Any parent of a child who has not reached his or her 18th birthday who knowingly permits such child to
violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided.
§ 140-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-31-1970 by Ord. No. 647; 4-21-1975 by Ord. No. 712; 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-
1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 145. Fire Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 20.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 85.
Open burning — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Article I. Automatic Fire Detection Systems
[Adopted 2-16-1981 by Ord. No. 789 (Ch. 7, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 145-1. Requirements; purpose; authorization.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 70/411
A.
B.
C.
Smoke detectors and alarms shall be installed in all hotels, motels, apartments and all dwellings within
the Township of North Versailles. It is declared to be the intent of this article to provide an effective
means of detecting fires and warning occupants of that circumstance. Standards of conduct and
standards of care for all property owners, occupants, rental agents are hereby imposed so as to
maintain safe conditions and to utilize available devices in keeping with the art of the trade of smoke
and fire detectors and alarms. To this end and in keeping with the standards of this article, the
Township Building Inspector is authorized to exercise his discretion in specifying the number and
placement of said devices, after due consultation with the Township Engineer and Fire Marshal.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SMOKE DETECTOR AND ALARM
A device which automatically detects the presence of heat, smoke or other products of
combustion, and which activates a fire alarm signal. Detectors shall be installed in compliance with
the following standards: Underwriters' Laboratories Standard No. 168 for photoelectric type
detectors, Underwriters' Laboratories Standard No. 167 for Ionization Type Detectors, and NFPA
No. 72E, 1974, NFPA 101, 1976, by Life Safety Code, BOCA Safety Code, and as the same shall
be amended from time to time.
§ 145-3. Residences and apartments.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area of the above classes
of buildings. A "sleeping area" is defined as the area or areas of the family living unit in which the
bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located. Where bedrooms or rooms ordinarily used for sleeping
are separated by other use areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets),
they shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this article.
At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head (top) of each stairway leading up to an
occupied area in such a manner as to assure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the
detector and the detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the sleeping area.
One smoke detector shall be installed in each gameroom or basement.
§ 145-4. Hotels and motels.
In hotels and motels, detectors must be installed so as to provide adequate and complete protection to
carry out the purposes and intent of this article. The determination of the number and placement of
smoke detectors is hereby vested in the Building Inspector, who is directed to consult with the
Township Engineer and the Township Fire Marshal.
§ 145-5. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all hotels, motels, apartments, public buildings, commercial buildings, and
residential buildings hereinafter erected, remodeled, transferred, devised, granted, conveyed,
assigned, reconstructed or upon which any work or construction is done for which at any time hereafter
an occupancy permit is needed pursuant to any ordinance of North Versailles Township.
§ 145-6. Verification; inspection and fee.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 71/411
In all the above classifications, prior to the time any building permit may be issued, there must be a
provision made for the installation of smoke alarms and smoke detectors in accordance with this
article. Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, there must first be compliance with the terms of
this article, and the Building Inspector shall verify that in fact smoke alarms and detectors have been
installed and are operable in accordance with this article. For each inspection pursuant to this article, a
fee shall be charged in the amount of $10. Said fee may be adjusted by simple resolution hereinafter.
§ 145-7. Duty to maintain detectors.
There is hereby imposed a continuing duty on all owners, occupant and rental agents to maintain all
smoke detectors and alarms in operable condition.
§ 145-8. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
It shall be deemed that this article shall be mandatory, and shall provide for civil and criminal penalties.
Civil remedies shall include the institution of suit in equity against any owner, occupant or rental agent
of any property to compel the installation of smoke alarms and detectors in accordance with this article.
If any owner, occupant, rental agent or any person or entity having any interest in any building covered
by this article shall fail or refuse to provide and install operable smoke alarms and detectors in
accordance with this article, he shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense, and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 149. Flea Markets
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 1-25-1993 by
Ord. No. 914 (Ch. 13, Part 7, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 110.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 149-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Flea Market Ordinance."
§ 149-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOOTH, KIOSK, STALL or SALES AREA
That particular area occupied by a single flea market seller for the purpose of selling used
merchandise.
FLEA MARKET
An open area delineated by metes and bounds, either inside a building or out of doors, containing
stalls, kiosks or booths or other types of sales areas in excess of five, designated for use as sales
of used merchandise. This will not be deemed to include casual or garage sales.
FLEA MARKET GOODS
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 72/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Used merchandise of any nature. Food to be consumed on the premises may only be sold by
vendors who hold a current health license of the County Health Department and Department of
Environmental Protection.
FLEA MARKET SELLER
Any person or entity who sells only used merchandise or goods at a flea market.
OWNER/OPERATOR
Any person or entity which conducts, manages, supervises, oversees or otherwise owns or
controls a flea market.
VENDOR
A person or persons who sells new merchandise or goods. If one sells new and unused
merchandise, he shall be deemed to be a vendor.
§ 149-3. Permit required.
Hereinafter no property owner may conduct a flea market without having first obtained a special permit
from the Building Inspector of the Township of North Versailles. This chapter shall apply to all existing
flea market owners/operators; any entity which presently conducts what is deemed to be a flea market
must nevertheless apply for, obtain and receive a special flea market permit following the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 149-4. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation of flea markets in North Versailles
Township:
Flea markets may only be operated in "C" Commercial Districts within the Township.[1]
Editor's Note: The reference to "'C' Commercial Districts" refers to the Zoning Ordinance in effect
at the time this chapter was adopted; see now Chapter 300, Zoning, for current district information.
The owner/operator shall pay an annual fee of $2,000 to the Township of North Versailles to be
permitted to operate a flea market operation. The fee of $2,000 shall be for each calendar year or
any part thereof during which the operation occurs, commencing in 1993.
The owner/operator with his application must designate and set forth with specificity plans for fire
and emergency, cleaning the area, removal of debris, garbage disposal, crowd control, policing
and recycling.
The owner/operator must identify the liability insurance carrier, policy number and effective dates
of the policy for the owner, operator and the flea market.
§ 149-5. Registration.
Any vendor must register with the Township of North Versailles and obtain a vendor's permit/license for
the business pursuant to Chapter 215, Peddling and Soliciting, of the Code of the Township of North
Versailles. All of such operations shall be deemed to be permanent businesses and must comply with
all acts, ordinances, levies, rules and regulations regarding permanent businesses in the Township of
North Versailles. Before any vendor may operate, such vendor must first apply for and receive a
license or permit from the Township of North Versailles. No owner/operator may permit a vendor to
operate without evidence of compliance with Chapter 215, Peddling and Soliciting, of the Code of the
Township of North Versailles.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 73/411
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
[1]
§ 149-6. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of this chapter, an owner/operator and/or booth occupier or vendor shall
be subject to civil enforcement proceedings and, if found liable, a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. Each
breach of any rule or regulation of this chapter shall be a separate violation.
§ 149-7. Sellers to obtain permit; mercantile and business
privilege taxes; permit fee.
[Added 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 952]
Hereinafter, no flea market seller shall be permitted to occupy a booth or transact business in a
flea market unless he or she is in possession of a permit from the Township for such activity as
described herein. The permit must be kept on open display by the flea market seller during regular
business hours for inspection and/or upon demand of any official of the Township of North
Versailles.
An owner/operator shall only rent or permit occupancy of a booth to flea market sellers who
are in possession of a current permit from the Township to operate as a flea market seller.
An owner/operator shall maintain a permanent record of all vendors and flea market sellers,
which record must remain open and available for inspection by Township officials during
reasonable business hours and at any time when the flea market is open for business.
Every flea market seller shall be obligated to collect, remit and report to the appropriate Tax
Collector all mercantile and business privilege taxes. Further, every flea market seller shall be
obligated to pay to North Versailles Township an annual permit fee of $25 prior to conducting
business. Permits may be obtained at the office of the Township Secretary by paying the
applicable fee and completing an application on a form to be supplied by the Secretary. The fee of
$25 shall be for each calendar year or any part thereof. A flea market seller shall not be permitted
to occupy, use, sell or otherwise conduct business in a flea market without having first paid the fee
to the Township and received a permit to operate as a flea market seller.
Fees and charges imposed pursuant to this chapter may hereinafter be modified by simple
resolution.
Chapter 154. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 9-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 1091.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 196.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Zoning floodplain regulations — See Ch. 300, Art. XII.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 154, Flood Damage Prevention, adopted 9-
18-1995 by Ord. No. 937 (Ch. 8 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances), as amended.
Article I. Statutory Authorization
§ 154-101. Authority.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 74/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles does hereby
order as follows.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 154-201. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents, by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 154-202. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the Township of North Versailles
unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 154-203. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 154-204. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 154-205. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 75/411
B.
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of North Versailles or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 154-301. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Township Secretary is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred
to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth
in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees, or (C) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant
to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code
of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the President of Board of Commissioners.
§ 154-302. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of the
Township of North Versailles.
§ 154-303. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[1] and the U.S.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 76/411
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Board of Commissioners for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
§ 154-304. Application procedures and requirements.
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by the Township of North Versailles. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 77/411
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(4)
C.
Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;
Building materials are flood-resistant;
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access ways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood;
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC.
The following data and documentation:
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a base flood; and floodway area (See § 154-
402A) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the base flood elevation at any point.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 78/411
[1]
[2]
(d)
(e)
(f)
D.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 154-503F, Storage, and
§ 154-504, Development which may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 154-503F and 154-504 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 154-504 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 154-305. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the
County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 154-306. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 154-307. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 154-308. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 154-309. Start of construction.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 79/411
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of development permit does not refer to the zoning
approval.
The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 154-310. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Township of North Versailles, of not less than $25 nor more
than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board of Commissioners to
be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 80/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 154-311. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance
with the Municipal Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.
Article IV. Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 154-401. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of North Versailles Township classified as special
flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by North Versailles Township and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 154-402. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which
represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those Special Flood Hazard Areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 81/411
(1)
(1)
C.
(1)
A.
The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which no base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall be
used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality.
§ 154-403. Changes in identification of area.
The Identified Floodplain Area may be revised or modified by the Board of Commissioners where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change to the Special Flood Hazard Area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the Special Flood
Hazard Area by submitting technical or scientific data. See § 154-501B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 154-404. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Township of North Versailles and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Board of Commissioners. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 154-405. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article V. Technical Provisions
§ 154-501. General.
Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 82/411
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(1)
B.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, shall be notified by the applicant prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments: any development that
causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in
Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior to approving
the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 154-502. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Residential structures.
In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 154-
402C of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 83/411
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
A.
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new construction
or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 154-402C of this chapter.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
§ 154-503. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 84/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages, and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 154-504, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 85/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
A.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions, shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. R104,
R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
§ 154-504. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any Identified Floodplain Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A, below, shall
be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following
provisions apply:
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 86/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
B.
C.
D.
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances
are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind
described in Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited. Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially
improved residential structure of the kind described in § 154-504A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in accordance
with §§ 154-501, 154-502, and 154-503.
Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in § 154-504A above, shall be built in accordance
with §§ 154-501, 154-502, and 154-503, including:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 87/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation; and
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight
standard.
§ 154-505. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in Identified Floodplain Areas where base flood elevation data are not
available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map
revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 154-506. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any Identified Floodplain Area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
Within any Identified Floodplain Area manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, all manufactured homes, and any
improvements thereto, shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation;
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above base
flood elevation;
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building
Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa. Code, Chapter 401
through 405, shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or
the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 88/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were
not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 154-507. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any Identified Floodplain Area, recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
Be removed from floodplain if flood warning is issued.
Article VI. Prohibited Activities
§ 154-601. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any Identified Floodplain Area.
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Article VII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 154-701. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 154-702 shall apply.
§ 154-702. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any Identified Floodplain Area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any Identified
Floodplain Area that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 154-402C.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 89/411
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(a)
(7)
A.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 154-402A) no new construction or development shall be
allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Article VIII. Variances
§ 154-801. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township of North Versailles may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 154-802. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of North Versailles in accordance with
the procedures contained in § 154-311 and the following:
No variance shall be granted within any Identified Floodplain Area that would cause any
increase in BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in § 154-
402C.
Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved, no
variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development which may endanger human life (§ 154-504).
No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Township of North Versailles shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of North Versailles shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of North Versailles shall consider, at a
minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 90/411
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(8)
B.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any
other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Township of North Versailles. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year
shall be included in the annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the one-percent annual chance flood.
Article IX. Definitions
§ 154-901. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 154-902. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 91/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 92/411
(1)
(2)
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has
selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special
flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 154-401 and 154-402 for the specifics on
what areas the community has included in the Identified Floodplain Area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after April 1,
1981, and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit
was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated April 1, 1981,
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 93/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated April 1, 1981,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 94/411
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Article X. Enactment
§ 154-1001. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014, and shall remain in force until modified,
amended or rescinded by Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 160. Grading and Excavation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 10-21-1985 by
Ord. No. 833 (Ch. 9, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Mining — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
§ 160-1. Permit required.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake, cause, endeavor or in any manner to excavate, drill,
cut, fill and/or grade any land within the Township of North Versailles without an approved permit
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 95/411
having first been issued by the designated permit officer or as otherwise excepted in § 160-4.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BEDROCK
The natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or beneath unconsolidated surface
deposits.
DESIGNATED PERMIT OFFICER
That person authorized to issue grading and building permits; as of the date of this chapter, that
person is the Building Inspector.
DRILL
To penetrate the surface of the earth with any implement whatsoever for the purpose locating,
testing or removing natural gas; it shall include an activity in manner of drilling, taking cores, taking
samples or penetrating the surface of the earth to remove something or test for the presence of
natural gas beneath the surface of the earth. It shall not include drilling for water or taking
geological core samples.
EARTH MATERIAL
Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.
ENGINEER, GEOLOGIST
A person who holds a degree in geology from an accredited college or university, and who has
training and experience in the field of engineering and geology.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL
A person licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice engineering and who is
knowledgeable in civil engineering.
EROSION
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity, including
such processes as gravitational creep.
EXCAVATION
The mechanical removal of earth material.
FILL
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed,
dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location and shall include the condition resulting
therefrom.
FILLING
The deposition of earth material.
GOVERNING BODY
The Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles.
GRADING
Any excavating or filling of earth material or combination thereof.
HAZARD
A danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or an adverse effect or potential adverse effect
to the safety, use or stability of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 96/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
sewers including stream pollution. (See § 160-6.)
PERMIT
Any permit required under these regulations.
PERSON
Any person, persons, partnership, business, corporation or any other legal entity.
SITE
A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts, or parcels of land which are adjoining, where
grading or filling work is being performed.
SOILS ENGINEER
A person registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who
has training, expertise and experience in soils engineering.
SOIL SURVEY
The unpublished and operational soil survey for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania and the
accompanying text, Soil Survey Interpretations of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, et al. When applicable, "Soil Survey" shall
mean Soil Survey, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, when this publication is completed.
SOLID WASTE
All parts or combinations of ashes, garbage, refuse, radioactive material, combustible and
demolition materials and industrial waste such as food processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal
scrap, etc.
§ 160-3. Application procedures.
The following procedures shall govern the application and issuance of such permits. Applications shall
be made to the designated permit officer on forms supplied by the Township. The following is the
minimum information which must be set forth in each application, and the permit officer shall have
absolute authority to demand and receive further information from any applicant:
Name and address of the applicant and the owner of the site where the work will be performed,
and the relationship between them.
The name and address of the contractor performing the work, a copy of the contract and the total
contract price.
Identification of all work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
Plans and specifications prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, surveyor or
architect giving a reasonable plan of the site and proposed soil erosion controls, if any. The permit
officer may waive the preparation, approval and signature by a professional engineer, surveyor or
architect only when it is self-evident that the proposed work is simple, clearly shown on the plans
submitted, and creates no potential nuisance or hazard to adjacent property, and does not include
the construction of a fill upon which a structure may be erected. Such plans shall include a
description of the site proposed for grading by giving an accurate location by lot, block, tract, street
address, longitude and latitude, coordinates, a location map or other similar information; a contour
map showing the present contours of the land and the proposed contours of the land after
completion of the proposed grading, and a plan showing cross sections of the proposed cut or fill
which show the method of benching for both cut and/or fill shall be supplied. In addition, a plot
plan shall show the location of the grading, boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets or ways,
buildings, surface and subsurface utilities and waterways. In addition, plans may include a
description of the type and classification of the soil from the Soil Survey or better; details and
location of any proposed drainage structures and pipes, walls, and cribbing shall be set forth;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 97/411
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
seeding locations and schedules, debris basins, diversion channels shall be described and
located; nature of fill material and such other information as the permit officer may need to carry
out the purposes of this chapter shall be divulged. All plans shall be dated and bear the name and
seal of the professional engineer who prepared the same; the name of the applicant; and the
name of the owner of the land. Plans shall be submitted in triplicate, one set of which shall be of a
reproducible nature.
The purpose for which the grading application is filed. The duty of the applicant to the permit
officer shall be to provide information and reports from governmental agencies, and scientific
and/or engineering journals, if available, and professional engineers and/or engineering
geologists, if necessary. This information and these reports must be of sufficient detail to insure
that the proposed grading will not create a hazard and that there will be a minimum of soil erosion
on the site to be graded.
A geological report may be requested to include a detailed description of the geological conditions
of the site, and include conclusions and recommendations that will demonstrate the relationship of
the geological conditions to the proposed development, including hazardous conditions, water
resources, mineral resources and environmental impact. A soil conservation report may be
required to include existing site description as to topography, drainage, cover and soils, major
resource problems as to soil limitations, erosion and sediment potential, surface runoff changes
and recommendations to minimize soil limitations, erosion and sediment, and surface water
disposal problems.
A separate grading permit shall be required for each site.
If there is no stated contract price for said work, the reasonably anticipated cost of said work and
the total cubic yards of earth to be excavated and/or filled shall be set forth.
Any or all of the above data may be required by the permit officer; such other information as
reasonably may be required by the permit officer shall be provided.
§ 160-4. Exceptions.
A grading permit will not be required in the following situations at the discretion of the permit officer:
Where grading is limited to mining, quarrying or stockpiling of coal, rock, sand, aggregate or clay
that satisfies requirements and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Where grading is limited to solid waste disposal areas or sanitary landfills operated in accordance
with the requirements, rules and ordinances adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Allegheny County Department of Health.
Where excavation does not exceed five feet in vertical depth, does not result in cut and/or fill slope
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical and does not exceed an area of 1,000 square feet for
areas recognized by the Soil Survey or better source as containing landslide-prone soils. Better
sources recognizing landslide-prone soil areas may be relied upon as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Topographic and Geologic Survey, or by a professional engineer experienced in
geology or an engineering geologist.
Where excavation does not exceed 10 feet in vertical depth, does not result in a cut or fill slope
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical and does not exceed an area of 2,500 square feet in
areas of soils not recognized by the Soil Survey or better as landslide-prone.
Where grading does not exceed new construction authorized by a building permit properly issued
by the governing body. Grading under the authorization of a building permit should follow the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 98/411
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Where soil excavated under the authorization of a building permit properly issued by the governing
body is temporarily stockpiled on the same site as excavation; provided, however, that if the
material from such excavation is thereafter to be used for fill purposes for which a grading permit
is required, such permit must be obtained prior to such use in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter. In addition, if excavated material is stockpiled on a site for a period longer than 120
days, then a permit shall be necessary when disposing of the fill material.
§ 160-5. Source of fill; destination of excavated materials.
If a fill is to be made within the Township, it must identify all sources of and the nature of all material
being used to make the fill. If an excavation or cut is to be made in the Township, applicant must
designate where all the material is to be deposited. If material is to be excavated and deposited within
the Township, two permits are required (one for each site).
§ 160-6. Hazardous conditions.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of its permit officer, determines that any
existing or proposed excavation, embankment or fill has or may become a hazard, the owner of
the property upon which the excavation, embankment, or fill is located, or other person or agent in
control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the permit officer, shall within the
reasonable period specified therein repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation, embankment,
or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
If after such notification, the property owner has not made the necessary repairs within the time
adopted, then the governing body may direct government employees to make the required repairs
and the cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner by suit and/or lien filed as provided by
law.
In determining whether a hazard may endanger property, streets or alleys, or create hazardous
conditions, the permit officer shall give due consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth
movements, runoff surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting
of rock, aquifers, springs and the nature and type of the soil, rock and fill material.
Whenever the permit officer determines in his sole discretion that any danger, nuisance or hazard
exists by virtue of the operations being undertaken pursuant to this chapter, he shall have
authority to stop the work being done. This shall include but not be limited to accumulations of dirt
and mud or other substances on streets, any windblown or airborne substances, or a nuisance in
any manner in and about a work site. The permit officer shall have the authority to inspect and
determine the existence of dangerous, noxious or nuisances and shall have the authority to abate
the same and order the work to discontinue until appropriate precautions are made.
§ 160-7. Permit issuance; landslide potentials.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
The permit officer shall issue a permit after he has determined that the proposed work meets all the
applicable rules and regulations of this chapter, all other Township ordinances and any other applicable
governmental regulations, if any. If, however, the permit officer has reason to believe that the area to
be excavated or filled is a slide-prone area or has reason to believe that a slide may be precipitated by
the work described in the application, the permit officer may demand that the applicant provide an
evaluation by a soils mechanic engineer together with plans of operation. The Building Officer shall
further have the authority at any time during which work is being performed pursuant to this chapter to
order the cessation of all work in the event that information comes to the attention of the Officer that a
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 99/411
A.
B.
A.
landslide may be caused by the work being performed. The permit officer shall have sole discretion to
define and delineate the scope and duration of any project and thus limit duration and scope of any
permit. The permit officer may divide the proposed project into as many segments and permits as he
sees fit in his sole discretion and to prescribe and mandate that a permit be obtained for each and
every segment or area where work is to be performed.
§ 160-8. Written approval.
After the issuance of a permit by the permit officer, no changes of any kind shall be made to the
application, permit, or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written approval of the permit officer.
§ 160-9. Issuance of placard.
In addition to the permit, the permit officer shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the
premises during the time when work is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit
and the date of its issuance and shall be signed by the permit officer.
§ 160-10. Performance guarantee.
Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post a bond, corporate surety, or other
approved security in the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the grading work and erosion control
facilities proposed in the permit to guarantee said work and facilities in a satisfactory manner and
meeting the requirements of this chapter. No bond shall be required if another bond or other approved
security is posted for construction and/or site improvements. The amount of the bond shall be
determined in the sole discretion of the permit officer. When all requirements of this permit have been
met and the work has been completed in a satisfactory manner, the full amount of security shall be
returned to the person posting said security. This bond shall also be to guarantee that there is no
damage to public roadways within the Township due to weight limitations or to any other conduct of the
moving fill.
§ 160-11. Start of work; expiration of permit.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
The proposed work shall begin within three months after the date of issuance of the permit or the
same shall automatically expire unless an extension is granted in writing by the permit officer. If at
any time there is a continuous three-month period where no work is done on the work site, then
the permit shall be deemed to have expired.
All work to be done under such permit shall be completed within one year from the time when the
permit is granted. No permit shall be valid for more than a one-year period. If any work is to
performed or desired to be performed beyond that period of time, then a new permit must be
obtained.
§ 160-12. Inspection and revocation.
During the permitted work period, the permit officer, his representative or other authorized
Township official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in
compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. In the event the permit officer discovers that the work does not
comply with the permit application or with all applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 100/411
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
been a false statement or a misrepresentation by any applicant, the permit officer may revoke the
permit.
If at any time during the construction of the work, the permit officer has cause to believe that the
applicant or anybody performing work pursuant to the application permit is causing damage, he
shall have the absolute right to cause the cessation of work.
§ 160-13. Permit fees.
[Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No. 923]
Excavation fees.
Minimum fee for each fill and/or excavation: $50.
For each cubic yard over 50 cubic yards for each fill and for each excavation there shall be
added a charge of $0.25 per cubic yard.
Drilling fees. Fees for drilling shall be as follows:
Fees for removal of natural gas: $500.
Hereinafter, the Township Board of Commissioners shall have the absolute right to set and reset
fees and charges by simple resolution, following advertisement in accordance with the law.
The permit officer in his sole discretion may request site inspections by the Township Engineer. On
each occasion the applicant must pay an inspection fee of $50 to the Township of North Versailles.
In default of payment for five days of demand, the permit officer may revoke the permit.
§ 160-14. Appeals to Zoning Hearing Board.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the permit officer may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the determination by the permit officer.
Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time and place not less than 10
days nor more than 30 days for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and place of
the hearing of the appeal shall be given to all parties at which time they may appear and be heard.
When the requirements of this chapter for obtaining a permit have been met, the permit officer
shall approve the proposed plan and grant a grading permit to the applicant. Approved work may
then start.
§ 160-15. Slope requirements.
Maximum slope steepness of a cut should be three horizontal to one vertical for minimizing
erosion and landslide hazard. However, a governmental review agency, professional engineer or
engineering geologist may recognize the types of soil on the site to be graded from the Soil
Survey or better. Maximum slopes can then be redetermined as follows:
Landslide-prone soils with slopes greater than 25% shall have cut slopes no steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical. Soil Survey Map are:
34-DE-6 34-E-2 34-F-1 65-E-2
Landslide-prone soils where slopes are less than 25% shall have cut slopes no steeper than
two horizontal to one vertical. Soil Survey Map symbols are:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 101/411
(3)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
32-B-2 34-C-2 65-C-2 65-D-2
32-C-2 34-D-2 65-D-2 67-B-1
34-B-2 65-B-2 67-B-1
Soils which are not or have a low probability of being landslide-prone shall have a slope no
steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical. All Soil Survey Map symbols except the symbols
listed above denote soils of low landslide probability.
Cut slopes which are steeper than those specified above may be allowed under a grading permit,
provided one or both of the following is satisfied:
The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable to sustain a slope steeper
than the slope specified above for recognized soil conditions on the site. A written statement,
signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer, stating that the steeper slope will
have sufficient stability and that risk of creating a hazard will be slight, must be submitted to
the permit officer.
A retaining wall or other approved support, designed by a professional engineer and
approved by the permit officer, is provided to support the toe and face of excavation.
The top or bottom edge of slopes shall generally be set back from adjacent property lines or street
right-of-way lines in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the
abutting property or street.
Guidelines for cuts in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, shall be followed. One or a combination of guidelines should be used to minimize
hazard, depending on site conditions and proposed grading.
§ 160-16. Standards for fills.
No fill shall be placed over trees, stumps or other material which could create a hazard. Instead,
such materials may be buried in natural ground where no structures will be built or hazard created.
Limbs can be chipped and mixed with the topsoil.
All fills should be compacted to provide stability of fill material and to prevent undesirable
settlement or slippage.
Clean soil or earth should be placed over the top and exposed surfaces of the fill to a depth
sufficient to conceal all materials used in the fill other than clean soil or earth. If the filling operation
is intermittent, the top and exposed surfaces of the fill should be so covered at the completion of
each lift.
§ 160-17. Standards for minimizing erosion and sedimentation.
Guidelines for minimizing erosion and sediment in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, should be followed. One or a combination of guidelines shall be used
to minimize hazard, depending on site conditions and proposed grading; however, the administrator
may approve grading plans not meeting guidelines of the Handbook if proposed grading will not
constitute a hazard. Governmental and/or engineering reports should be used as evidence that
proposed grading will not constitute a hazard.
§ 160-18. Retaining walls.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 102/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
Definition of retaining wall: A structure composed of concrete, steel or other approved building
material constructed for the purpose of supporting a cut or filled embankment which would
otherwise not comply with the requirements of the standards set forth in this chapter, and which is
more than four feet in height as measured on the exposed vertical surface of the wall.
If a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy a requirement of this chapter, a building permit, as
provided by other municipal regulations, shall not be required. The grading permit will apply to the
retaining wall, and the requirements for inspection, etc., as stated herein will govern.
Retaining walls must be constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices. The plans
submitted for approval shall bear the seal of a professional engineer.
The backfilling of retaining walls and the insertion of subterranean drainage facilities shall be done
strictly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and appropriate municipal specifications.
In general, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical face of the wall shall be three
feet back from the adjoining property.
A special exception to this requirement may be applied for and granted by the permit officer if
it can he satisfactorily demonstrated that such a variance is necessary to insure normal use of
the property, i.e., for a sideline driveway.
Compliance with this section may also be excused when the proposed retaining wall is a joint
venture between adjacent property owners, and appropriate documents so stating are filed
with the application for the permit.
§ 160-19. Drainage provisions.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface or subsurface waters from damaging:
The cut face of an excavation;
The sloping surface of a fill; and
Adjacent property affected by the change in the existing natural runoff pattern.
To prevent damage, grading plans should follow vegetative control methods and ditch and conduit
control methods set forth in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania. The permit officer may approve methods and materials recommended by
governmental agencies and professional engineers when they are more suitable to the site in
preventing damage. Drainage facilities shall be designed to accommodate the largest size storm
that would occur on the average of every 20 years.
§ 160-20. Maintenance.
The owner, occupier or controller of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill, all retaining walls, cribbing,
drainage structures, fences, ground cover, and any other protective devices as may be a part of
the permit requirements.
If, at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work, the cut face or fill slope shall
evidence signs of deterioration, erosion, or other evidence which might be detrimental to the
properties above and below the grading site, the permit officer may direct the property owner or
applicant to take necessary remedial steps in accordance with sound engineering practice to
restore the grading to a safe condition, and to do so in a reasonable period of time.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 103/411
§ 160-21. Liability.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with the
provisions herein with any condition imposed by the permit officer hereunder shall relieve any person
from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed
by law, nor impose any liability upon the Township of North Versailles for damages to persons or
property.
§ 160-22. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or who
fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the permit officer or any other authorized
employee of the Township shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the
Township of North Versailles of not less than $25, but no more than $1,000; and/or such person shall
be imprisoned in the county prison for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day during which any
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above
remedies, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance
with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable
time. Any excavation, filling, and/or grading not in compliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Board of Commissioners to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
Chapter 165. Hazardous Materials
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Board — See Ch. 15.
Police force — See Ch. 48.
Solid waste — See Ch. 250.
Article I. Cleanup of Spills and Deposits
[Adopted 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 927 (Ch. 10, Part 5, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 165-1. Spilling prohibited.
Every person or entity is hereby prohibited from spilling, depositing or dumping any hazardous
materials or substances or any substances which pose or present a safety or health hazard upon or
into properties within the municipal boundaries of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 165-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES
Any material or substance which may have a direct or identifiable effect on persons or property or
any such substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the Township
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 104/411
or its authorized representative, poses an unreasonable or imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment. This shall include,
but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables, corrosives or materials listed in the
hazardous substance list of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, the Solid Waste
Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.103, and the Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act, 35 P.S.
§ 7303.
PERSON or ENTITY
Any individual, firm, corporation, government, association or partnership or any other legal entity.
§ 165-3. Authorization of cleanup.
North Versailles hereby authorizes and directs its various emergency services, volunteer fire
departments, Township employees or any other persons employed or retained by the Township for
such purposes to clean or abate, or cause to be cleaned or abated, the effects of any hazardous
materials or substances deposited upon or into properties or facilities within the municipal boundaries
of the Township of North Versailles. This shall include, but not be limited to, abatement, emergency
service, fire control, traffic control, evacuation, relocation, substance monitoring and establishment of
medical care facilities. Any person or persons who intentionally, accidentally or negligently caused
such spill, deposit or dumping shall be liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the Township of
North Versailles or its instrumentalities in cleanup or abatement activities. The remedies provided by
this article shall be in addition to all remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, United States, Allegheny County or the Township of North Versailles.
§ 165-4. Costs.
For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the Township shall include, but are not limited to, actual
labor costs of Township police and other personnel, including workmen's compensation benefits, fringe
benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of special fire extinguishing agents
used and costs of any contracted labor and materials; further, it shall include any costs incurred by
volunteer fire companies, emergency medical companies and any other agency or contractor engaged
in the abating or cleaning up of the effects of any such hazardous materials of substances deposited
upon or into properties, facilities, roads or streets in the Township of North Versailles.
Chapter 170. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 1-23-1993 by Ord. No. 915 (Ch. 1, Part 7, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 170-1. Designated official.
From time to time the Township shall designate the official responsible for carrying out the duties as
are described herein. Such official shall be the designated officer of the Township to make
certifications, file claims, etc., and carry out all functions as may be necessary to effectuate Township
claims pursuant to the "legislation referred to hereinabove.[1] At the present time the Township hereby
designates the Township Secretary as the appropriate officer.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 105/411
[1]
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
B.
Editor's Note: So in original § 701 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances; unable to ascertain reference to
"legislation referred to hereinabove."
§ 170-2. Payment of claim.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring agent") doing business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
structure located within North Versailles Township (hereinafter the "Township") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $5,000, unless the named
insured or insuring agent is furnished by the Township Treasurer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c)
and (d) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions of this article.[1]
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b), (c) and (d).
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992,[2] the Municipal Treasurer issues a
certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges
against real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure,
the following procedures must be followed:
The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the designated officer of the
Township in the aggregate of $1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this subsection to be applied such that if the claim is $20,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the Township shall be $1,000.
If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured and the insuring agent,
the named insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Township from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies, associations or
exchanges insuring the building or other structures.
After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs
of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, and the designated officer
shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the Township in excess of the estimate to
the named insured, if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
Upon receipt of proceeds under this subsection, the Township shall do the following:
The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Township. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Township in connection with
such removal, repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto.
It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the proceeds to provide the
Township with the name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the
transferred funds and the named and address of the named insured, the designated
officer shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by
the Township and notify the named insured that the procedures under this subsection
shall be followed.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 106/411
(c)
(d)
(6)
[2]
[1]
A.
When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed
in accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of the Township and the required
proof of such completion received by the designated officer, and if the Township has not
incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the cost shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds
remain, the Township shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the Township pursuant to this
section and not returned to the named insured, such interest shall belong to the
Township. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds
are returned.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limited the ability of the Township to recover any
deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Township
and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to
the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 170-3. Adoption of regulations and fees.
The Township of North Versailles may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to implement
Act 98 of 1992[1] and this article and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 170-4. Violations and penalties.
An owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who violates this article shall be
subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
Chapter 179. Junkyards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 4-17-1937 by
Ord. No. 121 (Ch. 13, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 179-1. License fees.
[Amended 2-14-1938 by Ord. No. 126; 11-17-1952 by Ord. No. 285; 3-19-1962 by Ord. No. 510]
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles hereby ordains and enacts, by
authority of the same, that no person, firm or corporation shall use, exercise or carry on the trade
or business of buying, selling and dealing in junk automobiles or junk parts, junk, rope, scrap, iron,
glass, lead, brass, copper and rags, bones and other materials commonly termed as junk, within
the limits of the Township of North Versailles, without having first obtained a license from the
Secretary of the Township of North Versailles, for which license such person, firm or corporation
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 107/411
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
shall pay to the Treasurer of the Township of North Versailles the sum of $750, and which license
shall be renewed annually on the first day of January of each year.
Each and every person, firm, or corporation desiring to carry on the junk automobiles or junk
business within the Township of North Versailles, individually or by the use of a vehicle or vehicles
for that purpose, whether the same be accompanied by one or more men, shall obtain a license
from the said Secretary of said Township of North Versailles, for each and every such vehicle so
used by said person, persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations in carrying on the
business of buying, selling and dealing in junk automobiles or junk parts, junk rope, scrap iron,
glass, lead, brass, copper and rags, bones and other materials, commonly termed junk, within the
limits of the Township of North Versailles, for each of which said licenses the sum of $300 shall be
paid, as provided in Subsection A hereof.
§ 179-2. Prohibited acts.
No person, firm or corporation, licensed as provided in this chapter, shall, by virtue of said license
or licenses, maintain more than one place of business and the location thereof shall be definitely
specified in said license, nor shall said licensee or licensees engage in said business in any place
in the Township other than that for which said license is granted, as described in said license.
No person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall receive or buy
from minors or unknown and irresponsible parties any junk automobiles or junk parts, scrap iron,
glass, brass, lead, copper or other metals, or rags, bones and other materials commonly termed
as junk.
§ 179-3. Inspections.
The premises of all persons, firms or corporations, wherever the same may be situate, so licensed
shall be accessible at all times to the authorized representative of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Versailles, for the purpose of examining, inquiring into and searching for any articles
and materials which may be received or purchased under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-4. Regulations.
[Amended 12-14-1942 by Ord. No. 181]
Every licensee, or licensees, in the conduct of a junk automobile or junk business in the Township of
North Versailles is, or are, required and must comply with the following rules and regulations in the
conduct of such duly licensed premises:
Every licensed premises must be entirely surrounded by a fence or barrier which is substantial,
solid, and uniform as to appearance, height, character and substance, which fence or barrier must
surround, encompass, and enclose all junk automobiles and junk within and on licensed premises.
Such fence or barrier must be of the uniform height of 10 feet at all points thereof; and the fence or
barrier shall include any portion therein that is used as a gate or entrance to said licensed
premises. Where substantial buildings are already constructed to the property line of the licensed
premises, the outer wall on said property line of such building shall constitute the fence and shall
be an exception to the fence requirement hereunder; provided, however, that said outside wall of
said building is of a height of at least 10 feet.
No burning of any junk, refuse, or other substance shall be permitted at said licensed premises at
any time excepting on Wednesday of each week between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Eastern standard time. At no time shall any licensee burn or permit the burning of any of his junk
material or substance outside of the confines or limits of his licensed premises. Adequate
measures and precautions must be taken by each licensee to control any lawfully permitted
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 108/411
C.
D.
E.
F.
burning, which must be under constant control and supervision of the licensee or an attendant of
said licensee during said burning. At no time shall any lawfully permitted burning be allowed to
become dangerous or hazardous to surrounding properties or persons.
No licensee or licensees shall be permitted to pile or stock any junk, junk automobiles, or any
other materials or substances of his business on his licensed premises in such manner as to
constitute a hazard, danger or nuisance to persons or property within the Township of North
Versailles, and particularly against any fence or barrier when the same is adjacent to, at or near
public highways or properties of other persons and in danger of collapsing or otherwise harming or
injuring persons or property of other persons.
Every licensee or licensees shall maintain adequate restroom or toilet facilities on the licensed
premises in the conduct of his or their business.
No licensee or licensees shall permit or allow any junk automobiles or junk of any character to
remain on the public highways or streets of the Township for a longer period than 1/2 hour, in
order to reduce the hazards and dangers to the traveling public. During said 1/2 hour when said
junk automobiles or junk is permitted to remain in any public highway, it is the exclusive
responsibility of the licensee or licensees to care for, attend to, and adequately safeguard any
users of the highway or any persons from injuries or damages to them or their property by the
presence of said junk automobile or junk of any character in said highway.
The grant or issuance of any license or privilege under this chapter or any ordinance of the
Township of North Versailles shall not permit or empower such licensee or licensees to maintain a
nuisance, nor shall the grant of such license protect said licensee or licensees from liability for
maintaining a nuisance in the conduct of his or their business, or for liability for any negligent
conduct of said business.
§ 179-5. Maintenance of junk on premises.
All persons, firms or corporations so licensed shall keep and retain on their premises all of such junk
automobiles and junk parts, scrap iron, glass, brass, lead, copper or other metals, and rags, bones and
other materials commonly termed as junk in their original forms, shapes and conditions for a minimum
period of 48 hours, and shall not dispose of, reduce, change or alter such original forms, shapes or
conditions until such minimum period of 48 hours shall have passed.
§ 179-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 185. Logging and Timbering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 7-17-2000 by
Ord. No. 980. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 222, Art. I.
Trees — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 109/411
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUFFER ZONE
That area of land surrounding the immediate perimeter of a logging operation in which no cutting
of trees or other vegetation shall occur except for the isolated cutting of individual trees which are
dead, damaged, sick, infected or constitute a danger to neighboring properties or the public
generally.
CLEAR-CUTTING
A logging method that removes all trees from a tract of land or portion thereof.
FARMING OPERATIONS
A person engaged in raising crops, not including trees as defined in this chapter, in dairy farming,
the production of poultry or livestock, the production of poultry or livestock products, or the
principal part of whose income is derived from any one or more of the foregoing operations.
FORESTER
A person with a degree in forestry from a college or university accredited by the Society of
American Foresters who has experience in wood lot management.
LOGGING
The act of cutting live trees for cordwood, timber, pulp or for any commercial purpose.
LOGGING OPERATIONS
The act of cutting live trees pursuant to a logging permit issued under the authority of this chapter.
LUMBERING
See "logging."
PERMIT
Any permit to remove trees or to conduct logging operations as defined and authorized in this
chapter.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity, including the plural as
well as the singular, and including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on
behalf of others.
SELECTION METHOD
A method of selectively removing trees from a wooded area either singly or in small groups
according to age and size with provision being made for natural or artificial vegetation.
SLASH
All debris resulting from logging operations, including stems, limbs, and parts thereof.
TIMBERING
See "logging."
TOPS
That part of a felled tree which is left above the part of the tree to be utilized by the logger.
TREE
Any self supporting woody plant of a species, which normally in the area grows at maturity to an
overall height of a minimum of 15 feet.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 110/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
TREE REMOVAL
The cutting of trees for any purpose.
§ 185-2. Permit required.
Tree removal, timbering and/or logging within the Township on any parcel of land one acre in area
or larger shall require a permit except as provided herein. Permits shall be issued for a maximum
of 10 acres at any one time, and shall be valid for a period of four months from date of issue.
Except as otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful for anyone to cut down any tree in any
zoning district in North Versailles Township which is six inches or more in diameter measured at a
point 4 1/2 feet above ground.
Except as otherwise herein provided, any person desiring to conduct a logging operation or cut
trees on any parcel of land in the Township of North Versailles shall first obtain a logging permit or
tree removal permit as the case may be; it shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or permit the
maintenance or operation of any logging operation or tree removal on any land in the Township in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 185-3. Exemptions; general permit requirements.
No permit shall be necessary and it shall be lawful to cut down trees six inches or more in
diameter up to 20 trees per acre if the tree is sick, infected, damaged, dead, is in such position or
condition that it constitutes a danger to neighboring property or to the public generally, or is
located within the legal right-of-way of a public street or public utility.
No permit shall be necessary and it shall be lawful to cut down trees six inches or more in
diameter up to 20 trees per acre when conducted by a homeowner on a parcel of land upon which
his home is situate one acre in area or smaller. It is specifically noted that only 20 trees may be cut
down with this exemption. If more than 20 trees are to be cut down, a tree removal permit is
required.
When a zoning permit is issued for a building, structure or use, it shall be lawful to cut down any
trees which exist in the space to be occupied by such building, structure, or use, any space within
15 feet of any building or structure, and any space to be occupied by, and all space within 10 feet
of all sides of, any driveway, parking area, water system, or sewage disposal system. The granting
or entitlement to a grading permit shall not obviate the requirement for a permit under this chapter
if tree removal mandates a permit. In such event, a person may require a grading permit and a
permit under this chapter.
Any and all permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be declared null and void if
commencement of work so permitted is not started within a reasonable time, but in no case will
the permit be valid for more than four consecutive months. Permits not utilized within this period
will become null and void and future work will require a new application. A permit shall further be
deemed to be terminated when the work authorized by the permit is completed. This shall in no
way excuse the permit holder from strict compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
During periods of abnormal forest fire danger, as determined by the Township Fire Marshal, the
Township shall have the right to order a suspension of logging operations until the danger
subsides.
§ 185-4. Tree removal permit.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 111/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Any person desiring to remove no more 20 trees per acre, six inches or more in diameter on land
comprised of three acres or less and not otherwise covered in § 185-3A or B, shall first obtain a tree
removal permit. Tree removal may only be done in accordance with a forest management plan
prepared by a forester, and an erosion and sedimentation control plan designed to prevent erosion and
sedimentation during and after the logging operations approved by the Soil Conservation Service of
Allegheny County. Copies of all such plans shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. This permit may be
issued by the Zoning Officer without the necessity of obtaining a special exception.
§ 185-5. Special exception.
Logging shall be permitted as a special exception in all zoning districts in the Township in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of North Versailles Township, relating to the
granting of special exceptions.
§ 185-6. Logging permit.
A logging permit shall be required in all situations not provided for under §§ 185-3 and 185-5.
Such permits will not be issued until and unless a special exception is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
Logging shall be done only in accordance with a forest management plan, prepared by a forester,
and an erosion and sedimentation control plan designed to prevent erosion and sedimentation
during and after the logging operations approved by the Soil Conservation Service of Allegheny
County. Copies of all such plans shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at least 30 days prior to the
date on which the Zoning Hearing Board is to hold its hearing on the application for a special
exception to do such logging. All submissions shall contain a recitation of the manner of how the
work shall be accomplished and demonstrate compliance with the requirements of § 185-7.
Application for logging permits shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be
determined by the Board of Commissioners by simple resolution from time to time.
Application for a logging permit shall be accompanied by a topographical survey of the property
with the area of trees to be cut down shown thereon.
§ 185-7. Logging operations.
The forest management plan and the logging operation shall comply with the following
requirements:
All logging shall be undertaken by the selection method. Clear-cutting is prohibited.
All cutting, removing, skidding and transporting of trees shall be planned and performed in
such manner as to minimize the disturbance of or damage to other trees and vegetation and
the land itself.
Any roads, trails or grading to facilitate roads shall be planned and performed in such manner
as to minimize the disturbance of or damage to other trees and vegetation and the land itself.
All roads must be seeded and mulched within 30 days of completion of the project, the
expiration of the permit or cessation of work.
Roads and trails shall be only wide enough to accommodate the type of equipment used and
grades shall be kept as low as possible.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 112/411
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
Where possible, stream crossings shall be avoided, but where deemed necessary, crossings
shall be made at a right angle across suitable culverts or bridges.
Skidding logs across live or intermittent streams is prohibited, but they may be skidded over
bridges and culverts.
Buffer zones of 50 feet shall be maintained on the property on which the logging operation is
being conducted along all streets and abutting properties.
Buffer zones of 25 feet shall be maintained along any streams and around any springs.
Everything practicable shall be done to prevent damage or injury to young growth and trees
not designated for cutting.
All limbs and stubs shall be removed from felled trees prior to skidding.
All trees bent or held down by felled trees shall be released promptly.
No trees shall be left lodged in the process of felling.
Felling or skidding on or across property of others is prohibited without the express written
consent of the owners of such property. Felling or skidding on or across any public street is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Township in the case of Township streets
or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in the case of state highways.
No tops or slash shall be left within 50 feet of any public street or adjoining property; within 25
feet of any stream, historic or scenic trail; or within 10 feet of a drainage ditch. All slash must
be removed from the site within 30 days of completion of the project, the expiration of the
permit or cessation of work.
Stumps of all felled trees shall be permitted to remain in the soil for stabilization purposes.
Upon completion of a logging operation, all roads shall be graded to eliminate any wheel ruts,
and access to such roads from any public street by motor vehicles of any kind shall be
effectively and safely blocked.
Before the logging operation begins, all trees which are to be felled in connection therewith
shall be clearly marked on the trunk and the stump so that the same may be easily identified
both before and after a tree has been felled. No trees shall be felled which have not been
designated for removal on the forest management plan as finally approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
The holder of a permit to conduct a logging operation shall notify the Township at least 48
hours before the cutting of trees is to begin.
The holder of a permit to conduct a logging operation shall notify the Township at least 48
hours before the removal of trees from the site is to begin.
The holder of a permit to conduct a logging operation shall notify the Township at least 48
hours in advance of an expected suspension of logging operations for more than five
successive working days for reasons other than weather conditions.
The holder of a permit to conduct a logging operation shall notify the Township at least 48
hours in advance of the expected completion date of the logging operation, and shall notify
the Township immediately upon completion.
The Township may, by its own personnel or outside persons hired for the purpose, go upon
the site of any proposed logging operation after an application to conduct such operation has
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 113/411
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
A.
B.
been filed for the purpose of reviewing the plans for the proposed operation and thereafter
recommending or opposing the proposed operation or recommending or requiring changes or
modifications thereto.
After a permit for a logging operation has been issued, the Township shall have the right, by
its own personnel or by outside persons hired for the purpose, to go upon the site before,
during, and after the logging operation to insure compliance with the plans for said operation,
as finally approved, and all of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
Logging shall not be undertaken on any ground with a slope exceeding 25%, in landslideprone
areas or in a floodplain.
All trees shall be removed in sections not to exceed 24 feet in length.
When a logging operation has been completed, the property shall be replanted with trees of a
similar nature measuring a minimum of two feet in height to replace the trees which were cut
down.
All logging debris, including small tree tops and branches, shall either be hauled from the site
or properly mulched on the site and spread; the property shall be completely restored to its
pre-logging condition.
No tree may be cut which is the largest of it species in the state.
The logging permit application shall be field-checked prior to issuance of permit.
Daily hours of operation, which includes, but is not limited to, the movement of trucks and/or
equipment at the logging operation site, shall commence no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and
terminate no later than 7:00 p.m. prevailing time.
§ 185-8. Bond.
Prior to the commencement of a logging operation, the person who secures the logging permit
shall post a bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with the Township as obligee in the amount of $3,000 per acre to guarantee
restoration of the property and a bond in the amount of $15,000 per 1,000 feet of Township road
over which equipment and/or trucks from the logging operation travel to guarantee repair and
restoration of the Township roads. In lieu of the bond, other security acceptable to the Township
(e.g., an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan) may be posted with the
Township.
Bond will not be released until the site has been inspected and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer, and all the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied by the permittee.
§ 185-9. Permit fees.
A permit fee must accompany each application for a permit in an amount to be determined by the
Board of Commissioners from time to time by simple resolution. The fee shall be in such amount to
cover the cost and fees charged by Township personnel in carrying out the intent of this chapter,
including all engineering fees for inspection, prosecution (if necessary) and supervision. A permittee
shall continue to be liable for all fees and expenses incurred by the Township at its customary rates in
enforcing this chapter. Initially, each permittee must pay a permit fee of $1,000 with the submission of
his application.
§ 185-10. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 114/411
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in
the amount of $1,000 for each violation. Every day shall be deemed to be a separate violation. In
addition, any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the Township for all
Township expenses and legal fees in connection with such prosecution.
Chapter 191. Mining
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Article I. Coal Mining
[Adopted 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 710 (Ch. 9, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 191-1. Findings; prohibited acts.
Underground mining, as it is commonly defined, namely, the mining, removal or recovery of coal by
way of shaft or tunnel entry, or mining for the digging and removal of coal from coal beds or coal
seams in their natural or previously mined condition, is hereby prohibited within the Township of North
Versailles because, in the judgment of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Versailles, such mining operation or operations endanger or may endanger the health, safety, property
values, tax bases, progress, planning, development, and general welfare of the Township of North
Versailles, both as to its residents and their properties, as well as property of nonresident owners, or
users of any property, including public properties of the Township of North Versailles, East Allegheny
School District, and the various water, school, and sanitary sewer authorities, and other public bodies
and utilities.
§ 191-2. Violations and penalties
Any person, partnership, association, or corporation, whether owner, lessee, or other, who engages in
underground mining of coal or who is or becomes the owner of coal recovered as a result of such
mining within the Township of North Versailles in violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before any Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction in the matter, forfeit and pay to the
Township of North Versailles the sum of $1,000 for each day the violation is committed, and the further
sum of $1,000 for each additional day the violation is permitted to continue.
Chapter 196. Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 14, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Rental property — See Ch. 232.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 196-1. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 115/411
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
LICENSE
The written approval as issued by the Board of Commissioners, authorizing a person to operate
and maintain a mobile home or a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME
A single-family dwelling which is designed after assembly and fabrication, for transportation, on
streets and highways on its own running gear, and which may be temporarily or permanently
affixed to real estate, used for nontransient residential purposes, and constructed with the same or
similar electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities as immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME PARK
Any plot of ground which is leased or rented, and upon which two or more mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE
A plot of ground within a mobile home park, designated for the accommodation of one mobile
home and leased or rented for that purpose.
OWNER
Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company, association, or other legal entity
which rents or leases spaces in a mobile home park.
SERVICE BUILDING
A structure which contains operational, office, recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other
facilities built for the use of the mobile home park residents or owner.
SEWER CONNECTION
All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the
corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE
That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at
each mobile home space.
WATER CONNECTION
All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE
That portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a designated point on each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE
All pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from the water main of the park distribution system to
the water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 196-2. Mobile home parks; individual mobile homes.
License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, construct, alter or extend any
mobile home park within the limits of the Township of North Versailles unless he holds a license
issued by the Board of Commissioners in the name of such person for the specific maintenance,
construction, alteration, or extension proposed. The municipal license shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 116/411
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
A.
Application to Township. The applicant shall also submit an application to the Board of
Commissioners using a form furnished by the Board of Commissioners for a license to operate a
mobile home park in the Township of North Versailles.
License renewal. The license shall be renewed by the Board of Commissioners upon furnishing of
proof by the applicant that his park continues to meet the standards prescribed by this chapter.
Inspection of mobile home parks. A representative of the Board of Commissioners may inspect a
mobile home park at reasonable intervals, and at reasonable times, to determine compliance with
this chapter.
Compliance of existing mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this chapter may be continued so
long as they otherwise remain lawful.
Any subsequent new construction, alteration or extension of an existing mobile home park
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 265, Subdivision and Land Development, and
Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North Versailles.
Any existing mobile home park which in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners creates a
safety hazard shall be required to comply with this chapter within a reasonable period of time
as determined by the Board of Commissioners.
Individual mobile homes.
Individual mobile homes permitted in areas as set forth in Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of
the Township of North Versailles and not located in a mobile home park shall not be required
to obtain a mobile home park license; however, they shall be required to obtain zoning and
building permits as prescribed by the Township's ordinances.
Individual mobile homes shall comply with all other applicable municipal ordinances and
regulations governing single-family homes.
Inspection; revocation of license. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is
determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter,
or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Board of Commissioners shall give notice in
writing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to the person to whom the license was
issued, advising him that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period of time specified in the notice, the license to operate in the Township of North Versailles
shall be suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be inspected and, if
such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the Board of Commissioners shall suspend
the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license is
issued.
§ 196-3. Fees.
All fees shall be set by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to resolution.
§ 196-4. Application for license.
Application for the mobile home park license shall be filed in triplicate with the Board of
Commissioners. The application shall be in writing, signed by the owner and shall include the following:
Name and address of the owner;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 117/411
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be
constructed within the mobile home park; and
Such further information as may be requested by the various municipal agencies to enable them
to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal requirements.
§ 196-5. Water supply.
General requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided for mobile homes, service
buildings, and other accessory facilities as required by this chapter. Where a public water supply
system of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto
and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a satisfactory public water supply system is not
available, the development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other authorities having jurisdiction over
water supply systems.
Fire hydrants. Where a public supply of water is provided, fire hydrants shall be installed as
agreed upon by the Board of Commissioners and the agency responsible for supplying water.
Individual water-riser pipes and connections.
Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand
at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring the
shortest water connection possible and decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4 inch and terminate at least
four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipe
and to protect risers from heaving and shoving actions of ground during freezing weather.
Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
A shutoff water valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water-riser pipe in each
mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste valves are prohibited unless their types of
manufacture and their method of installation are approved by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 196-6. Sewage disposal.
General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all parks for
conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory
facilities.
Individual sewer connections.
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch-diameter sewer riser pipe.
This sewer riser pipe shall be imbedded in poured concrete, minimum twelve-inch diameter
and minimum eighteen-inch depth. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least 1/2 inch
above ground elevation. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the
sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
The sewer connection (see § 196-1 for definition) shall have a nominal inside diameter of not
less than three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot.
All joints shall be watertight.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 118/411
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
All materials used for a sewer connection shall be semirigid, corrosive resistant,
nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.
§ 196-7. Electrical distribution system.
General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
the Township ordinances regulating such systems.
Power distribution lines. Main power lines not located underground shall be suspended at least 18
feet above the ground, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet above any
mobile home, service building or other structure.
§ 196-8. Service and recreation buildings.
The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other
community service facilities when constructed such as management offices, repair shops, storage
areas, laundry facilities, and indoor recreation areas.
All structural requirements shall be in accordance with the Township ordinances regulating same.
§ 196-9. Refuse disposal.
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so managed as to not
create health hazards, rodent harborages, insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air
pollution, and shall be in accordance with the Township ordinances.
§ 196-10. Fire protection.
Fire protection provisions shall be in accordance with the Township's ordinances.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fire Prevention.
§ 196-11. Fuel.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be copper or other
acceptable metallic tubing and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel
storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or
beneath the mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
§ 196-12. Supervision; responsibilities of management.
The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in
compliance with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park and its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home
stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 119/411
C.
D.
E.
[1]
[1]
A.
The park management shall give the Board of Commissioners or their representative free access
to all mobile home lots, service buildings and other community service facilities for the purpose of
inspection.
The management shall maintain a register containing the names and addresses of all park
occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park.
The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of Health immediately of any
suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park.
§ 196-13. Revocation of license.
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
the municipal inspector shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued,
advising them that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within the period of time specified
in the notice, the license to operate shall be suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home
park shall be reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the municipal
inspector shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to
whom the license is issued. An aggrieved party may file an appeal to the Board of Commissioners in
accordance with the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 196-14. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $1,000, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 200. Municipal Claims and Liens
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 170, Art. I.
Article I. Attorneys' Fees and Collection Charges
[Adopted 2-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1055]
§ 200-1. Fees to be added.
North Versailles Township hereby approves the following fee schedule for the collection of unpaid
claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claim.
Notice expense. A charge, not to exceed $50, plus postage, shall be added to the unpaid claim for
providing notice of delinquency pursuant to Section 7106 of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Act.[1] North Versailles Township may hire a private company to perform this service and add the
amount of this charge to the unpaid claim.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 120/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
C.
Collection fees.
Handling fee for returned check: $30.
Handling fee to issue refund check: $20.
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of three months or less: $25.
Bookkeeping fee for payment plan of more than three months: $50.
Guaranteed payoff fee: $25.
Legal fees.
Initial review and sending first demand letter: $160.
File lien and prepare satisfaction: $250.
Prepare writ of scire facias: $250.
Obtain reissued writ: $30.
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P. 237.1: $30.
Prepare motion for alternate service: $250.
Prepare request for production of documents in preparation for trial: $25.
Prepare pretrial memorandum: $150.
Prepare motion for judgment for want of sufficient affidavit of defense pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 7271: $150.
Prepare default judgment: $175.
Prepare writ of execution: $800.
Attendance at sale; review schedule of distribution and resolve distribution issues: $400.
Continue sheriff sale: $50.
Petition to assess damages: $50.
Petition for free and clear sale: $400.
Prepare bankruptcy proof of claim: $100.
Services not covered above: At an hourly rate between $60 and $225 per hour.
§ 200-2. Costs to be added.
In addition, the reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs, expenses, commissions and
fees incurred in collection, such as but not limited to postage, title searches, prothonotary fees and
sheriff fees, shall be added to the unpaid claims.
§ 200-3. Interest.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 121/411
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
[1]
Interest will be assessed upon all delinquent unpaid municipal claims at a rate of 10% per annum and
added to the unpaid claim.
§ 200-4. Collection procedures.
The following collection procedures are hereby established in accordance with the Act:[1]
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection with the collection of
an account, North Versailles Township or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice of such intention to the taxpayer or other entity liable for
the account (the "property owner").
If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10 days prior to the assessing or imposing
such attorney fees, North Versailles Township or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by
first-class mail, a second notice to the property owner.
All notices required by this article shall be mailed to the property owner's last known post office
address as recorded in the records or other information of North Versailles Township or such other
address as it may be able to obtain from the County Office of Assessment and Revision of Taxes.
Each notice as described above shall include the following:
The type of tax or other charge, the date it became due and the amount owed, including
penalty and interest;
A statement of North Versailles Township's intent to impose or assess attorney fees within 30
days after the mailing of the first notice, or within 10 days after the mailing of the second
notice;
The manner in which the assessment or imposition of attorney fees may be avoided by
payment of the account; and
The place of payment for accounts and the name and telephone number of North Versailles
Township's representative designated as responsible for collection matters.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 200-5. Authorization.
The proper officials of North Versailles Township are hereby authorized and empowered to take such
additional action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this article.
§ 200-6. Appointment of Solicitor.
North Versailles Township appoints Michelle R. Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the limited purpose of
collecting delinquent municipal claims and hereby authorizes her, and attorneys under her supervision,
to sign any and all documents, including municipal claims, on behalf of North Versailles Township.
Chapter 206. Parks and Recreation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 6-9-1975 by
Ord. No. 716 (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 122/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
Animals — See Ch. 92.
Open burning — See Ch. 100.
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 110.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Firearms and air guns — See Ch. 140.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Trees — See Ch. 276.
§ 206-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose, and scope of this chapter to insure the preservation of public park lands,
recreation facilities, and conservation areas within the Township of North Versailles for the perpetual
enjoyment of the residents of the Township of North Versailles, to regulate activities within these areas
consistent with the enjoyment of unspoiled natural settings and park facilities, and to prevent any
nuisances to the residents of the Township of North Versailles in the use of such public park lands,
recreation facilities, and conservation areas or in the enjoyment of private property adjacent to such
areas.
§ 206-2. Preservation of property, natural resources and wildlife.
No person, except those authorized by the Township and conducting Township business, shall, in
recreation, park, or conservation areas:
Injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any part of any
recreation, park or conservation site owned by the Township, nor any building, sign, structure,
equipment, utility or other property found therein.
Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing, or any rock or other
mineral.
Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner deliberately disturb or cause to be disturbed any wild bird
or animal within the recreation, park and conservancy sites owned by the Township, except as
permitted in § 206-4B.
Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond,
lake or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or
drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in
the pollution of said waters; nor to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or trash anywhere within the park and conservancy
sites owned by the Township; but rather to make use of proper receptacles where these are
provided, and where receptacles are not so provided, all such materials shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 206-3. Operating policy.
Hours of operation. Recreation, park and conservation areas shall be open daily to the public from
official sunrise to official sunset; and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than
Township personnel conducting Township business therein, to occupy or be present in said park
during any hours in which the park is not open to the public. Permits must be obtained for use
after official sunset for specific activities. Any section or part of the recreation, park and
conservation areas may be declared closed to the public at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. During such periods of time, it shall be unlawful
to enter upon or occupy such areas or portions thereof contrary to posted regulations.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 123/411
B.
C.
[1]
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Group activity; possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. When any North Versailles
group, association or organization desires to use recreation or park facilities for a particular
purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of
said group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit for such use in specially
designated areas from the Recreation Board and/or Recreation Director. The Board of
Commissioners may adopt an application form to be used by the Recreation Board which may
require an indemnity bond or other security to protect the Township from any liability of any kind or
character and to protect property from damage. The Recreation Board and/or Recreation Director
shall grant the permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with
the general use of the park by the individual members of the public, and if the group, association
or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. It shall be unlawful for any
person to have in his or her possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage, including beer
of any kind whatsoever, except as a member of a North Versailles group, association or
organization granted a permit for particular activities in specially designated areas as set forth in
this section.
Use of facilities. Facilities and areas in Township recreation parks or conservancy sites shall be
used only for the purposes designated or implicit in their character. Special activities, including
flying model airplane, games, picnics, the operation of motor scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, gocarts
and snowmobiles and similar vehicles, shall be permitted only at locations or trails
specifically designated for such use and at times established.
Motor vehicles. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on designated roadways. The
speed limit for such vehicles on such roadways shall be 15 miles per hour. Motors scooters,
motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts and snowmobiles shall not be permitted on roadways designated
for licensed vehicular traffic unless licensed for travel on the public roads of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. All vehicles shall be parked in areas or places so provided and designated. Parking
in places contrary to posted regulations and times is prohibited, and such vehicles may be
removed by the Township at the owners' expense. All parking is prohibited after regular closing
time. It shall be unlawful to clean, wash, repair, or do any work whatsoever on private vehicles
within recreation, park and conservation areas except for emergency repairs.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See
also § 282-13, Maximum speed limits in parks.
Fees. The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to issue a fee schedule for permits,
set the amount of deposits and prescribe conditions under which deposits are collected or
forfeited. Such revenue shall be used for recreation, park and conservation purposes within the
general fund.
§ 206-4. Prohibited acts.
Fires and fireworks. Fires may not be built or allowed anywhere in recreation, park or conservation
areas except in stoves, fireplaces or designated areas provided for that purpose. Permits must be
secured for any fireworks at any time, and for fires to be maintained after closing time.
Animals. It shall be unlawful for owners of domesticated animals to permit same within recreation,
park or conservation areas without being controlled by a leash not more than six feet long. Permits
may be obtained for the training and/or exhibition of animals in designated areas. It shall be
unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any recreation, park or conservation area.
Gambling. Gambling is prohibited on recreation, park and conservation lands.
Merchandising, advertising and signs. No person shall, in recreation, park or conservation areas:
Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing except under the authority of the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 124/411
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
F.
Board of Commissioners and/or Township Secretary by application and permit.
Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or
hire.
Post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw, carve, tack or affix any placard, bill, notice, sign,
advertisement, or any inscription whatever upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or
enclosure within any recreation, park or conservation area or on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to any recreation, park or conservation area, except that the Township may
place informational signs within such areas.
Aircraft. It shall be unlawful to land a private or commercial airplane or helicopter on recreation,
park and conservation lands.
Personal conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in any recreation park or conservation area
to:
Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting.
Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage including beer except as otherwise permitted
under § 206-3B.
Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the Recreation Board.
Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in
compliance with this chapter and the rules applicable to such use.
Act in an unlawful, disorderly or disruptive manner or against the best interests of the areas or
other people.
§ 206-5. Enforcement.
The Board of Commissioners and agents designated by them, primarily the Recreation Board, shall
administer the provisions of this chapter, including the establishment and collection of fees, preparation
of application forms, issuance and revocation of permits, promulgation of rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this chapter and all other decisions relative thereto. When acts or conduct
of individuals or groups is determined to be in violation of this chapter or rules and regulations
promulgated by the authority of this chapter; or not to be in the best interests of the recreation, park
and conservancy area; or when such acts or conduct endangers other people, private or public
property; or when such acts are deemed to be disruptive to the surrounding neighborhood, the
Township Police, Recreation Board or their agent assigned to such area or program shall have the
authority to cause such acts to be terminated, or to expel the perpetrators of such acts from the area,
or to call the Township police to arrest and detain such individual or individuals, or to file a complaint
for the violation of this chapter with a Magisterial District Judge.
§ 206-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 125/411
A.
B.
Chapter 208. Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 12-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 1072. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flea markets — See Ch. 149.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 208-101. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pawnbrokers and Second Hand Dealers Ordinance." The purpose
is to regulate and monitor transactions in personal property which have been observed to be the
subject of theft and illicit transfer. The terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania Pawnbrokers License
Act, 63 P.S. §§ 281-1, et seq., are incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
§ 208-102. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings as set forth below:
LICENSING AUTHORITY
The Township of North Versailles.
PAWNBROKER
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other business entity whose business includes
any transaction wherein there is a lending of money.
PROPERTY
Any personal, tangible property of any description having any value, including but not limited
to, jewelry, watches, clocks, diamonds, precious stones, cameras, cassettes, televisions,
firearms of any type, computers, wearing apparel, auto accessories, any metal or commodity
such as gold, silver, brass, copper, steel, palladium or magnesium. Used household furniture
is excluded.
SECONDHAND DEALER
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose business is the retail buying, selling, buyback,
exchanging, dealing in or dealing with secondhand articles and property. The term
"secondhand dealer" shall not apply to any entity that does not purchase secondhand articles
directly from the general public.
Other definitions are as set forth in 63 P.S. § 281-2.
Article II. License
§ 208-201. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other type of business entity shall operate, conduct or
engage in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer unless such person, firm, partnership or
corporation first obtains and maintains a license in good standing from the Township of North
Versailles. This license shall be obligatory commencing on January 1, 2013, and annually thereafter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 126/411
§ 208-202. Application.
Any applicant as defined in the Pennsylvania Statute cited herein must apply for a license from the
North Versailles Township Chief of Police. Forms will be available from the Chief of Police which will
request all relevant information regarding the applicant, place of business, personnel and such other
information as the Chief of Police deems relevant in his discretion. The Chief shall promptly conduct an
investigation as to the fitness of the applicant and the applicant's employees to carry on the business
of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. Criteria for the issuance of a license shall be that standard set
forth in 63 P.S. § 281-8(a). The Chief of Police at his discretion shall then grant the license upon
payment of the fee or decline to grant the license. He shall further file a report with his or her findings
to the Board of Commissioners. A numbered license shall be issued and continue to be in full force for
one calendar year from the issuance date unless revoked prior to this date by the Board of
Commissioners. The licensed premises may be inspected at any time by a duly authorized police
officer.
§ 208-203. Fee.
A registration fee is hereby set at $100 for one year or any part thereof for each place of business in
the Township. Such fee must be paid to the North Versailles Township Manager prior to the issuance of
a license.
§ 208-204. Display of license.
A licensee shall display their current license in a conspicuous place within the business where it must
be readily visible to the general public.
Article III. Regulation
§ 208-301. Recordkeeping.
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall keep and maintain a complete written record of each
transaction/purchase. This record must be retained for seven years, and shall be written in the English
language; it shall include a full and accurate description of all property (including serial numbers)
purchased, pawned or pledged, the date and time of each transaction, the amount of money loaned or
paid, the rate of interest to be paid on loan and the full name and address of the seller or pledger.
Secondhand dealers, in addition to being subject to the above, shall also keep and maintain written
records including the names and addresses of purchasers of property sold by the secondhand dealer
for property held less than 60 days from the initial purchase date.
§ 208-302. Identification required.
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall require every seller or pledger of property to produce
a valid positive photographic identification issued by a United States federal or state government. The
identification used must include the seller or pledger's full name, date of birth and current street
address. The identification must have been issued within five years preceding the date of the
transaction, and the type of identification must be noted on the transaction record. At no time shall a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer accept another person's photographic identification for any
transaction. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall attach a photocopy of the identification
produced to support the transaction. Jewelry, watches, diamonds or other precious stones or gems,
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 127/411
gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals, with consideration to their size, shall be photocopied
and attached to the transaction record.
§ 208-303. Age requirement.
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall transact business with anyone under the age of 18 years
old, except when said minor is accompanied by an identified parent or legal guardian who shall sign
the transaction record.
§ 208-304. Holding period.
[Amended 4-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1079]
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall retain possession of all property purchased for a tenday
holding period subsequent to the date of purchase; provided, however, that property may be
disposed of by the purchaser within such ten-day period with written permission from the Township
Chief of Police.
§ 208-305. Maintenance of property.
All property received by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be maintained in the same condition
in which it was received, and shall not be altered, damaged or destroyed during the holding period.
Property must be maintained at the dealer's licensed location during the holding period. Pawnbrokers
shall retain nonperishable property for at least four months and perishable property for at least one
month following receipt of the property.
§ 208-306. Filing of documentation.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall prepare and electronically file documentation of all
transaction records with the Chief of Police, within 24 hours of the end of the business day in which the
transaction occurred. If during any week a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer has not purchased any
property, he or she shall make a report of such fact to the Chief of Police on or before 12:00 noon of
the first business day of the following week.
§ 208-307. Photographic record.
All property purchased shall be photographed with a digital camera or digital image scanner. A color
digital image shall be saved in a manner to allow it to be electronically sent to the North Versailles
Township Police Department as part of the transaction record. The complete transaction record shall
be submitted on one standard-size page. The transaction record shall include a color image of the
identification used by the seller, information documented by the dealer and a clear color image of the
property pledged or purchased. Each item of jewelry shall be individually photographed. The image
shall be sent electronically in PDF or JPG format.
§ 208-308. Approval and retention of forms.
Transaction record forms intended to be used by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer must first be
approved by the Chief of Police. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall retain all original
transaction documents for a period of seven years at the licensed premises.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 128/411
Article IV. Violations
§ 208-401. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of this chapter, such licensee, person or entity found guilty shall be subject to a fine
of $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition, the Township Board of Commissioners shall have the
authority to revoke the license of a dealer in secondhand property, to suspend a pawnbroker's license
for 30 days and provide written notice of such suspension to the Secretary of Banking.
Article V. Appeals
§ 208-501. Appeals process.
Appeals by a pawnbroker from a decision of the Chief of Police or the Township Board of
Commissioners may be taken to the Pennsylvania Department of Banking. A dealer in secondhand
property may request a hearing before the North Versailles Township Board of Commissioners in
accordance with the Local Agency Law.
Article VI. Savings Clause; Effective Date
§ 208-601. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is deemed to be unconstitutional or unlawful, then it is deemed to be the
intent of the Township Board of Commissioners that it would have enacted the balance of this chapter
irrespective of said invalid portion.
§ 208-602. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 210. Peace and Good Order
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police force — See Ch. 48.
Adult uses — See Ch. 75.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 85.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 88.
Animals — See Ch. 92.
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 110.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Firearms and air guns — See Ch. 140.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Article I. False Alarms
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 129/411
[Adopted 7-11-1949 by Ord. No. 249 (Ch. 7, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall knowingly give, turn in, or raise, or cause to be given, raised, or turned in, a false
alarm of fire by ringing of any fire bell, or bells, or sounding any siren, or warning, or alarm of fire, or
any other common or recognized alarm of fire within the Township of North Versailles, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 210-2. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Article II. Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 4-20-1970 by Ord. No. 639 (Ch. 6, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 210-3. Prohibited acts.
"Disorderly conduct" within the limits of the Township of North Versailles shall be and is hereby defined
as any act, word or conduct causing or tending to cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of
the Township, or causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the inhabitants of
the Township or users of the Township thoroughfares, and shall include loafing, fighting, drunkenness,
vagrancy, begging, the making of unnecessary noises, profanity or indecent language, reckless or
careless driving, or any other use of vehicles by owners or occupants thereof as shall endanger the
safety or interfere with the comfort, welfare and convenience of any person using the thoroughfares or
residing in the Township; all the foregoing offenses coming within the definition of said disorderly
conduct are hereby declared to be unlawful.
§ 210-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 709; 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 215. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-15-1982 by
Ord. No. 807 (Ch. 13, Part 5, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flea markets — See Ch. 149.
Junkyards — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 300, § 300-904.
§ 215-1. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 130/411
A.
B.
C.
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
An organization which has been granted an exemption by the United States Internal Revenue
Service under Section 501(c) or Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,[1] or any other
organization deemed to be charitable in nature by the Township Board of Commissioners.
SOLICITOR
Any person:
Who goes from private house to house, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise, or offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales or delivering articles,
goods, wares or merchandise to purchasers;
Who goes from private house to house, soliciting or attempting to take orders from individuals
for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal
property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for service to be performed at that
time or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such
orders;
Who goes from private house to private house soliciting donations or money for themselves
or for any organization for any purpose, whether or not anything of value is given in return.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT
Any person who temporarily and for a short time hires, rents or obtains a definite place of
business, whether a storeroom or a market stand, or a private residence, for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise or to offer or expose the same for sale or for future delivery and sale.
("Temporarily" and "short time" shall be construed as three months or less.)
Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c) and 509(a), respectively.
§ 215-2. Exemptions.
The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of merchants or their employees or
agents in delivering goods or services in the regular course of business; nor shall it apply to any
manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk
and milk products.
§ 215-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or transient merchant as defined in § 215-1 of this chapter to
engage in any such business within the Township of North Versailles without first obtaining a license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 215-4. Application.
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Police Department of the Township an
application, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the Township, which will give the following
information:
Name and physical description of applicant.
Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of transient
merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 131/411
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold or the organization
on behalf of which funds are solicited.
If employed, the name and address of the employer.
The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the
sale thereof, and the proposed method of delivery.
Two recent photographs of the applicant, which shall be approximately two inches, showing
the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner.
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony or crime
involving moral turpitude.
Applications involving solicitation for a charitable institution shall be accompanied by a copy of
the grant of exemption issued by the Internal Revenue Service.
This application completed as to all matters inquired of shall be turned over to the Police
Department of the Township, together with the initial fee to cover the expenses of investigation,
payable to the Township of North Versailles, said fee to be established by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners.
§ 215-5. Investigation; issuance of license.
Upon receipt of each application, it shall be immediately reviewed by the Police Department for
accuracy.
If as a result of such review, the application is found to be true, the Chief of Police or his designee
shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the Township Secretary
or designee, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed initial license fee, deliver to the applicant
his or her license within 24 hours after payment of the fee, provided that no license shall be issued
to any convicted felon or person convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, and shall show the name, address
and photograph of said licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods or organization
involved, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the expiration date, as well as the
license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business.
Each solicitor or transient merchant must secure an individual license. No license shall be used at
any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The Township Secretary shall
keep a permanent record of all licenses issued and those rejected.
§ 215-6. Charitable organizations.
Solicitors for charitable organizations shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, but no application
or license fee shall be charged.
§ 215-7. Fees.
Every applicant for a license as a solicitor or transient merchant under this chapter shall pay a license
fee as established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Said fees are hereby established at
$25 per person per day. In the alternative, an applicant may purchase a license for three-month period
for $100.
§ 215-8. Hours and locations.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 132/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
[1]
No licensee shall solicit at private residences on Sunday, nor before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, on weekdays.
No licensee shall solicit at any private residence exhibiting a sign reading "No Solicitors" or words
of the same meaning.
Residents may erect "No Solicitors" or similar signs not to exceed 120 square inches in size,
which for the purposes of this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed near their entrance walk or
doorway.
Solicitors may solicit at business properties in the Township during all business hours; and may
solicit in Township streets and other public places from 9:00 a.m., prevailing time, to sunset;
provided that such solicitors obtain a license as required by this chapter and that they shall be
subject to all the other provisions of this chapter.
§ 215-9. Exhibition of license.
Licensees shall exhibit their license at the request of any resident or police officer.
§ 215-10. Revocation of permit; notice of hearing.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police or his
designee with respect to such persons, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, for any of the
following causes:
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business
as solicitor or transient merchant.
Any violation of this chapter.
Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
Conducting solicitation or business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of peace.
Refusing to leave premises when asked to do so by the occupant.
Notice of the revocation of a license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds
of complaint and the opportunity for a hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address.
§ 215-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his designee in the denial of application
approval as provided in § 215-5 of this chapter, or in the action of the revocation provided in § 215-10
of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Commissioners. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Board, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed
to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
Hearings shall be governed by the Local Agency Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 215-12. Expiration of permit.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 133/411
All permits expire on the date specified in the permit.
§ 215-13. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 222. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Requirements for keeping certain animals — See Ch. 92, Art. III.
Open burning — See Ch. 100.
Solid waste — See Ch. 250.
Trees — See Ch. 276.
Article I. Brush, Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 10-12-1942 by Ord. No. 180 (Ch. 10, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 222-1. Growth of weeds.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
owning or having a present interest in any real estate within the Township of North Versailles,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, to permit ragweed, sumac, and similar vegetation, not edible or
planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow on the premises owned by them within the
Township of North Versailles, and all such vegetation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 222-2. Removal of weeds.
All ragweed, sumac, and similar vegetation that is noxious in character, permitted to grow or remain
contrary to the provisions of this article, shall be cut and removed by or under the direction of the
Township Health Officer, or the Chairman of the Board of Health, as the case may be, or any other
person or persons designated by the Board of Commissioners, and the cost thereof, together with the
penalties provided by law, shall be collected by lien or by action in assumpsit, or any such other
manner as may be provided by law.
§ 222-3. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-18-1974 by Ord. No. 702; 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
Article II. Dumping on Private Property
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 134/411
A.
B.
[Adopted 6-25-1956 by Ord. No. 364 (Ch. 10, Part 2A, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 222-4. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCUMULATE
To gather, amass, pile, heap and collect garbage and/or rubbish in Township and to fail to
lawfully dispose of same.
DISPOSAL AREA or DUMP
A place where garbage and/or rubbish is regularly dumped, deposited or placed by the owner
of the property or with his consent by collectors of garbage and/or rubbish and/or individuals.
DUMP or DEPOSIT
The placing, throwing, dropping, abandoning, casting, sweeping, unloading, putting, letting fall
or leaving of garbage and/or rubbish.
GARBAGE
All offal, table refuse, food scraps, bones, dead animals, and all other animal and vegetable
waste matter.
OWNER
A person who is the registered owner of property situate within the Township.
PERSON
An individual, or individuals, a partnership or a corporation owning and/or occupying property.
PROPERTY
Land, buildings, and structures within the Township.
RUBBISH
All refuse, junk, trash, dross, scrap, litter, papers, pasteboard, rags, mattresses, worn out
furniture, old clothing, old shoes, old rubbers, leather, carpets, broken glass, crockery, bottles,
straw, excelsior, floor sweepings, old metal packing boxes and barrels and broken parts
thereof, tin cans, Christmas trees, tree cuttings, leaves, grass cuttings, cut or pulled weeds
and brush, household refuse, solid industrial waste, and all other similar waste matters and
materials not defined herein as garbage.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 222-5. License fees.
[Amended 7-2-1958 by Ord. No. 402; 3-23-1959 by Ord. No. 428]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of property to use or allow same to be used for the disposal of
garbage and/or rubbish as a disposal area or dump without first having obtained a license for same
from the Board of Commissioners of the Township. The application for such permission must be in
writing, stating types of refuse to be collected and location of proposed dump and defining method of
disposal of garbage and/or rubbish. The fee for said license shall be $700 per annum, payable by
January 15 of each calendar year, and an additional fee of 6% of gross dumping charges, to cover
expenses of supervision of said operation, which latter fee is to be payable quarterly by the 15th day of
January, April, July and October. All licenses shall be issued for the calendar year, or such portion
thereof, as shall remain after the beginning of any calendar year.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 135/411
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
[2]
C.
D.
§ 222-6. Burning of garbage.
From and after the passage of this article burning of garbage and/or rubbish by persons maintaining
garbage and/or rubbish disposal areas or dumps on private property within the Township shall be
unlawful.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 100, Burning, Open.
§ 222-7. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use private property within the Township for the disposal of
garbage and/or rubbish in such manner so as to constitute a public nuisance, damage the health,
welfare, comfort and peace of the residents of said Township and cause a depreciation in the real
estate situate therein, and from and after the passage of this article all garbage and/or rubbish
disposed of within the Township must be deposited only on land licensed under the provisions
hereof to be designated as sanitary landfills. The material deposited must be compacted to at
least 1/3 of its original volume by means of heavy equipment of 10 tons in weight, such as a roller
or bulldozer, and covered with a layer of earth at the end of each day's operation. When the depth
of the compacted garbage, rubbish, industrial waste, etc., reaches six feet, or when the finished
elevation is reached, the material deposited shall be covered with at least two feet of earth or slag
containing not more than 50% clay. The sanitary landfill site must be provided with adequate
surface drainage to prevent ponding and/or erosion by rain water. The sanitary landfill operation
must be conducted in such a manner as to prevent insect and rodent infestation. In addition, a
fence must be constructed to capture all paper and other wind-borne material and prevent it from
blowing away from the site of operation. Firefighting provisions approved by the Township Fire
Marshal must be provided at the site of the sanitary landfill.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant of property within the Township to accumulate or
cause to accumulate garbage and/or rubbish thereon and it shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate, store, or scatter any garbage and/or rubbish on any public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any garbage and/or rubbish on any public
property, on any sidewalk or in or at the side of any public street or highway in the Township
unless the same is placed there temporarily for collection and disposal by either the Township or
its agent or a contractor or for collection by a private contractor engaged to collect such material
by the owner or occupant of the premises in front of which said material is placed, and unless
same be contained in sturdy containers and separated as may be required for collection.[2]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Solid Waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit garbage and/or rubbish on any private
property in the Township with or without the express permission of the owner of such property;
provided, however, that the dumping of clean earth, ashes free from offensive or obnoxious debris
or any similar material free from any obnoxious or offensive debris, and satisfactory for fill
purposes, will be permitted; provided, however, that such fill shall be kept level to a reasonable
grade and in a manner to avoid the accumulation of stagnant water, weeds or other obnoxious or
offensive material likely to constitute a public nuisance or damage the health, welfare, comfort and
peace of the residents of said Township.
§ 222-8. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 136/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article III. Dumping Into Waterways
[Adopted 11-16-1970 by Ord. No. 651 (Ch. 10, Part 2B, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 222-9. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases shall be construed in this article to have the following
meanings except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
GARBAGE
All animal and vegetable waste attending or resulting from the handling, dealing in, storing,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of foods; all refuse of animal or vegetable matter which
has been used for food of man or which was intended to be so used, and excess fruit from trees
on residential property but not from trees in orchards or on farms.
PERSON
Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association, or corporation.
RUBBISH
All paper, cardboard, rags, broken grass, crockery, bottles, tin cans, wastebasket debris, grass
cuttings, and small household refuse, generally including incinerator ashes and refuse from paper
burners and ashes from heating plants and coal stoves and refuse caused by repairs, alterations,
and new constructions of buildings and sidewalks.
TRASH
Any fluid or object other than garbage and rubbish which is abandoned or of no further use to its
owner.
§ 222-10. Purpose.
The right of the people to clean air, pure water, and the natural qualities of their environment shall
not be abridged.
The Township of North Versailles shall endeavor to assure the rights guaranteed to its citizens in
Subsection A.
The Township of North Versailles shall endeavor to correct the ecological imbalance in our dead
streams by seeking in cooperation with other local municipalities to eliminate mine acid drainage
and other pollutants in our streams with the goal and intention of providing the citizens of the
Township of North Versailles with living streams abundant in natural wildlife.
§ 222-11. Prohibited acts.
No person shall keep, accumulate, or suffer to remain upon his or her premises, or upon any
private or public property, any garbage, rubbish, or trash.
No person shall throw, place or dump any garbage, rubbish, or trash upon the shores, margins, or
surface of any sewer inlet, stream, drainage ditch, or other body of water within said Township of
North Versailles.
§ 222-12. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 137/411
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 222-13. Stream Work Day.
The second Saturday in August is hereby declared to be an annual Stream Work Day.
Article IV. Storage of Unused Property
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 10, Part 4, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 222-14. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
LESSEE
Owner, for the purpose of this article, when the lessor holds the lessee responsible for
maintenance and repairs.
NUISANCE
Any condition, structure, or improvement which shall constitute a threat or potential threat to
the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the Township of North Versailles.
OWNER
The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on which machinery, equipment or
materials are stored, whether individual or partnership, association, or corporation.
PERSON
A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 222-15. Health hazards and nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain any condition upon their property which could
directly or indirectly cause a nuisance or health hazard to residents of the Township of North Versailles.
Specifically, the unsheltered storage or maintenance of unused, stripped, damaged and generally
unusable machinery or equipment or materials shall be considered a nuisance and/or health hazard if
any of the following conditions exist:
Broken glass or metal parts with sharp or protruding edges.
Openings or areas which are conducive to the harboring and growth of vermin.
Storage in any manner which would allow the equipment, machinery, material or any parts thereof
to easily shift, tilt, or fall from its original storage position.
Contains any liquid or material of a hazardous or potentially hazardous nature, including, but not
limited to, gasoline, oil, battery acids, refrigeration agents, and poisons.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 138/411
E.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any other condition which, in the opinion of the inspecting official, shall be deemed to be a health
hazard, potential health hazard or nuisance.
§ 222-16. Storage requirements.
Storage of such items as listed in § 222-15 hereof on personal property shall be permitted only in
strict compliance with the regulations provided herein or with stricter regulations in other Township
ordinances or in state or federal laws. Each person, owner or lessee desiring to store items
described in § 222-15 must first apply for a permit for either temporary or permanent storage and
pay a fee to the Township such as may be provided from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. The nuisance(s) must be stored within a garage or other enclosed building, or
outside within an opaqued fence at least six feet high which is locked at all times when
unattended. With the special approval of the Board of Commissioners, nuisances may also be
stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain link fence, at least six feet high, screened by
shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence, with an unobstructed gate capable of
admitting fire or emergency equipment. Such gate shall remain locked at all times when
unattended. In addition the machinery, equipment, or materials shall be kept free of vermin
infestation while being stored; and all gas, oil or other potentially hazardous substances shall be
removed. The total area of storage of such potential nuisances may not exceed 25 square feet.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of machinery, equipment, or material
nuisances contrary to the provisions of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North
Versailles.
§ 222-17. Inspection; notice to comply.
The Enforcement Officer/Inspector is hereby empowered to inspect grounds on which machinery,
equipment, and/or various materials are stored to determine if there is compliance with the
provisions of this article. If noncompliance with the provisions of this article constitutes a nuisance,
or if any condition, structure, or improvement poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the
public, he shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of
said premises, or, if the owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
Said notice shall specify the condition considered to be a hazard and/or nuisance and shall require
the owner to commence to remove or otherwise rectify the condition as set forth in the notice
within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice, and thereafter, to fully comply with the
requirements of the notice within a reasonable time.
§ 222-18. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of grounds on which machinery, equipment, and/or materials are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the conditions, within the time limit prescribed, the Township shall have the
authority to take measures to correct the conditions and collect the cost of such corrections plus 10%
of all costs. The Township, in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police
powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the
foregoing.
§ 222-19. Hearing.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 139/411
A.
B.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Enforcement Officer/Inspector may request and shall
then be granted a hearing before the Board of Commissioners, provided he files with the Board,
within 10 days after notice of the Enforcement Officer's/Inspector's decision, a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The hearing
shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition was filed unless
postponed for sufficient cause.
After such hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall sustain, modify or overrule the action of the
Enforcement Officer/Inspector.
§ 222-20. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not more than $1,000 and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 222-21. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article, or any remedy provided by law, shall
not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather, they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at
the option of the Board of Commissioners.
Article V. Storage Containers
[Adopted 10-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1110]
§ 222-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
STORAGE CONTAINER or CONTAINER
Any temporary box, bag, bin, dumpster, portable storage unit, POD, or any other thing which
occupies space and is used for the purpose of storing material or items of any nature.
§ 222-23. Compliance required.
No owner or occupier of any real estate may place or cause to be placed on his/her/its real estate any
container except in compliance with this chapter.
§ 222-24. Permit required.
Any person or entity desiring to place a container on his/her/its property must first apply to the Building
Inspector (for purposes of this chapter, this shall include the Code Enforcement Officer) for a permit. It
is declared to be the intent of this chapter that no container of any nature or size may be placed on
private property except in compliance with this chapter. Containers may not be used for storing
garbage. On private property, one storage container of four cubic feet or less may be utilized by the
property owner or occupant for a thirty-day period without any permit, so long as the same does not
constitute or amount to a public nuisance.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 140/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
§ 222-25. Application for permit.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to prepare forms for such applications requesting such
data as the Building Inspector deems necessary in his discretion, including but not limited to limits of
liability of any liability insurance policy requested, a hold-harmless provision protecting the Township, a
provision mandating lighting or reflectors on such containers, the placement of containers, warning
signs and barricades and whether a cash or security bond to cover damages should be included. A
dated application signed by the owner of the land and the applicant, if not the owner, must provide at
least the following information:
Name and address of the applicant and the owner of the subject real estate and the address
where the container is to be placed;
The dimensions and capacity of the container to be used;
The place on the real estate where the applicant wishes to place the container, the duration of
time when it will be in place and what materials will be stored in the container.
§ 222-26. Issuance of permit.
Based on the application and all the circumstances, the Building Inspector may issue a permit in
accordance with this chapter. The Building Inspector may place such further restrictions on the permit
as he sees fit to assure compliance with the standards of this chapter. Permits shall be valid for no
longer than 30 days; a permit may be renewed by filing an application with the Building Inspector. A fee
is hereby set in the amount of $30 for each permit and each renewal, payable upon presentation of the
application. The Township Commissioners may change this fee from time to time at its sole discretion
by simple resolution.
§ 222-27. Considerations for permits.
The Building Inspector in his discretion may issue a permit, refuse to issue a permit, refuse to renew a
permit, move to rescind a permit by taking into consideration the following circumstances, and any
other factors or conditions he deems to be relevant:
If the container due to its size or proposed location has or likely will unduly interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or parking;
If the applicant's activity or proposed activity or use produces or likely will produce or contain
hazardous or noxious conditions (smoke, dust, odors);
The circumstances surrounding the applicant's need for a container, and the availability of
alternate means of storing.
§ 222-28. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board by filing such appeal in the office of the Township Manager and paying an appeal fee as
proscribed for appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the decision of the Building
Inspector.
§ 222-29. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 141/411
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine in the amount
of $600 for each day such a container remains without a permit as set forth herein.
§ 222-30. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is held to be illegal or unconstitutional, then it is deemed to be the intent of
North Versailles Township Commissioners that the balance of this chapter would have been enacted
irrespective of said invalid portion.
§ 222-31. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 228. Real Estate
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Rental property — See Ch. 232.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Article I. Permit Required for Any Change
[Adopted 3-17-1986 by Ord. No. 840 (Ch. 4, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 228-1. Intent.
It is declared the intent of the Township Board of Commissioners that this article is precautionary and
that the effect of this article is implicit and implied in all ordinances heretofore enacted. However, the
Township Board of Commissioners enacts this article to establish with certitude the requirement for an
application and issuance of a permit for any use or change of use of any real estate in the Township.
§ 228-2. Permit required.
Prior to the use, occupancy, construction, alterations, change of possession, sale, lease,
improvements or repairs to any real estate in the Township of North Versailles, the owner of the same
or any other party in interest must first apply for and obtain a permit from the Building Inspector. A
signed and duly issued permit from the Building Inspector shall be a necessary condition precedent to
any of the events set forth in this chapter. Such events shall include but are not limited to construction,
repairs or alterations to buildings, land or any of the conditions thereon, the occupancy or use of any
dwellings, vacant land or improvements of any nature. It shall apply to commercial, industrial and
residential properties.
§ 228-3. Purpose.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 142/411
The purpose of this article is to better enable Township officials to enforce land use and taxing
ordinances and other ordinances enacted by the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 228-4. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any owner, lessee, party in possession or party in interest of any real estate or property within the
Township of North Versailles who or which does not first apply for and obtain a permit shall not be
entitled to occupy, use, build, erect, raze or perform any other alterations, construction or any other act
or make any other use of real estate within the Township of North Versailles. If any person or entity
does undertake any of the acts set forth herein without having first obtained a duly issued permit, said
entity or person shall be guilty of an offense for each day that the use or occupancy is made, activity
conducted, repairs or alterations made without said permit. Upon conviction thereof, the offender shall
be subject to a $600 fine for each such day of infraction and/or 30 days in jail.
§ 228-5. Forms.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to prepare forms to be used by applicants to apply for
permits which shall include all necessary information at the discretion of the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector is also authorized to prepare forms for the issuance of permits. Such forms shall be
approved by the Township Board of Commissioners by simple resolution without amendment to this
article.
Chapter 232. Rental Property
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Real estate — See Ch. 228.
Taxation — See Ch. 270.
Article I. Tenant Registration
[Adopted 5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 757 (Ch. 11, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 232-1. Occupancy permit required.
Any person who hereinafter rents, purchases, owns or otherwise occupies any dwelling in the
Township of North Versailles must apply for and obtain an occupancy permit in conformance with
existing ordinances of the Township of North Versailles and obtain appropriate and satisfactory
inspection and approval by the Building Inspector of the Township of North Versailles prior to said
occupancy. Prior to entering into any said premises, occupying the same or making any improvements
or changes upon the same, any such person, or his agent, must apply to the Secretary of the Township
of North Versailles for an occupancy permit.
§ 232-2. Transient rentals.
All owners of real estate which are available for rental use by other persons shall have the duty to see
that an occupancy permit is obtained prior to the change of occupancy of any dwelling. Said
obligations on the owners of real estate will apply irrespective of the number of units for lease or rent.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 143/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
However, it shall not include transient or casual rentals for persons not permanently residing or
occupying said premises. However, any occupancy of a premises for a period in excess of seven days
shall be presumed to be a permanent occupancy of said premises and the occupier shall be deemed
to be a resident.
§ 232-3. Notification of occupancy.
All such owners and occupiers of real estate must furnish to the Borough Secretary within 10 days of
the signing of a lease or occupancy of any premises, whichever occurs first, a notification of occupancy
as defined in the following section.
§ 232-4. Information required.
The notification of occupancy to be completed by each owner, agent, rental agent, tenant or an
occupier of any premises shall include the following:
Address of the dwelling or rental unit;
Name and address of the owner and rental agent, if any;
Name and address of the tenant or tenants, including the name of each occupant together with
age and relationship;
Term of lease or rental, if applicable;
When conveyance of title was made, if applicable.
§ 232-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations.
It shall be a violation of this article for any owner and/or his agent to lease, rent or otherwise
permit the occupancy of any dwelling under his or their respective ownership and/or control
without having first filed with the Township Secretary the notice of occupancy as set forth and
required hereinabove. It shall further be a violation for an owner or his agent to collect rent or
lease payments from any tenants for any dwelling unit without having first complied with the
obligations of this article.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to occupy any premises as an owner or
otherwise without having first complied with this article.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
§ 232-6. Occupancy permit fee.
[Added 7-16-1979 by Ord. No. 758]
Each application for an occupancy permit pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by check, cash
or money order in the amount of $21 for all commercial uses and in the amount of $5 for all residential
uses. When all the applicants of any residence are 65 years of age or older, there shall be no fee.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 144/411
A.
[1]
B.
Chapter 235. Roads
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 282.
Article I. Weight Limits
[Adopted 12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1088]
§ 235-1. Findings.
The operation of vehicular travel on certain streets in the Township is found to cause excessive
damage and wear on those streets. The result is an adverse affect on the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of North Versailles Township.
Attached as Exhibit "A"[1] is the professional opinion of Glenn Engineering dated November 18,
2013, which opinion is incorporated into and made a part of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
§ 235-2. Weight limits.
The following named public streets in the Township shall have a weight limit prohibiting vehicular traffic
weighing more than the limit set forth:
Street Name
Weight Limit
(tons)
Kline Avenue from Greensburg Pike to Central
Avenue
6
Highwood Avenue for its entire length 8
Lincoln Avenue for its entire length 6
§ 235-3. Exemptions.
Exempted from the application of this weight restriction are vehicles making local deliveries, garbage
and trash collection vehicles and passenger buses.
§ 235-4. Notice to be posted.
Public notice of the limits established shall be set forth on road signs facing oncoming traffic to be
posted at the termini of the affected streets and at each intersection in each direction.
§ 235-5. Violations and penalties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 145/411
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
Any person who violates or knowingly permits the violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a civil violation before a District Judge, pay a fine of not less than $300 and not more than
$1,000, plus court costs, including reasonable attorneys fees incurred by North Versailles Township for
prosecution.
Chapter 238. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 255.
Sanitary sewer installation — See Ch. 260, § 260-3.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Article I. Rates and Charges
[Adopted 11-18-1963 by Ord. No. 553 (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 238-1. Rates established.
[Amended 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 783; 7-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1069]
There is hereby imposed upon the owners of, or the users of water in or on, all properties situate
within the limits of the Township and served by the public sanitary sewage system a revision of
sewer service charges for the use of said system, payable as hereinafter provided in the amounts
hereinafter provided. The revised rates shall be applicable with the first billing after the third cycle
billing in 2012 and thereafter, and shall include all sewer service rendered as a result of that
billing, or on a date 45 days after notice to connect to the public sanitary sewage system is given
as provided in ordinances of the Township. Said owners and users shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of the sewer service charge and for the penalty and interest herein
prescribed for delinquent payment thereof.
The Authority may charge a fee to cover expenses related to all federal and state mandates,
which shall include but not be limited to the costs to administer and implement said mandates.
The Authority shall pass on to the consumer an administration charge of 15% for pretreatment
standards and/or pretreatment charges incurred by the Authority as identified in Articles II and IV
herein, as well as a surcharge of 10% to cover the additional costs incurred by the Authority.
§ 238-2. Sewage rates.
[Amended 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 783; 2-20-1983 by Ord. No. 812; 1-21-1985 by Ord. No. 829; 6-26-
1987 by Ord. No. 853; 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 876; 3-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1058; 7-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 1069]
Sewer service charges shall be calculated on water consumption and shall be as follows:
For residential properties for each billing cycle:
The rate shall be $10.50 per 1,000 gallons for every 1,000 gallons over 6,000 gallons.
There shall be a minimum billing cycle charge of $63 up to 6,000 gallons.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 146/411
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Rates shall be amended annually or from time to time by resolution of the Board of the North
Versailles Township Sanitary Authority.
For commercial properties for each billing cycle:
The rate shall be $10.75 per 1,000 gallons for every 1,000 gallons over 6,000 gallons.
There shall be a minimum billing cycle charge of $64.50 up to 6,000 gallons.
Rates shall be amended annually or from time to time by resolution of the Board of the North
Versailles Township Sanitary Authority.
Flat-rate water users. All owners of or the uses of water in or on all residential properties supplied
with unemtered water service by any Water Authority or Utility or having unmetered private water
supply shall pay a flat-rate sewer service charge of $130 per quarter or its adjusted equivalent for
sewer service periods of less than one quarter; all commercial property users shall pay a flat-rate
sewer service charge of $135 per quarter or its adjusted equivalent for sewer service periods of
less than one quarter.
§ 238-3. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Each sewer service charge, surcharge and penalty imposed by this article shall be a debt due the
Township or Township Board of Commissioners and shall be a lien on the property served, and if
not paid within 30 days after the date of the bill shall be deemed delinquent. In such event, the
Township or Township Board of Commissioners may proceed to file a lien in the nature of a
municipal lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and collect the
same in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims; or the
Township or Township Board of Commissioners may proceed to collect such delinquent sewer
service charge, surcharge and penalty by an action in assumpsit, or by distress of personal
property on the premises. In the event of failure to pay the sewer service charge, surcharge or
penalty after they become delinquent as herein provided, the Township or Township Board of
Commissioners shall be authorized, in addition to any other remedies authorized by law, to
remove or close the sanitary sewer connection and shall have the right to enter upon the property
served for such purpose and to take such steps as may be necessary to accomplish such removal
or closing. The expenses of such removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such
sewer service or connection, shall likewise be a debt due the Township or Township Board of
Commissioners and a lien on the property served and may be filed and collected as hereinabove
provided, and such sanitary sewer connection shall not again be turned on or the sewage service
restored until all sewer service charges, surcharges and penalties, including the expense of
removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
[Amended 7-19-2012 by Ord. No. 1069]
Change of ownership or occupancy of any property served by the public sanitary sewerage
system for which the service charge, surcharge or penalty imposed by this article is delinquent, as
provided in Subsection A hereof, shall not be a cause for reducing or eliminating the rights and
remedies of the Township or Township Board of Commissioners set forth in this section.
Article II. ALCOSAN Pretreatment Standards
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 147/411
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Adopted 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 930 (Ch. 18, Part 4, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 238-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning hereafter designated:
ACT, THE
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ALCOSAN
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment facility and any devices and systems
used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE
A waste or substance which has any of the following properties:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than or equal to 10, as
determined by pH meter.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35 millimeters (0.250 inch)
per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130° F.).
HAZARDOUS WASTE
All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)[1] as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act[2] as specified in 25 Pa.
Code § 261.[3]
IGNITABLE WASTE
A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard in the sewage collection system or the
ALCOSAN treatment facility which has any of, but is not limited to, the following properties:
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21.
It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge originating in the Borough/Township which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal.
Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred to as NPDES) permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section
405 of the Clean Water Act,[4] the Solid Waste Disposal Act[5] (including Title 2 or more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act," and including state
regulations contained in the state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act ), the Clean Air Act[6] and the Toxic Substances Control Act.[7]
PASS-THROUGH
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 148/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives,
agents or assigns.
pH
The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, emissions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION
The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and/or radiological
integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE
A waste or substance which can create an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or
the ALCOSAN treatment facility; which has any of, but is not limited to, the following properties:
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without detonating.
It reacts violently with water.
It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to
present danger to human health or the environment.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic gases, vapors or fumes in a
quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the environment.
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a strong initiating source or
if heated under confinement.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction at standard
temperature and pressure.
It is forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51 or a Class B explosive as defined in 49
CFR 173.88.[8]
TOXIC POLLUTANT
Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA,
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.[9]
WASTEWATER
The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed directly or indirectly into
the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 149/411
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border upon the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: Section 261 of 25 Pa. Code was reserved 4-30-1999. See now 25 Pa. Code § 261a.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
Editor's Note: The references to "Class B explosive" and the citation of 49 CFR 173.88 appear to be
outdated. For current provisions, see 49 CFR § 173.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 238-5. Prohibited wastewater.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN
or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Borough/Township and transmitting
substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other
facilities.
pass-through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
§ 238-6. Prohibited substances.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or indirectly, into the facilities of
ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Borough/Township and
transmitting substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the treatment plant sewer
maintenance and plant operations personnel or which would preclude safe entry into the sewer
system or any portion of the treatment plan.
Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except as provided for by
ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for either alpha, beta or
gamma radiation and/or any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half life or concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operations of ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the
ALCOSAN system.
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes may create a public nuisance or adversely affect public health or safety.
Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste garbage resulting from the
proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 150/411
I.
J.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
K.
A.
B.
operating condition.
Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from sewage or industrial waste
treatment plants or from water treatment plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other
materials is specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate
and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other product of the ALCOSAN
facilities such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including
any substance which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act,[1] any
criteria, guidelines or regulations promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,[2] the
Clean Air Act,[3] the Toxic Substance Control Act[4] or state laws or regulations applicable to the
treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 238-7. Adherence to regulations; incorporation by reference.
No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in violation of any rule or
regulation of ALCOSAN.
The pretreatment regulations of Allegheny County Sanitary Authority are incorporated into this
article by reference as though fully set forth herein.
§ 238-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to
exceed the sum of $1,000, for each offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of payment of the
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding
30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute separate offense. In addition, any person
violating any provision of the ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and administered by ALCOSAN. Such
penalties may include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day,
per violation, as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et
seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to
but not in place of any other remedy available to the Borough/Township.
Article III. Prevention of Surface Water Discharge to North
Versailles Sanitary Sewer
[Adopted 8-17-1998 by Ord. No. 967]
§ 238-9. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "North Versailles Sanitary Sewer Connection Ordinance," and shall
be known as Chapter 238, Article III, in the Code of North Versailles Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 151/411
[1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
A.
§ 238-10. Adoption and approval.
The North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority Resolution No. 98-1 and procedural rules, Exhibits A
and B are hereby adopted and approved. All the requirements of those documents are incorporated
into the Township Code of Ordinances.[1]
Editor's Note: The full text of Resolution No. 98-1 and all exhibits and amendments thereto is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 238-11. Authority.
The North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority is given the authority to enforce the duties and
obligations established in Exhibits A and B.
§ 238-12. Fees and charges.
The fees and charges imposed herein may be amended by simple resolution of the Township or the
Authority.
Article IV. McKeesport Pretreatment Standards
[Adopted 3-19-2001 by Ord. No. 989]
§ 238-13. Purpose; administration; abbreviations; definitions.
Purpose and policy.
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works
for the Township of North Versailles and enables the Municipal Authority of the City of
McKeesport to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The
objectives of this article are:
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will
interfere with its operation;
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will
pass-through the publicly owned works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly
owned treatment works;
To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance,
and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and
To enable the Municipal Authority of the City of McKeesport to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment
works is subject.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 152/411
(2)
B.
[1]
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
D.
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article
authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of
costs resulting from the program established herein.
Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Municipal Authority of the City of
McKeesport shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Municipal Authority of the City of McKeesport may be
delegated by the Authority to other Authority personnel.
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated
meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd gallons per day
mg/l milligrams per liter
MACM Municipal Authority of the City of McKeesport
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act[1]
SIC Standard industrial classification
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as
used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
ACT or THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended,
33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The Regional Administrator of EPA, Region III.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of
a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision making functions for the corporation; or
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 153/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
If the user is a partnership of sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or their designee.
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the Municipal Authority of the City
of McKeesport.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD)
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a concentration (e.g.,
mg/l).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE
Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable
to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the
Act.[2]
GRAB SAMPLE
A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream
and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE
The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.[3]
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT
The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation the MACM NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or
local regulations: Section 405 of the Act;[4] the Solid Waste Disposal Act,[5] including Title II
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 154/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(3)
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;[6] the Toxic Substances Control Act;[7] and
the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE
Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes,
sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
NEW SOURCE
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge
of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act[8] which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no
other source is located; or
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or
production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
or
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure,
facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same
site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to
which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification
rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure,
facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement,
assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER
Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 155/411
(1)
(2)
A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, is a violation of any requirement of MACM NPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local
governmental entities.
pH
A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT
Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other
than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS
Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear
in § 238-14A of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW)
A "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned
by McKeesport or MACM. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE
Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and
septic tanks.
SEWAGE
Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 156/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
Is designated as such by MACM on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement.
Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, MACM may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUG LOAD or SLUG
Any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature or a flow-rate or concentration which would
cause a violation of the prohibited standards in § 238-14A of this article.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE
A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United
States Office of Management and Budget.
STORMWATER
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of North Versailles or the Commissioners of North Versailles or MACM.[9]
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER
A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER
Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT
That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c)
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c).
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-14. Prohibited discharges; pretreatment standards; sewer
use requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 157/411
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(2)
A. Prohibited discharge standards.
General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited
to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage
to the POTW or equipment;
Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
POTW resulting in interference;
Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at
a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
Wastewater with a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.);
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts
that will cause interference or pass-through;
Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW
in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by MACM in
accordance with § 238-15D of this article;
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process,
such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which
consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating MACM
NPDES permit;
Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by MACM.
Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by MACM in a wastewater discharge
permit;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 158/411
(o)
(p)
(q)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's
effluent to fail a toxicity test;
Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive
foaming in the POTW;
Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge
into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than 5% or any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated.
Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or
the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, MACM may impose equivalent concentration
or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater
not regulated by the same standard, MACM shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating
to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40
CFR 403.15.
State pretreatment standards. (Reserved.)
Local limits.
No industrial user shall discharge wastewater containing a mass of any pollutant which, when
taken together with the mass of that pollutant discharged by all other industrial users, will
cause the mass of the pollutant to exceed the mass of that pollutant specified in the
headworks industrial allowance which has been approved by the approval authority for the
POTW into which the industrial user discharges.
MACM may establish local limits regulating the discharge of specific pollutants by industrial
users. Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local limit or an industrial user's permit shall
constitute a violation of this article.
MACM's right of revision. MACM reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. MACM may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
§ 238-15. Pretreatment of wastewater.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 159/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
D.
Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and
the prohibitions set out in § 238-14A of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
state, or MACM, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to MACM for review, and shall be acceptable to
MACM before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures
shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to MACM under the provisions of this article.
Additional pretreatment measures.
Whenever deemed necessary, MACM may require users to restrict their discharge peak flow
periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user's compliance with the requirements of this article.
MACM may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on his or
her property and at his or her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of MACM, they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by MACM and shall be so located to
be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, MACM shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. MACM
may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively,
MACM may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying MACM of any accidental or slug discharge, as required
by § 238-18F of this article; and
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such
procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
Hauled wastewater.
Septic tank waste or municipal digested sewage sludge may be introduced into the POTW
only at locations designated by MACM, and at such times as are established by MACM. Such
waste shall not violate § 238-14 of this article or any other requirements established by
MACM. MACM may require waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 160/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
MACM shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
MACM may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge
permits. MACM also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of
hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article.
Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by MACM. No load
may be discharged without prior consent of MACM. MACM may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. MACM may require the
industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall
include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
§ 238-16. Wastewater discharge permit application.
Wastewater analysis. When requested by MACM, a user must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request. MACM is authorized to prepare
a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining
a wastewater discharge permit from MACM, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to Subsection C of this section may continue to discharge
for the time period specified therein.
MACM may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this article.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in §§ 238-22 through 238-24 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 60 days after said
date, apply to MACM for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Subsection E of this
section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 days of the
effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by
MACM.
Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain
such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Subsection E of this section, must be filed at
least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application.
MACM may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 161/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(2)
F.
G.
A.
(1)
B.
All information required by § 238-18B(2) of this article;
Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of
all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of
operation;
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers,
floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of
discharge;
Time and duration of discharges; and
Any other information as may be deemed necessary by MACM to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user
for revision.
Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate,
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
Wastewater discharge permit decisions. MACM will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, MACM will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit.
MACM may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
§ 238-17. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of MACM. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by MACM to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage
to the POTW.
Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 162/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(2)
(1)
(2)
C.
A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed five years;
A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferrable without prior
notification to MACM in accordance with § 238-17E of this article, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge
permit;
Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule
may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state,
or local law.
Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following
conditions:
Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW;
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permitee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the
wastewater discharge permit; and
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by MACM to ensure compliance with this article,
and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
Wastewater discharge permit appeals. MACM shall issue industrial wastewater discharge permits.
Any person, including the user, may petition MACM to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions
objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 163/411
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
D.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
place in the wastewater discharge permit.
The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
If MACM fails to act within 60 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be
denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Allegheny County Court of Common
Pleas.
Wastewater discharge permit modification. MACM may modify a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or
wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge;
Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to MACM's POTW, MACM
personnel, or the receiving waters;
Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or any required reporting;
Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40
CFR 403.13;
To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least 60 days' advance notice to MACM and MACM approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to MACM must include a written certification
by the new owner or operator which:
States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes;
Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void
as of the date of facility transfer.
Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 164/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
H.
MACM may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited
to, the following reasons:
Failure to notify MACM of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
Failure to provide prior notification to MACM of changed conditions pursuant to § 238-
18E of this article;
Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application;
Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
Tampering with monitoring equipment;
Refusing to allow MACM timely access to the facility premises and records;
Failure to meet effluent limitations;
Failure to pay fines;
Failure to pay sewer charges;
Failure to meet compliance schedules;
Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted
facility; or
Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this article.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of
business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit
shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with Subsection E of this section, a minimum of 180 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to
the POTW, MACM shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing
municipality.
Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection H(1), above, MACM shall request
the following information from the contributing municipality:
A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the
contributing municipality;
An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging
to the POTW; and
Such other information as MACM may deem necessary.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 165/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection H(1) above, shall contain the
following conditions:
A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at
least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those
set out in § 238-14D of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to MACM's ordinance or
local limits;
A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at
least an annual basis;
A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater
discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted
by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by MACM;
and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and
MACM;
A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide MACM with access to all
information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
A provision ensuring MACM access to the facilities of users located within the
contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by MACM.
§ 238-18. Reporting requirements.
Baseline monitoring reports.
Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the
final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to MACM a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to MACM a report which contains the information
listed in Subsection A(2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it
intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 166/411
[1]
[2]
[3]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
Measurement of pollutants.
The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by MACM, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in Subsection J of this section.
Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Subsection K
of this section.
Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
Subsection B of this section.
Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 238-16D of this article.
Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance
schedule required by Subsection A(2)(g) of this section:
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction,
and beginning and conducting routine operation);
No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
The user shall submit a progress report to MACM no later than 14 days following each date in
the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to MACM.
Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following
the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of
a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to MACM a report
containing the information described in Subsection A(2)(d) through (f) of this section. For users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures
in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in
terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 167/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 238-16F of this article.
Periodic compliance reports.
All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by MACM but in no case less
than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 238-16F of this
article.
All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring
facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by MACM, using the procedures prescribed in Subsection K of this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify MACM of any planned significant changes
to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
MACM may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 238-16E of this article.
MACM may issue a wastewater discharge permit under § 238-16G of this article or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit under § 238-16E of this article in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
Reports of potential problems.
In the case of any discharge that may cause potential problems for the POTW, including, but
not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, the user shall immediately telephone and
notify MACM of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by MACM, submit a
detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this article.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1),
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 168/411
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
J.
Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to MACM as MACM may require.
Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a
violation, the user must notify MACM within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to MACM
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
MACM monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if MACM samples between the
user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in
writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected
to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under Subsection E of this section. The notification requirement
in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Subsections A, E, and D of
this section.
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection I(1), above, during a calendar
month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the
wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA[1] identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste,
the user must notify MACM, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.
Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6921.
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to
be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state
law.
Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 169/411
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by EPA.
Sample collection.
Except as indicated in Subsection K(2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples
using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional
sampling is infeasible, MACM may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic
compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For
reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States
Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any
monitoring activities required by this article and additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the date analyses were performed; who performed the analyses;
the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended
for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or MACM, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by MACM.
§ 238-19. Compliance monitoring.
Right of entry: inspection and sampling. MACM shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. User shall allow MACM ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, MACM will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
MACM shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
MACM may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition
by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of MACM
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
Unreasonable delays in allowing MACM access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this
article.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 170/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 238-20. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from MACM's inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of MACM, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will
not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
§ 238-21. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
MACM shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall mean:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of
wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or
average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or more of
wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
Any other discharge violation that MACM believes has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public;
Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in MACM's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained
in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline
monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s) which MACM determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
§ 238-22. Administrative enforcement remedies.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 171/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
E.
Notification of violation. When MACM finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, MACM may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within five days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the user to MACM. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of MACM to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
Consent orders. MACM may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance.
Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Subsections D and E of this section and
shall be judicially enforceable.
Show-cause hearing. MACM may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before MACM and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show-cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
Compliance orders. When MACM finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, MACM may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not
come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount
of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order
relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
Cease and desist orders.
When MACM finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, MACM may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user
to:
Immediately comply with all requirements; and
Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 172/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
G.
(a)
(b)
(1)
H.
Administrative fines.
When MACM finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, MACM may assess a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed
$25,000 per day for each violation. Each violation for each separate day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. MACM may recover its costs for reestablishing the operating of
the POTW in addition to any civil penalty imposed hereunder. In addition, MACM may recover
attorney's fees, all court costs, and all other expenses of litigation to the extent permitted by
law.
Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for MACM to reconsider the
fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, MACM may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. MACM may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
Emergency suspensions.
MACM may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user,
whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons. MACM may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW,
or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, MACM may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. MACM may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
MACM that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in Subsection H of this section are initiated against the user.
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to MACM
prior to the date of any show-cause or termination hearing under Subsection C or H of
this section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this section.
Termination of discharge.
In addition to the provisions in § 238-17F of this article, any user who violates the following
conditions is subject to discharge termination:
Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 173/411
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
[1]
C.
D.
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents,
and characteristics prior to discharge;
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 238-14 of this article.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under Subsection C of this section why the proposed action should
not be taken. Exercise of this option by MACM shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
§ 238-23. Judicial enforcement remedies.
Injunctive relief. When MACM finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, MACM may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County
through MACM's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or
other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. MACM may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user
to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
Civil penalties.
A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to MACM for a maximum civil penalty not to exceed $25,000 per
violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation.
MACM may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by MACM.
In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other
factor as justice requires.
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this article or pretreatment permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, or both. Each occurrence shall be a separate offense. This section shall not
preclude prosecution under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. MACM may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 174/411
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
B.
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with MACM's enforcement response plan.
However, MACM may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, MACM is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
§ 238-24. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
Upset.
For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of Subsection A(3), below, are met.
A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
The user has submitted the following information to MACM within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset:
A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected,
the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of
the noncompliance.
In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall
have the burden of proof.
Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general provisions in § 328-14A(1) of this article or
the specific prohibitions in § 238-14A(2)(c) through (q), excluding (h), of this article if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each
limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 175/411
(2)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(4)
C.
No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents
from the user's prior discharge when MACM was regularly in compliance with its NPDES
permit, and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
Bypass.
For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BYPASS
The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE
Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections B(3) and (4) of this
section.
Time frame for notification.
If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to MACM,
at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
A user shall submit oral notice to MACM of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
MACM may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
Prohibition; exception.
Bypass is prohibited, and MACM may take enforcement action against the user for a
bypass, unless:
Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal
periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and
The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C(3) of this section.
MACM may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if
MACM determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection C(4)(a) of this
section.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 176/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 238-25. Fees and costs.
Pretreatment charges and fees. MACM may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating MACM's pretreatment program, which may include:
Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such
applications;
Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection
and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
Costs for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
Costs for filing appeals; and
Other fees and costs as MACM may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein.
These relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees,
fines, and penalties chargeable by the federal or state governmental agencies.
Article V. Connections; Use Regulations
[Adopted 1-20-2004 by Ord. No. 1012]
§ 238-26. Title.
This article shall be known as the "North Versailles Sewer Connection Ordinance", and is designated
as Chapter 238, Article V, in the Code of North Versailles Township. The whereas clauses are
incorporated into and made a part of this article.[1]
Editor's Note: The full text of Ord. No. 1012, which adopted this article, and all amendments thereto, is
on file in the Township offices.
§ 238-27. Discharge into sanitary sewer system.
It is declared to be the intent of North Versailles Township to eliminate the discharge of surface
water into the sanitary sewer system, and to prohibit and require the removal of private
connections that allow extraneous surface water to enter the publicly owned sanitary sewers that
are directly or indirectly tributary to a public sanitary sewer system.
No structure or building shall permit any surface water to be channeled into the sanitary sewer
system. It is the intent of this article that the substantial reconstruction, demolition, razing, or
removal of any structure shall be the loss of any preexisting right, if any, to utilize or construct a
combination sewer; any reconstruction, rebuilding or repair of any structure must be in full
compliance with this article and no surface water shall be permitted to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system.
No person or entity shall permit any extraneous surface water to enter into a publicly owned
sanitary sewer system either directly or indirectly.
Where used herein, reference to a "plumber" shall mean a person registered as a plumber with
the Allegheny County Health Department.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 177/411
E.
A.
B.
Where used herein, the office of Code Enforcement Officer shall include the office of North
Versailles Township Sanitary Authority Foreman.
§ 238-28. Enforcement.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer ascertains or determines that a service or lateral sanitary
sewer line is defective in any manner, or has reason to suspect the same, he is hereby authorized and
directed to provide a written notice to the property owner of such condition and demand that the same
be cured. The property owner shall repair, replace, remedy or otherwise rehabilitate all such defects
within 30 days of the date of the written notice, or within such longer period of time as the Code
Enforcement Officer shall reasonably allow.
§ 238-29. Existing structures.
From the effective date of this article, every owner of land in the Township of North Versailles upon
which a structure is erected the sewer lines from which drain into the ALCOSAN basin shall, by
May 31, 2007, obtain a certification of dye testing from the North Versailles Township Sanitary
Authority. Property owners shall make application for evidence of compliance on a form furnished
by the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority. The application form shall be issued upon
payment of a fee of $20.
Dye testing may be performed only by either a registered plumber in the presence of the North
Versailles Township Sanitary Authority Foreman or other North Versailles Township Sanitary
Authority authorized representative or by the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority no less
than 60 days prior to the date submitted to the Authority. If the dye test reveals that surface water
is being discharged into the sanitary sewer system, no certificate of compliance will be issued until
after necessary repairs have been made and a retest is completed, showing compliance with this
article. Only the North Versailles Township Authority Foreman shall have authority to issue a
certificate of compliance to the owner of the real estate after the terms and conditions of this
article have been met.
§ 238-30. Transfer or sale of land.
[Amended 10-17-2019 by Ord. No. 1122]
From the effective date of this article, any owner, transferee, transferor or subsequent owner of land
upon which a structure is erected in the Township of North Versailles, prior to any transfer of
ownership, must make application to the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority for a pre-sale
dye test. Upon payment of a fee of $20, an application shall be given to the applicant. Dye testing may
only be performed by a plumber in the presence of a North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority
Foreman or his designated representative no more than 120 days prior to the date of sale or transfer.
Upon successful completion of the dye test, the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority foreman
or his representative shall issue a certificate of compliance to the transferor or transferee of the real
estate. If repairs are needed, a retest must be performed following the repairs in the presence of the
North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority Foreman or his representative. Upon compliance with this
article, a certificate of compliance will be issued.
§ 238-31. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Foreman, who or which has
an interest in the matter, including the Township of North Versailles or the Township of North Versailles
Authority, may file an appeal to the North Versailles Zoning Hearing Board within 20 days of the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 178/411
A.
B.
C.
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Foreman, which is given jurisdiction to hear and
determine such questions.
§ 238-32. Occupancy permit and certificate of compliance.
Every structure in the Township of North Versailles must have an occupancy permit prior to a change
of occupancy, which must be accompanied with a certificate demonstrating compliance with the
obligations described in this article. No buyer or transferee may buy, take title or occupy land without
first complying with the provisions of this article. No owner or seller of land may convey title to land
without first complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 238-33. Applicability.
The duties and obligations created herein by North Versailles Township are limited to those within the
jurisdiction of the Township. Those matters under the control of the North Versailles Township Sanitary
Authority shall remain under its exclusive jurisdiction and control. Those matters are set forth here
solely for the purpose of approval of the action by the Authority.
§ 238-34. Fees and charges.
The fees and charges imposed herein may be amended by simple resolution.
§ 238-35. Violations and penalties.
Every violation of this article shall be deemed to be a separate civil offense and punishable by a fine up
to $1,000 and costs.
Article VI. Oil and Grease
[Adopted 5-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1081]
§ 238-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORITY
The North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority or their duly authorized agent or representative.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE
Any facility which services motor-driven, self-propelled vehicles and conducts the following
operations.
Change oil.
Mechanical repairs which includes the use of detergents or solvents to clean equipment.
Use of grease or lubricants for mechanical parts.
BAKERY
Any facility equipped to bake bread, cookies, cakes, pies, etc., cooked in dry heat, especially an
oven, and goods are sold either retail or wholesale or nonprofit.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 179/411
A.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quality of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. expressed in milligrams/liter.
BUILDING DRAIN
That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer.
BUILDING SEWER (also HOUSE CONNECTION or SERVICE SEWER)
The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CLEAN WATER ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,[1] Public Law 92-500, also known as the Clean Water
Act, including the amendments made by the Clean Water Act of 1977, Public Law 95-217.
COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY
An establishment where clothes/items are laundered or cleaned in exchange for a fee.
COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USERS
All nonresidential users which introduce only sanitary sewage or primarily segregated domestic
wastes into a building sewer.
FLOATING OILS
Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the wastewater facilities.
GARBAGE
The putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking, and
serving of foods.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR
An inceptor whose rated flow exceeds 35 gpm and which is located underground, outside the
building.
GREASE TRAP
A trap whose flow rate is 35 gallons per minute (gpm) or less and which is located inside the
building. Grease traps shall be rated for a minimum of 22.59 gpm.
INDUSTRIAL USER
Any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), (d) of the Clean Water Act that
introduces pollutants into the Authority's sewage disposal system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
The water-carried wastes from industrial manufacturing or industrial processing as distinct from
sanitary sewage. It shall include the trade wastes produced by, but not limited to, food processing
and bottling plants, food manufacturing plants, slaughtering plants, tallow works, plating works,
disposal services, industrial cleaning plants, fertilizer plants, car and truck washing operations,
laundries, cleaning establishments, cooling plants, industrial plants, factories, chemical treatment
installation, and steel making plants.
INTERFERENCE
A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
both:
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment process or operations or its sludge process, use,
or disposal.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 180/411
B. Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations); § 403
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RDRA), and
including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
MAY
Is permissive.
MINOR INDUSTRIAL USERS
An industrial user not classified as a significant industrial user.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of
Industrial Users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD
Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403.5).
NEW SOURCE
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
OWNER or OCCUPANT
The persons using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to and discharging
sewage into the sewage disposal system of the Authority, and who pays or is legally responsible
for the payment of sewer user charges made against the said lot, parcel of land, building or
premises, if connected to the sewage disposal, or who would pay or be legally responsible for
such payment.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, company, association, governmental agency, society, corporation, group or
political subdivision.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams contained in one liter of
solution.
POLLUTANT
Any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
POLLUTION
The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological
integrity of water.
PREMISES
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 181/411
All the parcels of land included in the contributory municipalities or in the service are thereof in a
single assessor's parcel number.
PRIMARILY SEGREGATED DOMESTIC WASTES
That sewage which is introduced into a building sewer and which contains no more than 50%
industrial waste, prior to any intentional dilution.
PROPERTY SEGREGATED DOMESTIC WASTES
The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER
A sewer in publicly owned land or easements and controlled by the NVTSA.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW)
A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned in this instance by
either ALCOSAN or the MACM. This definition includes any sewer that conveys wastewater to the
POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected
to a facility providing treatment.
R-1 GROUP
This use group shall include all multiple-family dwellings having four or more dwelling units and
shall include all boarding houses and similar buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping
accommodations in which occupants are primarily not transient in nature.
RESTAURANT
Any public eating place where meals are prepared, offered for sale, sold and served to patrons,
customers or guests for compensation based on the prices charged for and generally paid at the
conclusion of each meal. The words "regular meals" as used herein mean meals generally
consisting of courses embracing some kind of meat, or its equivalent, vegetables, bread, pastry,
beverage and accompaniments, served at more or less regular intervals.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The water-carried wastes from residences, hotels, restaurants, eating houses, or from business
establishments or premises engaged solely in the sale, storage or repair of goods, wares or
merchandise, and which contains garbage, human wastes, or animal wastes.
SANITARY SEWER
A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
All tangible property used or useful to the Authority in the rendering of sewage transportation,
treatment and disposal service, and shall include intercepting sewers, regulator chambers,
pumping stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (also WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ASSOCIATION)
All facilities for collecting, pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER
A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER USER CHARGE
A monthly charge to all users of the sewage disposal system which is based on sewage volume,
strength and/or flow.
SHALL
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 182/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(a)
(2)
D.
Is mandatory.
Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 238-37. Oil/grease interceptor required.
The following establishments are required to have installed an oil/grease interceptor:
Restaurant/food preparation and service.
Automotive service (change oil/mechanical repairs).
Sale of gasoline or oil (retail and bulk).
Bakery.
Use detergents or solvents to clean mechanical equipment.
Use grease or lubricants for mechanical parts.
Commercial laundry.
Any establishment involved with the preparation of food made for human and/or animal
consumption.
§ 238-38. Prohibited materials.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer line substances, materials,
waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the NVTSA, or its designated agent, that such
wastes can harm the sewage disposal system or the treatment processes or equipment, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming their opinion as to the acceptability of these waters, the NVTSA, or its designated
agent, will give consideration to such factors as to the qualities of subject wastes in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plan, degree of treatability of wastes in
the sewage treatment plan, and other pertinent factors.
In all cases, the NVTSA, or its designated agent, shall require compliance by the user with all
aspects of latest applicable ALCOSAN Pretreatment Standards and/or MACM Pretreatment
Standards.
See provisions of Part 3, MACM and Part 4, ALCOSAN Pretreatment Standards.
Plumbing to be in good repair. Every building or room occupied or used as a food preparation
facility or restaurant shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes, drains or other plumbing
fixtures shall be of adequate size to enable the passage of any waste intended to pass
through it to the main public sewer. All drains, sewers, waste and soil pipes, traps and water
in gas pipes shall, at all times, be kept in good repair and order so that no gases or odor shall
escape therefrom and so that the same shall not leak, and all vent pipes shall be kept in good
order and repair and free from obstruction.
Installation of grease interceptors and grease traps.
Every building, room or space or part thereof used as a food preparation facility or
restaurant, whether new or existing, shall install or cause to be installed, if not already
installed, a grease interceptor or grease trap. The type of installation shall be determined
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 183/411
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(3)
by the total fixture flow through rate of potential grease-laden fixtures discharging through
the building sewage lines as determined by the Allegheny County Health Department
(ACHD) Plumbing Division. For flow through rates 35 gpm or less, an internal grease trap
may be installed in certain existing structures used as food preparation facilities and
restaurants. For flow through rates exceeding 35 gpm, an external, underground grease
interceptor must be installed in all new structures, major remodeling or renovation of
existing structures, or changes of use involving food preparation facilities or restaurants.
Said grease trap or grease interceptor shall be installed at an appropriate location along
the sewer line between the food preparation facility or restaurant and the line's entry in
the main public newline. An inspection site tee shall be installed between the interceptor
discharge and connect to the public sewer system. All installations shall be in accordance
with the ACHD Plumbing Code and Regulations. No solid waste devices, such as waste
grinders, disposals, potato peelers, etc., shall discharge through the grease trap or
grease interceptor. Only potential grease-laden fixtures may discharge through the trap
or interceptor.
All new food preparation facilities and restaurants shall be required to install an exterior,
underground grease interceptor of a minimum 1,000 gallon capacity, regardless of the
flow through rate.
In all existing food preparation facilities and restaurants there shall be installed a grease
interceptor or grease trap as determined by the flow through rate, as detailed above, if
not already installed. In existing facilities where it is determined by the NVTSA that a
grease trap is not sufficient, the NVTSA may require that a grease interceptor (as
detailed above) be installed. Such insufficiency shall be evidenced by excessive amounts
of grease being discharged into the public sewer system by a facility. All existing food
preparation facilities and restaurants shall, at a change of ownership or remodeling or
renovation thereof, install an exterior, underground grease interceptor of a minimum
1,000 gallon capacity. In all existing structures, buildings or parts thereof in which there is
a change of use or occupancy to that of a food preparation facility or restaurant, there
shall be installed a grease interceptor of a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons, regardless
of the flow through rate.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the wastewater
superintendent and shall be located under cover and so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall not be located so as to receive
rainwater or unpolluted run-off.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gastight and watertight.
Maintenance of grease interceptors and grease traps.
All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be maintained and kept in good working
order at all times. The interceptor or trap shall limit the amount of grease discharge into
the public sewer system to levels not exceeding those permitted by ALCOSAN.
Oil/grease discharges shall not exceed 200 ppm downstream of the interceptor or tap.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all owners, lessees or agents of all food
preparation facilities and restaurants to, at a minimum of annually, inspect the grease
interceptor or trap. A written record shall be kept of all inspections. The inspection record
shall, at a minimum, list the name (inspector and company), address and phone number
of the inspection/disposal company, the method and frequency of cleaning scheduled
and the date of the cleaning/inspection. Such records shall be immediately presented to
the NVTSA upon request. A more frequent cleaning/inspection schedule may be ordered
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 184/411
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
to be performed by the facility when it is determined by the NVTSA that the facility is
discharging excessive amounts of grease to the public sewer system.
Grease and all debris removed from a trap or interceptor shall only be disposed of at a
facility approved by the Allegheny County Health Department (ACHD) and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Under no circumstances
shall this material be deposited into another sanitary or storm sewer.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at
his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Interceptors shall be
cleaned at least once a week.
Failure by the owner to properly clean and maintain these units shall be considered
sufficient cause for disconnection of premises from the public sewer, or punitive actions
as provided for in this article.
Rate of flow control. Grease interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of
water flow so that the water flow does not exceed the rated flow.
Capacity of Grease Interceptors
Total flow-through rating
(gallons/minute)
Grease retention capacity
(pounds)
4 8
6 12
7 14
9 18
10 20
12 24
14 28
15 30
18 36
20 40
25 50
35 70
50 100
§ 238-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to comply
therewith, or any of the requirements thereof, shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 for each violation, plus court costs and cost of
persecution incurred by the NVTSA, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment to the extent permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to exist
or for each section of the article found to have been violated. All fines and penalties for the
violation of the article shall be paid to the NVTSA.
The NVTSA may also commence appropriate actions in equity or other to prevent, restrain,
correct, enjoin, or abate violations of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 185/411
A.
B.
§ 238-40. Right of entry.
In the discharge of duties, the North Versailles Township Code Enforcement Officer, or authorized
representative, including the ACHD, ALCOSAN, or MACM representatives, shall have the
authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, food preparation facility and/or restaurant in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article.
North Versailles Township may designate an agent, or agents, to enforce the provisions of this
article by appointment of Board of Commissioners, or may be any Township Officer or employee
with knowledge of Township ordinances, laws and penalties, including but not limited to, the Code
Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector, Engineer, or Police Officer.
§ 238-41. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of any ordinance in conflict with the terms of this article relating to sewage
charges of the Township of North Versailles is hereby revoked to the extent of any such conflict with
this article.
Chapter 250. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 100.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 215.
Article I. Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 4-26-1967 by Ord. No. 610 (Ch. 20, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 250-1. Incorporation by reference.
All provisions of any of the Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania now in force or
hereafter put in force applying to or affecting the collection of garbage, its transportation and disposal,
as well as all rules of the Township Board of Health or its Health Officer now in force or hereafter put in
force, shall also be deemed, taken and included and made part of the specifications of this article.
§ 250-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COLLECTOR
Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation having a lawful and legal contract with the
Board of Commissioners of the said Township to collect garbage, offal, dead animals, condemned
meat, decaying matter or organic waste substance of any kind within the municipal limits of the
said Township.
GARBAGE
The animal or vegetable refuse from the storage, vending, transportation, sale, preparation or use
of foodstuffs of any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation, of meats, fish, fowl, fruits
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 186/411
[1]
or vegetables or any other organic substance or substances subject to fermentation or decay.
§ 250-3. Proper disposal procedures.
[Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 887]
The manner, mode and form of the disposal of garbage, offal, dead animals, condemned meat,
decaying matter or organic waste substance of any kind in and throughout the Township under these
specifications shall be in compliance with Act approved June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206, as amended and
supplemented.[1] It shall be the duty of the garbage collector to be thoroughly informed concerning the
provisions of said laws and to conduct the matter of disposal of the garbage as outlined in said Act and
agreeable with the rules and regulations of the County Commissioners of Allegheny County and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All municipal waste collected within the Township shall
ultimately be disposed of only at a landfill cited and approved by the Allegheny County Solid Waste
Management Plan, 1990, or subsequent revisions thereto.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56502.
§ 250-4. Incineration plants.
Any reduction, incineration or other types of plan or facilities that may be necessary for carrying out
these specifications in their entirety, if located within the limits of the Township of North Versailles, shall
be at such point or points as the Board of Commissioners shall select and approve, and as may be
approved by the Courts of the County of Allegheny as provided by law; but the contractor may locate
his plant or plants outside of the municipal limits of the Township of North Versailles if he so desires, or
may go to any other incinerator within or without Allegheny County in compliance with laws. However,
any garbage reduction plant located within the municipal limits of the Township of North Versailles shall
be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of laws pertaining thereto
and as they may be amended or supplemented; and its maintenance and operation in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles, and/or its Health
Department or Health Officer, insofar as such rules and regulations would apply under all existing laws,
and as the same may be amended and supplemented.
§ 250-5. Tin cans, bottles and paper.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation to deposit any tin cans or
bottles in garbage or refuse to be collected within the Township, excepting only tin cans and bottles
that have contained foods or liquids suitable for human consumption and as would be used weekly by
any individual in the preparation of foods within their own household; and also paper used in the
wrapping of garbage. No paper, excepting a reasonable amount used in wrapping the garbage, no
ashes, no wood, no accumulation of tin cans, no buckets or cooking utensils or rubbish of any
description (except broken glassware or china used in the dispensing of food) may be placed in the
garbage cans. In case of violation of this rule or regulation notice shall be given by the Township Board
of Health or the Health Officer to any such individual, partnership or corporation that thereafter such
parties may be required to separate from the animal and vegetable matter all such unlawful tin cans,
bottles and paper.
§ 250-6. Applicability.
The contractor shall collect, remove and dispose of all garbage, etc., as defined in these specifications
from all places wherever the same may accumulate within the municipal limits of the Township of North
Versailles.
§ 250-7. Unauthorized collectors.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 187/411
A.
B.
No person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation other than the party duly and lawfully authorized
under contract by the Board of Commissioners of said Township shall be permitted to collect within the
Township any garbage or transport the same through the streets, alleys or highways of the said
Township.
§ 250-8. Frequency of collection.
Collections from the residences of the Township shall be once each week. All collections from any
public markets, hotels, restaurants, fish markets, butcher shops, shopping center, or any type of
business operation shall be twice each week.
§ 250-9. Removal of dead animals.
Dead animals lying upon any of the streets, alleys or highways or elsewhere must be removed
immediately by the contractor upon receiving notification thereof from the Board of Health, the Health
Officer or the Township police; and if the contractor fails, neglects or refuses to have the same
removed within five hours after receiving notice either by telephone or otherwise (except in cases
where such notices shall be given between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., in which instance the
computing of the five hours shall start from 6:00 a.m.) the sum of $15 per day for every day of failure,
neglect or refusal to comply herewith shall be deducted from the next monthly bill of said contractor,
and which deduction shall be deemed, taken and treated as liquidated damages and not as a penalty.
§ 250-10. Requirements for vehicles transporting solid waste.
[Amended 5-26-1969 by Ord. No. 628]
Garbage, offal, condemned meat, dead animals, decaying matter or organic waste substance of
any kind shall be collected in and transported through the streets, alleys and highways of the
Township in such type of vehicle approved by the County Commissioners of Allegheny County and
in conformity with the Acts of Legislature, as amended and supplemented, concerning such
matter. Said vehicle must also be approved by the Township Board of Health and/or Health Officer
of the Township, and they shall not be changed without the approval of said Board of Health or
Health Officer. The receptacles or trucks used for the transportation of garbage shall have closely
fitted lids or bodies which must be, at all times, closed and kept closed except when loading or
unloading garbage, offal or condemned meat, and must not at any time be driven over the public
streets, alleys or highways of the said Township in an overcrowded or overloaded condition. The
truck beds shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected in accordance with the rules and
regulations now in force by the County Commissioners of Allegheny County and, in the absence,
for any reason whatsoever, of the enforcement of said rules or regulations, the truck beds or other
receptacle transporting garbage, etc., shall be thoroughly flushed out and cleaned after the close
of the day's hauling, in a manner approved by the Township Board of Health and or Health Officer,
and shall not appear on the public streets and highways of the said Township in an unsanitary or
unsightly condition. For any failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the contractor or any of his
agents or employees to thoroughly wash and disinfect daily the said vehicles for transportation, as
aforesaid in this section, there shall be deducted from the next monthly pay due said contractor
the sum of $7.50 per day for each and every offense, which deduction shall be deemed, taken and
treated as liquidated damages and not as penalties.
All trucks, vehicles, devices and receptacles used in the collection, removal and transportation of
garbage and other matter defined herein must be watertight at all times with all-metal enclosed
body duly licensed by the Allegheny County Health Department. Packer-type trucks are preferred;
and open trucks are prohibited. Trucks are preferred to be painted a white color, or have a
distinguishing appearance; and are to have a volume capacity of at least 23 cubic yards each. The
garbage-hauling contractor shall have at least three trucks of this type available to assure garbage
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 188/411
collection and removal; vehicles used in garbage collection and transportation shall be washed
and disinfected at least once daily, and oftener if necessary. The weight of trucks or vehicles so
used in garbage collection when empty shall not exceed 16,000 pounds, so as to avoid damage to
certain streets or highways in the Township.
§ 250-11. Control and supervision.
The entire work of collecting, removing and transporting of garbage, dead animals, offal, decaying
matter or organic waste substance of any kind shall at all times be under the control and supervision of
the Board of Commissioners of the said Township and its authorized representatives through the Board
of Health and/or the Health Officer; and for the purpose of supervising the collection of garbage, etc.,
and inspection of transportation equipment, all policemen of the said Township of North Versailles are
hereby designated and appointed health officers.
§ 250-12. Garbage dropped from conveyances.
All receptacles, carts, trucks or conveyances of whatsoever kind used for the collection and removal of
garbage, offal, dead animals and condemned meat, decaying matter, or organic waste substance of
any kind shall be so constructed and loaded as to prevent any particles therefrom of falling on any of
the streets, alleys or public highways of the Township, and must have the number of the receptacles,
carts, trucks or conveyances of whatsoever kind printed or painted on each side of the same in figures
of a size to be easily read; and should any driver or employee of the contractor allow any garbage,
offal, dead animals, condemned meat, decaying matter or organic waste substance of any kind to fall
upon any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or highways of the Township of North Versailles, he
shall immediately clean up the same and place the material in the said receptacle, cart, truck or
conveyance of whatsoever kind and thoroughly disinfect the place on which said garbage, etc., was
dropped.
§ 250-13. Other payments and gratuities.
No money, gratuity, reward, fee or other valuable consideration except the compensation agreed to be
paid by the Township shall be charged, received or taken by the contractor or any of his agents or
employees for doing or failing to do any part of the work required to be done under these
specifications.
§ 250-14. Standards of performance.
The contractor shall at all times use such appliances and equipment and employ such or so many men
for the performance of all of the operations connected with the work embraced under these
specifications as will secure a satisfactory rate of progress and quality of work, and in case it shall
appear at any time that the work, or any part thereof, is not being properly done, the same shall be
immediately corrected upon demand of the Board of Commissioners of the Township, or its agents,
such as the Board of Health and/or Health Officer.
§ 250-15. Failure to comply.
In case of failure by the contractor to comply in any respect with the specifications or with the contract,
the Board of Commissioners shall have the right and power to authorize or provide for the collection,
removal and disposal of garbage, offal, condemned meat, dead animals, decaying matter or organic
waste substance which the contractor shall fail to collect, remove, etc., and to charge the expenses to
the contractor and the contractor and his sureties shall be liable for the expense incurred therein.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 189/411
A.
B.
§ 250-16. Monthly report.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857]
The contractor shall make monthly reports on forms approved by either the Township Commissioners
or the Township Board of Health and/or the Township Health Officer which will show the number of all
loads or parts of loads as well as the tonnage collected, including dead animals, and said reports shall
be sworn to before the Magisterial District Judge for North Versailles Township.
§ 250-17. Liability.
The contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the Township of North Versailles, the Board of
Health and/or the Township Health Officer and its employees against any and all claims which may be
made by reason of any infringement of any patent right in the use of any machinery, equipment or
apparatus necessary in the collection and disposal of offal, dead animals, condemned meat, decaying
matter or organic waste substance of any kind under these specifications; and the contractor shall also
indemnify and save harmless the Commissioners of the said Township, the Board of Health and/or
Health Officer and their employees and each and every one of them against and from all suits and
action brought against them or any of them, and also from all damages and costs to which they, or any
of them, may be put by reason of injury to the person or property of any other, resulting from
negligence or carelessness or otherwise, in the performance of the obligations of the contractor under
the contract, or from any defective or improper appliance used in the performance of same.
§ 250-18. Placement of containers.
From and after the passage of this article it shall be the duty of every resident, householder,
tenant, hotel keeper, boardinghouse keeper, cafe owner or proprietor, nightclub proprietor, retail
dealer and all parties within the Township of North Versailles to provide or cause to be provided,
and at all times to keep or cause to be kept or provided, portable vessels or tanks for holding
garbage, offal, condemned meat, decaying matter or organic waste substance of any kind; said
vessels or tanks to be perfectly watertight and so kept, with handles on the outside and provided
with a tightly fitted cover, which cover shall not be removed except when absolutely necessary.
Said vessels or tanks shall be kept or placed in the rear of the house or passage way most
accessible to be collected, and never upon the street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public
place, and in all cases where the dwelling house or structure is erected upon a lot abutting on an
alley over which vehicles travel, the receptacle shall be placed on the line of the alley, and shall be
of a capacity sufficient for the needs of the owner, but shall not exceed three bushels. All such
vessels or tanks shall be returned by the collector, his agents or employees, to the said place or
places where found without unnecessary delay, and no person except for such purposes
authorized shall in any manner interfere with such vessels or tanks or the contents thereof. The
location and kind of all garbage receptacles shall be under the control of the Board of Health or
the Health Officer.
Provided, however, in instances of farm lanes or streets and highways that are sparsely inhabited,
the owner or owners, residents, etc., shall always place the receptacle in a place that is accessible
to the collector so that in no event shall the said receptacle be distant farther than 200 feet from
main roads, Township streets and alleys, or main arteries of traffic; provided also, that the
contractor must notify such individual or individuals of the exact day in the week wherein he will
make his collections. It is the intent of this section and of these specifications that the contractor
shall not have to travel unreasonable distances in cases where farm residents are involved or
other properties not situated in the built-up districts of the Township.
§ 250-19. Notification.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 190/411
The Township shall print a notice or notices to be left by the contractor at each and every dwelling
house or other types of buildings in the said Township where garbage may accumulate, giving notice of
the duties of the occupiers of the buildings requesting that such garbage be ready in the receptacles
for the collector when he calls for same. The said notice shall also contain the name, address and
telephone number of the contractor and the address and telephone number of the office of the
Township Commissioners, the Board of Health and the Township Health Officer and shall contain the
official definition of the term "garbage." In case of any failure to collect garbage as provided in this
article and specifications, there shall be deducted from the next monthly payroll or sum due said
contractor the sum of $2 for each and every such failure, which sum shall be deemed, taken and
treated as liquidated damages and not as penalties; provided, however, that no deduction shall be
made if the contractor shall remove the garbage within 24 hours after receipt of notice of such failure
from the office of the Board of Commissioners, from the Township Board of Health, or the Township
Health Officer, and further provided that no such deduction shall be made where the failure to remove
garbage occurs because of an emergency such as weather or an act of God.
§ 250-20. Award of contracts; performance bonds.
The proper officers of the Township of North Versailles are hereby authorized and directed to advertise,
from time to time, for bids for the collection, removal, and transportation of garbage, offal, dead
animals, condemned meat, decaying matter and organic waste substance of any kind in accordance
with the provisions hereof; to enter into a contract or contracts with the successful bidders and to
otherwise provide for the continuous collection and removal of garbage, etc., from the Township. Each
bid shall be accompanied by a certified check or treasurer's check payable to the Treasurer of the
Township of North Versailles; and the person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation to whom the
contract is awarded shall file a performance bond in favor of the Township of North Versailles within 10
days after the contract has been awarded in the sum of 50% of the contract price conditioned to
faithfully carry out and perform all of the provisions of the said contract and specifications.
§ 250-21. Collection expenses.
All labor and equipment of every kind necessary to carry out the provisions of these specifications shall
be furnished by and at the expense of the contractor.
§ 250-22. Contract assignment; cancellation.
When the contract has been entered into, it shall not be assigned, transferred or set over to any other
person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, and any party assuming the direction of
the work or taking part therein shall be considered as an employee under the specifications and under
the contract. Any violations of the acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of the
ordinances of the Township of North Versailles, or these specifications, shall be sufficient cause for the
immediate cancellation of the contract by the Commissioners of the said Township, who may
thereupon employ the necessary labor to perform the work, to re-advertise and re-let the work at the
expense of the offending contractor and his sureties.
§ 250-23. Interpretation of provisions.
All parts of these specifications are intended to be explanatory of each other, but in case any
misunderstanding or doubt as to the meaning of any of the provisions hereof shall arise, the same shall
be submitted to the Health Committee of the Township Commissioners, the Board of Health, or the
Township Health Officer for their interpretation, and their decision and interpretation shall be final,
binding and conclusive without exception or appeal.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 191/411
[1]
§ 250-24. Payments to contractor.
Payments shall be made to the contractor either monthly or semimonthly as shall be set forth in the
contract, but only after sworn statement of the contractor have been fixed as herein provided in such
sums as may be agreed upon and fixed in the contract entered into between the Township of North
Versailles and the contractor. Said payments to be made subject to the provisions of these
specifications.
§ 250-25. Questions of fact.
All questions of fact relating to adverse weather conditions, an act of God, strikes or causes beyond
the control of the contractor whereby garbage, etc., is not collected, disposed, or transported under the
terms of the contract and these specifications, shall be decided without appeal by the Health
Committee of the Board of Commissioners and the Township Board of Health or the Township Health
Officer.
§ 250-26. Notice of assessments or fines.
The Health Committee, the Township Board of Health and/or the Township Health Officer shall notify
the contractor within 48 hours after each and every assessment of liquidated damages or any fines
imposed under the provisions of these specifications. The signed statement of any householder of
failure to collect garbage, etc., according to the terms of the specifications shall be sufficient evidence
of the contractor's failure to do so, when verified by a representative of the Health Committee, the
Board of Health or the Township Health Officer. Notice to the contractor shall be notice by telephone or
otherwise, to his place of business, office or home.
§ 250-27. Reporting; verification.
If the contract for the work herein provided shall be let on the tonnage basis, the contractor shall
furnish monthly sworn statements or semimonthly sworn statements of the tonnage as herein provided.
However, the Township reserves the right to require all garbage to be weighed upon scales designated
by it within the municipal limits of North Versailles Township and may, at any time, require the same.
The Township shall pay the expense of the weighing.
Article II. Recycling
[Adopted 6-21-1990 by Ord. No. 882 (Ch. 20, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 250-28. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "North Versailles Township Recycling Ordinance."
§ 250-29. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980,
and the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, No. 101, July 28, 1988.[1]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 192/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 250-30. Purpose and goals.
The purposes of this article are:
To compel waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing municipal waste, conserving
resources and supplying energy.
To protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short- and long-term dangers of
collection, transportation, processing and storage of municipal waste.
To utilize, wherever feasible, the capabilities of private enterprise in accomplishing the desired
objectives of an effective, comprehensive solid waste management program.
To establish and implement within North Versailles Township a recycling program to return
valuable materials to productive use, to conserve energy and to protect capacity at municipal
waste processing or disposal facilities.
To recycle at least 25% of all municipal waste and source-separated recyclable materials
generated in North Versailles Township on and after January 1, 1997.
To reduce the weight or volume of municipal waste generated per capita in North Versailles
Township so that by January 1, 1997, it should, to the greatest extent practicable, be less than the
weight or volume of municipal waste generated per capita on the effective date of this article.
To educate each person living or working in North Versailles Township on the economic,
environmental, and energy value of recycling and waste reduction, and to require citizens, through
a variety of means, to participate in such activities. Failure to participate will result in fines,
imprisonment or both.
To the greatest extent practicable, to procure and use products and materials with recycled
content, and to procure and use materials that are recyclable.
§ 250-31. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings given to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABATEMENT
The restoration, reclamation, recovery, etc., of a natural resource adversely affected by the activity
of a person.
ALUMINUM
Empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans, foil and/or other types of food containers.
AVERAGE DAILY VOLUME
The mean daily volume received at a facility taking into account weather, seasonal variations,
scheduled community cleanup days and other factors.
COLLECTOR
The entity or person authorized to collect and gather any material described in this article.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Those properties used primarily for commercial or industrial purposes, and those multiple-dwelling
residential buildings containing four or more units.
COMMONWEALTH AGENCY
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 193/411
A.
B.
C.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and its departments, boards, commissions and agencies,
commonwealth-owned universities, and the State Public School Building Authority, the State
Highway and Bridge Authority, and any other authority now in existence or hereafter created or
organized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER
Plastic beverage carriers that degrade by biological processes, photodegradation,
chemodegradation or degradation by other natural processes. The degradation process may not
be one which produces or results in a residue or by-product considered to be a hazardous waste.
DEPARTMENT
The Department of Environmental Protection of the commonwealth and its authorized
representatives.
DISPOSAL
The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid waste into or on land or
water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged in the waters of this commonwealth.
FEASIBILITY STUDY
A study which analyzes a specific municipal waste processing or disposal system to assess the
likelihood that the system can be successfully implemented, including, but not limited to, an
analysis of the prospective market, the anticipated costs and revenues of the system, the
municipal waste system that the system will rely upon and various options available to implement
the system.
GLASS CONTAINERS
Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass,
plate glass, automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
All white paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
HOST MUNICIPALITY
The municipality other than the county within which a municipal waste landfill or resource recovery
facility is located or is proposed to be located.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Those facilities that house or serve groups of people including, but not limited to, hospitals,
nursing homes, orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE
Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and similar material, but not including
grass clippings.
LOCAL PUBLIC AGENCY
Counties, cities, boroughs, towns, townships, school districts, and any other authority now in
existence or hereafter created or organized by the commonwealth.
All municipal, school or other authorities now in existence or hereafter created or organized
by any county, city, borough, township or school district or any combination thereof.
Any and all other public bodies, authorities, councils of government, officers, agencies or
instrumentalities of the foregoing, whether exercising a governmental or proprietary function.
MANAGEMENT
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 194/411
The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage, collection, transportation, processing,
treatment and disposal of solid wastes by any person engaging in such process.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES
Properties having four or more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM
A source-separation and collection program for recycling North Versailles Township waste or
source-separated recyclable materials, or a program for designated dropoff points or collection
centers for recycling North Versailles Township waste or source-separated recyclable materials
that is operated by or on behalf of North Versailles Township. The term includes any sourceseparation
and collection program for composing yard waste that is operated by or on behalf of
North Versailles Township. The term shall not include any program for recycling
construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment
plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial or institutional lunchroom or office waste and other material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials, resulting from operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act from a municipal, commercial, or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL
Any facility that is designed, operated or maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether
or not such facility possesses a permit from the Department under the Solid Waste Management
Act. The term does not include any facility that is used exclusively for disposal of
construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment
plants.
NEWSPAPER
As used herein shall be deemed to include the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions
and containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. All such items must be
bundled separately and securely tied. Magazines and periodicals are not considered newspaper.
OPERATOR
A person engaged in solid waste processing or disposal. Where more than one person is so
engaged in a single operation, all persons shall be deemed jointly and severally responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this article.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution or cooperative enterprise,
municipality, municipal authority, federal government or agency, state institution or agency
(including, but not limited to, the Department of General Services and the State Public School
Building Authority), or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or
any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers, directors or persons
in control of any incorporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER
Plastic rings or similar plastic connectors used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages,
including, but not limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices, mineral waters,
soda and beer.
POLLUTION
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 195/411
Contamination of air, water land or other natural resource of North Versailles Township that will
create or is likely to create a public nuisance or which will render the air, water, land or other
natural resource harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or which
would be injurious to domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or
other legitimate beneficial uses, or injurious to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other life.
POSTCONSUMER MATERIAL
Any product generated by a business or consumer which has served its intended end use, and
which has been separated or diverted from solid waste for the purposes of collection, recycling,
and disposition. The term includes industrial by products that would otherwise go to disposal or
processing facilities. The term does not include internally generated scrap that is commonly
returned to industrial or manufacturing processes.
PROCESSING
Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal waste or any
technology used to convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities and resource
recovery facilities.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT
Those activities required to be conducted prior to constructing a processing or disposal facility that
has been shown to be feasible, including, but not limited to, public input and participation, siting,
procurement and vendor contract negotiations, and market and municipal waste supply assurance
negotiations.
PUBLIC AGENCY
Any commonwealth agency or local public agency.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL
Materials generated by residences and commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
which are specified herein and which can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products. Recyclable materials
may include, but are not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and
bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics, and any
other items selected by North Versailles Township or which may be specified in future revisions to
Act 101.[1] The recyclable materials selected may be revised from time to time at the sole
discretion of North Versailles Township.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics
and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste, or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and
creation and recovery of reusable materials other than as a fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING FACILITY
A facility employing a technological process that separates or classifies municipal waste and
creates or recovers reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. The term "recycling facility" shall not mean
transfer stations or landfills for solid waste or composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
RESIDUAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, discarded material or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials resulting from an industrial, mining and agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it is not
hazardous. The term shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Act of September 24, 1968
(P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act."[2] The term shall not
include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 196/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act of June 22,
1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams Law."[3]
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY
A processing facility that provides for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from
municipal waste that is generated off-site, including, but not limited to, a facility that mechanically
extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility that converts the organic fraction of
municipal waste to usable energy, and any chemical and biological process that converts
municipal waste into a fuel product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of
municipal waste that is generated off site, whether or not the facility is operated to recover energy.
The term does not include:
Any composting facility.
Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
Any separation and collection center, dropoff point or collection center for recycling, or any
source separation or collection center for composting leaf waste.
Any facility, including all units in the facility, with a total processing capacity of less than 50
tons per day.
SOLID WASTE
Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials. The term does not include coal ash or drill
cuttings.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT
The Act of July 7, 1988 (P.L. 380, No. 97).[4]
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Materials that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE
The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to
constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of any municipal
waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSPORTATION
The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any time after generation.
TREATMENT
Any method, technique or process, including, but not limited to, neutralization, designed to change
the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of any municipal waste so as to
neutralize such waste or so as to render such waste safer for transport, suitable for recovery,
suitable for storage or reduced in volume.
WASTE REDUCTION
Design, manufacture or use of a product to minimize weight of municipal waste that requires
processing or disposal, including, but not limited to:
Design or manufacturing activities which minimize the weight or volume of materials
contained in a product or increase durability or recycability; or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 197/411
B.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
Use of products that contain as little material as possible, are capable of being reused or
recycled or have an extended useful life.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 250-32. Powers, duties and responsibilities of Township.
Responsibilities. North Versailles Township has the power to assure the proper and adequate
transportation, collection and storage of municipal waste which is generated or present within its
boundaries, to assure adequate capacity for the disposal of municipal waste generated within its
boundaries by means of the procedure set forth in § 1111 of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.[1] North Versailles Township does hereby adopt and
implement a program for the collection and recycling of municipal waste or source-separated
recyclable materials.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.111.
Powers. In carrying out its duties under this section, the Township of North Versailles may adopt
resolutions establishing procedures, regulations and standards for the recycling, transportation,
storage and collection of municipal wastes, or source-separated recyclable materials which shall
not be less stringent than, and not in violation of or inconsistent with, the provisions and purposes
of the Solid Waste Management Act, the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. In the absence of regulations,
this article shall be construed and carried out pursuant to the terms herein.
Duties. The Township of North Versailles may implement the provisions of this article by collecting,
transporting processing or marketing source-separated materials or may contract, subject to
competitive bidding, with any person to carry out the recycling, transportation, collection and
storage of municipal waste and source-separated recyclable materials. Any such successful
contractor or bidder shall be responsible for transportation, collection and storage activities and
facilities and to see to compliance with this article and all applicable laws.
§ 250-33. Designated site.
North Versailles Township hereby requires that all municipal waste generated within its jurisdiction be
disposed of or processed at designated, permitted and lawfully licensed facilities.
§ 250-34. Recycling program.
The Township of North Versailles hereby establishes and implements a source separation and
collection program for recyclable materials in accordance with Section 1501 of the Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.[1] The source-separation and collection program shall
include the following:
Persons are hereby required to separate newspapers, aluminum, steel and bimetal cans, all glass
containers, plastic pop bottles and plastic milk containers from other municipal waste generated at
their homes, apartments and other residential establishments and to store such material until
collection. Recyclable materials shall be designated periodically by simple resolution from the
following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper,
newsprint, corrugated paper and plastics. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the
ownership of separated materials by the person who generated them unless and until such
materials are placed at curbside or such other designated location for collection by the contractor.
When so placed, the materials become the property of the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 198/411
B.
C.
[2]
D.
E.
F.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside in containers provided by the Township for
collection. Any containers provided for collection of recyclable materials shall be the property of
the Township of North Versailles and used only for the collection of recyclable materials. Any
person, resident or entity who moves within or from the Township shall be responsible for returning
the allocated container(s) to the Municipal Building or shall pay the replacement cost of said
container(s). Use of recycling containers for any purpose other than the designated recycling
program or use of the recycling containers by any person other than the person allocated such
container(s) shall be a violation of this article. It is ordained that the reasonable cost of a container
is $100, which value may be reestablished from time to time by the Township at its sole discretion.
Persons are hereby required to separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their
homes, apartments and other residential establishments until collection unless those persons
have otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste.
Effective September 26, 1990, all multifamily residences not receiving Township garbage
collection shall separate and recycle at least three of the following: clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper or
plastics. In addition, all residential establishments not receiving Township garbage collection shall
separate leaf waste from other waste and provide for disposal of said leaf waste in compliance
with Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act[2] effective September 26,
1990. The owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing
properties with four or more units may comply with its responsibilities for recycling by establishing
a collection system for recyclables at each property. The collection system must include suitable
containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and
written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords and agents of owners and landlords who comply with this article shall not be
liable for the noncompliance by occupants of their building. Owners, landlords, or agents of an
owner or landlord shall submit a recycling plan to the Township for approval by September 1,
1990. Such plan shall indicate materials for collection, location, type, and size of containers to be
used, sources for marketing recyclables, occupants of the recycling collection system. The plan
must be implemented and go into effect by September 28, 1990. Owners, landlords, or agents of
an owner or landlord shall submit an annual report to the Township by January 31 of each year
reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous calendar year.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Persons are hereby required to separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper and
leaf waste and other material deemed appropriate which is generated at commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments and from community activities and to store the material until collection.
Commercial, institutional and municipal establishments within it municipal boundaries must
provide for the recycling of materials they are required by this article to recycle. All occupants of
commercial and institutional establishments shall recycle high-grade office paper, aluminum,
corrugated paper, leaf waste and other materials deemed appropriate by the Board of
Commissioners. Said occupants shall submit a recycling plan to the Township for approval by
September 1, 1990. Such plan shall indicate materials for collection, location, type and size of
containers to be used method for disposal of leaf waste and sources for marketing recyclables.
The plan must be implemented and go into effect by September 28, 1990. Occupants of said
establishments shall submit an annual report to the Township by January 31 of each year
reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous calendar year. Commercial and
institutional solid waste generators must, annually, apply for a permit to do so and pay a fee
established pursuant to resolution and provide written documentation to the Township of the total
number of tons recycled or estimated to be recycled.
The contractor shall collect recyclable materials from curbside or similar locations designated by
resolution at least once every other week from each residence or other person generating
municipal waste in the Township. The method and means of collection may be changed from time
to time by simple resolution at the sole discretion of the Board of Commissioners of North
Versailles Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 199/411
[1] Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
§ 250-35. Public notice.
The Township of North Versailles shall establish a comprehensive and sustained public information
and education program concerning recycling program features and requirements. As a part of this
program and at least 30 days prior to the initiation of the recycling program and at least once every six
months thereafter until the Township deems it no longer necessary, all persons occupying residential,
commercial, institutional and municipal premises within its boundaries shall be notified of the
requirements of this article. Advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the Township, posting notice in
public places where public notices are customarily posted and notice with other official notifications
periodically mailed to residential taxpayers or any combination of the foregoing shall be deemed to be
sufficient, legal notice of this article and all applicable laws.
§ 250-36. Pickup and dropoff centers.
North Versailles Township may conduct its own collection or contract with a landfill, a resource
recovery facility or other entity under contract with the Township and/or may establish one or more
dropoff centers for the collection, removal and sale of at least three recyclable materials. The materials
shall be designated from time to time by the Township by resolution from the following: clear glass,
colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper and plastics. The center shall be located at a facility or in a place that is easily accessible to
persons generating municipal waste that is processed or disposed at the facility. Each dropoff center
must contain bins or containers where recyclable materials may be placed or temporarily stored. If the
operation of the dropoff center requires attendants, the center shall be open for reasonable periods of
time. Each operator shall, at least 30 days prior to the initiation of the dropoff center program and at
least once every six months thereafter, provide public notice of the availability of the dropoff center.
The operator shall place an advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the Township or provide notice
in another manner approved by the Commissioners. Any or all of the above standards may be
removed or revised from time to time at the sole discretion of the Township.
§ 250-37. Annual report.
On or before February 15 of each year, a report shall be submitted to Allegheny County which shall
describe the weight or volume of materials that were recycled by the recycling program in the
preceding calendar year.
§ 250-38. Prohibited activities.
No recyclable material or any material regulated by this article shall be appropriated, taken, used or
picked up by anyone other than an authorized collector as defined and regulated by this article; no
such material may be collected or conveyed over the streets, alleys and thoroughfares of North
Versailles Township by any person or persons other than North Versailles Township or its duly
authorized employees or collector, excepting multiple-family dwellings, townhouses, apartments,
churches, schools, and commercial and industrial establishments as provided for in this article.
§ 250-39. Scavenging.
The unauthorized removal of recyclable materials from containers placed for lawful collection shall be
considered scavenging and a violation of this article. Once a container(s) is placed for lawful collection,
then the recyclable materials contained therein become the property of the Township; and further, the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 200/411
[1]
collection of any recyclable materials once the same have been placed at the curbside for collection by
any one other than the designated hauler or the Township constitutes a violation of this article. The
recyclable container(s) shall be used only for the collection of recyclable materials.
§ 250-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his official duties, who violates any provision of
this article or any resolution enacted hereunder, any order issued hereunder, or the terms or conditions
of any contract awarded in the implementation of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and costs and, in default of the
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. A separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, theft or removal of recyclable materials at the curbside or of recycling containers
may be prosecuted under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
Article III. Garbage and Sanitation Fees
[Adopted 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 921 (Ch. 20, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 250-41. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "North Versailles Township Garbage and Sanitation Fee Ordinance."
§ 250-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the definitions set forth herein:
ANNUAL FEE
That fee imposed by this article or any amendment hereto for sanitation and for the collection of
garbage for a calendar year.
APARTMENT BUILDING
A single building containing four or more living units. Such apartment buildings are not covered by
this article as they are not included for the collection of garbage pursuant to North Versailles
garbage collection contract for the year 1994 and subsequent years.
DUPLEX AND TRIPLEX LIVING UNITS
Covered under the terms of this article shall be single-family buildings, duplexes and triplexes as
the same are commonly known. It is the intent to include any single building which includes up to
three living units which shall be deemed to be apartment buildings as defined herein.[1]
ENTITY
Any natural person, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, owner, occupier, tenant, rental
agent, manager or any other legally recognized entity under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
GARBAGE
That material or waste product as the same is used in the North Versailles Township garbage
collection contract effective for 1994. It shall further be deemed to include rubbish as is set forth in
said contract. Such contract and all specifications for bidding as prepared by Glenn Engineering
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 201/411
[1]
[2]
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
for North Versailles Township for the year 1994 shall be deemed to be included herein and made a
part thereof.[2]
GARBAGE FEE COLLECTOR
Entity designated by North Versailles Township by simple resolution as the entity responsible for
collecting the garbage and sanitation fee as set forth and provided for herein.
LIVING UNIT
An apartment, dwelling, residence, home or single-family residence used by one family or living
entity or intended to be used by one family entity. It may be contained in a dwelling standing alone
or with other living units together forming part of one building.
OCCUPIER
Such person in actual possession of a living unit who is not the legal owner.
QUARTERLY FEE
One-fourth of the annual fee as to be collected and paid as provided for herein.
RENTAL AGENT
That entity which collects, manages, rents or otherwise has some responsibility or control over the
occupancy of a living unit.
TENANT
A nonowner of a living unit which shall, nevertheless, be an occupant of a living unit pursuant to
some lease or other agreement.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Said contract and all attachments and amendments thereto are on file in the Township
offices.
§ 250-43. Fees.
The following fees shall be charged:
[Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1054; 12-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1064]
The base rate for garbage collection is $8.10 per unit, per month, $97.20 per year.
The billing fee is $1.25 + $0.29 + $0.01 = $1.55 per unit, per quarter, $6.20 per year.
Additional fees to be built into the total fee are as follows:
Costs for advertising fee and solicitor fee: $0.16 per year.
The average cost of delinquencies for the last year: $20.96.
Less credit for additional money collected in 2011: $3.14.
Annual discount. A discount of $7 shall be given for any living unit for which the fee is paid for the
entire year provided the fee is paid on or before March 1, 1994, or on or before January 31, 1995,
and by January 31 in subsequent years.
The annual fee shall be due and payable whether or not garbage is collected from any living unit
and whether or not the same is occupied. The intent of this article is to impose a garbage
collection and sanitation fee for each and every living unit in North Versailles Township.
Accounts shall be deemed to be delinquent when the fee has not been paid within one calendar
month of the due date. Payment shall be deemed to have been made upon receipt by the collector
or the date of the postmark for mailed payments, whichever is earlier.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 202/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
§ 250-44. Payment.
Every entity having ownership, control, responsibility, occupancy or the right of control or occupancy of
any living unit as defined shall be obligated to pay said fee. It is the intent of this article to collect the
fee for every living unit for which garbage is collected or intended to be collected under the terms of
this article or under the terms of the garbage collection contract for 1994. The Township and its
collector shall have the right to collect this fee in any legal action against any and all of the persons or
entities responsible, either jointly, singly or severally. Fees, penalties, interest and other charges may
be against the real estate by in rem or in personam proceedings. The Township also reserves the right
to discontinue garbage collection for any unit wherein the fee is delinquent.
§ 250-45. Collector.
A collector of the fee prescribed herein shall be entitled to 5% of the basic fee collected from each
entity responsible for paying such fee. The Township will also reimburse the collector for all
postage and other authorized expenses occurred in the collection of the fees. In regard to
delinquent accounts which may become delinquent under the terms of this article, the collector
shall further be entitled to any attorney's fees, penalties or interest allowed by this article added to
or due from the entity because of such delinquency.
The collector of the fee imposed by virtue of this article shall be that named by the Township from
time to time by simple resolution; the collector shall further give such bond as the Board of
Commissioners may set from time to time for the faithful performance of its duties. The collector
shall be responsible to collect all such sums due under this article, and shall do the same
promptly, diligently and efficiently. The collector shall bill the Township for its fees and expenses as
provided for herein, but shall deposit all sums collected directly to the Township account without
deduction. The collector shall maintain a separate bank account for the deposit of funds which
shall be in the name of the Township of North Versailles and which shall be the property of the
Township of North Versailles.
In the prosecution of any such cases the collector shall not be entitled to retain counsel, but shall
be obligated to use the services of the Township Solicitor. The collector shall be authorized to file
such suits and prosecute such liens as the collector deems to be necessary in its discretion; the
Township of North Versailles will advance all court costs or filing fees for such suits or liens. The
collector shall use its full time, best, good faith efforts to collect the garbage fee imposed herein
and shall file such reports as from time to time the Township shall deem to be necessary, but in no
event shall reports be filed less than quarterly.
§ 250-46. Advance payment.
The garbage fee due herein shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of the month of
the quarter as set forth hereinabove in § 250-43. Mailing the garbage fee bill by the collector shall
be conclusive proof that demand was appropriately and timely made for the amount set forth in the
collector's records as of the date of mailing. All sums claimed to be due in the notice by the
collector shall be deemed to be delinquent if not paid in accordance with § 250-43. Thereafter,
there shall be added a penalty of 10%, an attorney's fee of 5% and simple interest shall be
calculated from that day forward in the amount of 6% per annum. The collector may properly
demand payment of said fees by mailing such bill by regular bill, postage prepaid, to the address
of the property involved.
The purpose of this article and fee imposed hereby is to defray the cost of recycling, garbage
collection, administration and enforcement and further to defray the costs and expenses of health
and sanitation and prosecution of matters pertaining to health and sanitation.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 203/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 250-47. Amendment by resolution.
This article, including the rates, amounts, collection fees, identity of collector and such similar
provisions may be amended by simple resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
North Versailles at any regular or special meeting duly convened. In the event that rates and penalties
are increased, the same shall not go into effect until following public notice in accordance with law.
Chapter 255. Stormwater Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 1115.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
ATTACHMENTS
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 255, Stormwater Management, adopted 1-
20-2004 by Ord. No. 1013.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 255-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of North Versailles Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 255-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public
health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater recharge for water supplies
and supports the base flow of streams.
The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low-impact development (LID) are intended to address
the root cause of water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic
natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 204/411
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater
controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) program.
§ 255-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the municipality and its
watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 255-2 of this chapter
through provisions designed to:
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the
waters of this commonwealth.
Preserve natural drainage systems.
Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and mimic predevelopment
hydrology.
Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.
Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best management practices (BMPs)
that are implemented within the municipality.
Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
§ 255-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
[1] and/or the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended, The
Stormwater Management Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 255-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development
and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
§ 255-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 255-7. Severability.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 205/411
A.
B.
C.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or provision of this chapter
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 255-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance.
§ 255-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information
provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action
may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality purporting to validate such a
violation.
§ 255-10. Waivers.
If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter cannot be achieved for a
particular regulated activity, the municipality may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve
measures other than those in this chapter subject to Subsection B. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification or waiver shall originate
with the landowner, shall be in writing, and shall accompany the Stormwater Management Site
Plan submitted to the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the request is
based, the provisions of the chapter involved, and the proposed modification. The designated plan
reviewer shall review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of the chapter,
including Subsection B below. If acceptable to the municipality, the municipality may grant the
waiver or modification.
Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be approved by the municipality
if enforcement will exact undue hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or detrimental
to the public interest and will achieve the intended outcome and that the purpose of the chapter is
preserved. Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and not to
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. A
request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater management site plan
submission, as directed in Subsection A above.
No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater
than or equal to one acre may be granted by the municipality.
§ 255-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard shall be interpreted to refer to the latest or most
current version of that document.
Article II. Definitions
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 206/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 255-12. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or
statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT 167
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff and surface
and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation,
and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land
clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of
livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious areas is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT
A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the municipality for
approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater
recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are
commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: structural or nonstructural.
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related
practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas
structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is
installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited
to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed
wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, lowimpact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or
forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural
stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A conservation district as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P. S.
§ 851(c)] that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 207/411
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the
design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER
A qualified professional as defined herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County
Conservation District, that has been designated by the municipality to be the reviewer of
SWM site plans for the municipality and shall be understood to be the reviewer where
indicated as the municipality within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the
runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain
completely in a designated period after a rainfall event and to become dry until the next
rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME
The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the commonwealth at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE)
See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA
An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but
not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials.
EROSION
The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or chemical
action.
EXISTING CONDITION
The dominant land cover during the five-year period immediately preceding a proposed
regulated activity.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN
Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by
applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas
that comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical
Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
DEP).
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified,
the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by
FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-
year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 208/411
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment,
cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation,
and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
Systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or
reuse stormwater on the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER
Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells and springs and is within the saturated
zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
The replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies from precipitation or
overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as
surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS
defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their
group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil
survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices.
Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS[1]).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA)
A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages,
storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking
areas, and driveway areas are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION
Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into
the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES
DCNR defines invasive plants as those species that are not native to the state, grow
aggressively, and spread and displace native vegetation. (See
http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/public/documents/document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list
of invasive species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT)
Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings:
Improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
Any subdivision of land;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 209/411
(3) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.[2]
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID)
Site design approaches and small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the
use of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can be
applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects. LID utilizes design
techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through
a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features located on site.
MUNICIPALITY
Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION
Plant species that have historically grown in Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as
defined herein.
NRCS
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA
Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE
The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the municipality are planned,
conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL
Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of
land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code
102, or the Clean Streams Law.[3]
RELEASE RATE
The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the
proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT
A watershed or portion of a watershed for which a release rate has been established by an
adopted Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF
The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be
expected to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 210/411
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of
a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER
A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds
and wetlands.
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT
Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.[4]
STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels; storm
sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this
chapter.
STREAM
A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural
or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION
As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247.[5]
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE
See "stream."
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED
Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this
commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 211/411
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38A and B.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article III. Stormwater Management Standards
§ 255-13. General requirements.
For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is specifically exempted in
§ 255-14:
Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is required.
No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues written approval of an
SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with § 255-23, shall be on-site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in regulated activities.
For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs
and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (E&S Manual[1]), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38D.
Impervious areas.
The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this chapter.
For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is
subject to the requirements of this chapter, except that the volume controls in § 255-15 and
the peak rate controls of § 255-16 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas
that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity.
Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be created, increased,
decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered without written notification of the affected
property owner(s). Notification shall include a description of the proposed development and the
stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered. Adjacent property shall at a minimum include any property having a shared boundary with
the subject property of the SWM site plan; however, if in the judgment of the designated plan
reviewer additional properties are being affected, additional notifications may be required. Proof of
notification (signed postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 212/411
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
[2]
(3)
G.
H.
I.
[3]
J.
[4]
K.
[5]
L.
[6]
M.
submission to the municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
Protect health, safety, and property.
Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing measures to:
Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded areas.
Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.
Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual (BMP Manual[2]). If methods other than green infrastructure and LID methods are
proposed to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter, the SWM site
plan must include a detailed justification acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not practicable.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at strategic locations, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still
meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
Normally dry, open-top storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate
control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end
of the design storm.
The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall
be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual, Publication 584, Appendix 7A, or obtained from
the latest version of the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14[3] can be accessed at:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38E.
For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained
to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25
of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,[4]and the Storm Water Management Act.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.[5]
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state water
quality requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams
Law.[6]
Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 255-14. Exemptions.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 213/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than one acre are exempt
from the requirements in § 255-18 of this chapter except as provided in Subsection B below.
Earth disturbances between 1/4 acre (10,890 square feet) and one acre of earth disturbance must
submit an SWM site plan to the municipality which shall consist of the following items and related
supportive material needed to determine compliance with §§ 255-15 through 255-17. The
applicant can use the protocols in the small project stormwater management site plan if
municipality has adopted Appendix C.[1]
General description of proposed stormwater management techniques, including construction
specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and letters of adequacy from the
Conservation District where appropriate.
Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area that is
proposed; proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings; and a statement signed by
the applicant acknowledging that any revision to the approved drainage plan must be
approved by the municipality and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan must be
submitted to the municipality or Conservation District for approval.
All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail, and
all calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management
facilities must be shown.
Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects which do not increase impervious area and
underground infrastructure projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided the
activities meet the requirements of all other municipal, state and federal requirements.
Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from the
requirements in § 255-13D through J.
The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this section at any time for any
project that the municipality believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the
environment.
Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that are solely intended to better
manage runoff from existing development and are not part of new development or redevelopment
are exempt from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does not exempt
such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal regulation.
§ 255-15. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual[1] shall be
utilized for all regulated activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented
using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or
alternative design criteria as allowed by Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 214/411
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
[2]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[3]
B.
[1]
The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual[2]) is applicable as a method to any size of
regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions. The following
shall be incorporated into the CG-1 method:
Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
At least the first inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility
designed for a twenty-four- to seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated
stormwater system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a
facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined
sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
For modeling purposes:
Existing (predevelopment) non-forested pervious areas must be considered meadow in
good condition.
20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow in good
condition in the model for existing conditions.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual[3]) provided below is independent of site
conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not
applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of runoff from the net increase
in impervious surfaces.
At least the first inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility
designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater
system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility
designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined sewer
system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the
entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
This method is exempt from the requirements of § 255-16, Rate controls.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
§ 255-16. Rate controls.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 215/411
[1]
(1)
A.
[2]
(1)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan:
Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for
the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events.
This is the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those rates shown in
the maps contained in Appendix A (New and Existing Release Rate Management Districts).
[1] This predevelopment to post-development control is not to be misconstrued as the same
as the conditional direct discharge areas on the release rate maps. If it is shown that the peak
rates of discharge indicated by the post-development analysis are less than or equal to the
peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of this section
have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to
satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the
methods included in the chapter titled "Stormwater Calculations and Methodology" of the
PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan:
For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events,
the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (New and Existing Release Rate
Management Districts)[2] of this model chapter. For any areas not shown on the release rate
maps, the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge
rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should be computed using the methods
included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-17. Riparian buffers.
In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer easement shall be created and
recorded as part of any subdivision or land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The
intent of this chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve stream water quality.
The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland flow to the stream through the presence of native
grasses, trees and shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition of
sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer rather than in the stream; and
reducing erosion by providing stream bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams,
keeping waters cooler and reducing evaporation.
Except as required by Pa. Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer easement shall be
required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with a contributing watershed area of greater than
10 acres. The riparian buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the top
of the streambank (on each side).
Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the
intent of the riparian buffer as described in Subsection A.
Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within the riparian buffer
easement.
Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively removed and the riparian buffer
easement shall be planted with native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse
native plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 216/411
[1]
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
I.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality and shall be recorded in the
appropriate County Recorder of Deeds Office so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the
use of the property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership
and shall count toward the minimum lot area required by Zoning, unless otherwise specified in the
municipal Zoning Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be conducted in a manner that will
maintain the extent of the existing 100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability,
and preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer easement, but they shall
cross the easement in the shortest practical distance. Other structural stormwater management
facilities are not permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private recreation trails are permitted by
the municipality within riparian buffers:
It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for nonmotorized use only;
however, impermeable trails are permitted provided they have adequate drainage.
Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant species and other sensitive
environmental features.
Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement and shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer easement; however, work shall
be performed to minimize the disturbance area and removal of trees. Restoration within the
riparian buffer easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other plantings. One
tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the restoration shall be designed by a registered
professional with the requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to cross
the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest practical distance. Existing utilities
may remain and be maintained as required.
Article IV. Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan
Requirements
§ 255-18. Plan requirements.
Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,[1] and
other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances
where the municipality lacks subdivision and land development regulations, the content of SWM
site plans shall follow the Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements
of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is
found to be deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and require a
resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the municipality may accept submission of
modifications.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 217/411
(1)
(2)
(a)
[2]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(3)
A.
Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs,
such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the operation and
maintenance (O&M) plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(i) below.
The following signature block for the municipality:
The Municipal Engineer, on this date __________, has reviewed and hereby certifies that
the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No.
__________, except where waivers have been granted as noted on the Plan. The review is
based on a survey and plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is correct
and valid as submitted.
The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual.[2] A detailed site
evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas,
such as brownfields.
Editor's Note: See § 255-38C.
Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this chapter or
as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations and
general requirements in § 255-13.
Expected project time schedule.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and
submitted to the approval authority.
The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows) on
surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance
system that may be affected by the project.
Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open
channels, and swales.
SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater
facilities and water supply wells, property boundaries, existing and proposed topography,
points of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and proposed physical
stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and
responsibilities for O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance activities,
personnel and equipment requirements, estimated annual maintenance costs, and
method of financing continuing O&M.
A justification acceptable to the designated plan reviewer must be included in the SWM
site plan if BMPs other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this chapter.
§ 255-19. Plan submission.
Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
Two copies to the municipality.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 218/411
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
One copy to the municipal engineer (when applicable).
One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when requested by the District).
One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with combined sewer systems).
§ 255-20. Plan review.
The municipality has designated the municipal engineer as the designated plan reviewer of SWM
site plan for the municipality and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated by the
municipality within this chapter.
SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency with the provisions of this
chapter.
The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the SWM site plan is
approved or disapproved or requires additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a
subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed
by the Municipalities Planning Code [1](90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green infrastructure and LID
practices to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter, the municipality will
not approve the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are
not practicable.
If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will state the reasons for the
disapproval in writing. The municipality also may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if
so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 255-21. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or
that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary, because soil or other
conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the designated plan reviewer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 255-22. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the municipality's
concerns, to the municipality in accordance with this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with
Article VI, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 255-23. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the
SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval. The
municipality may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 219/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is not completed according to § 255-24 within the term of
validity, then the municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 255-22 of this chapter.
§ 255-24. Record drawings; completion certificate; final
inspection.
The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all SWM BMPs included in the
approved SWM site plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
construction plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
The record drawing submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a qualified
professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM
BMPs must also be submitted at the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified
professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must
sign the completion certificate.
The municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it deems appropriate. If
inspections performed by the municipality reveal deficiencies from the submitted and approved
SWM site plan, the municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall be at
the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the municipality may conduct a final
inspection.
Article V. Operations and Management
§ 255-25. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities
prior to final approval of the SWM site plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such
facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not
an indication that the municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to
reject or accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater
management controls.
Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate
appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the
land.
The O&M plan shall be recorded by the property owner at their expense as a restrictive deed
covenant that runs with the land.
The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the
provisions of this article.
§ 255-26. Operation and maintenance agreements.
Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall sign and record an operation
and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see Appendix B)[1] covering all stormwater control facilities
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 220/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
which are to be privately owned.
The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the approved
maintenance schedule in the O&M agreement.
The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements to assure access for
periodic inspections by the municipality and maintenance, as necessary.
The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name, address, and telephone number
of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the municipality within 10 working days of
the change.
Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the municipality may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 255-27. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of all
stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article VI. Fees and Expenses
§ 255-28. General.
The municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged to an applicant. The review
fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
Administrative/clerical processing.
Review of the SWM site plan.
Review of an SWM site plan resubmission.
Attendance at meetings.
Inspections.
Article VII. Prohibitions
§ 255-29. Prohibited discharges and connections.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4
or to enter the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 221/411
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
C.
D.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into
waters of this commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except 1) as
provided in Subsection C below, and 2) discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors
to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth:
Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
Discharges from potable water sources including waterline flushing and fire hydrant flushing,
if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance, landscape drainage and
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Diverted stream flows and springs.
Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from foundation and footing drains and
crawl space pumps.
Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.
Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where cleaning agents are not utilized.
Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of TRC.
Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as the PADEP guidelines for
swimming pool water discharge are followed.
In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this
commonwealth, the municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 255-30. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 255-31. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, drainage
easements, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this chapter without the written
approval of the municipality.
Article VIII. Enforcement and Penalties
§ 255-32. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated agent may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 222/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
§ 255-33. Inspection.
The landowner or the owner's designee (including the municipality for dedicated and owned
facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/or structures installed under this chapter
according to the following frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
Annually for the first five years.
Once every three years thereafter.
During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater storm.
Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following precipitation events. A written
inspection report shall be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain
the date and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the inspection, the location of
the BMP, facility or structure inspected, observations on performance, and recommendations for
improving performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the municipality
within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
§ 255-34. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an
approved SWM site plan, unless specifically exempted in § 255-14.
It shall be unlawful to violate § 255-31 of this chapter.
Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a responsibility of the municipality.
§ 255-35. Suspension and revocation.
Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or
revoked for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM site plan or
O&M agreement.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or
regulation relating to the regulated activity.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of
others.
A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the
suspension.
The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The applicant may
apply for a new approval under the provisions of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 223/411
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion
the municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these
cases, the municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend any, or
all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this chapter.
§ 255-36. Penalties.
Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 255-37. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee, relevant to the provisions
of this chapter, may appeal to the municipality within 30 days of that action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has
taken place within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
Article IX. References
§ 255-38. Sources cited.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). National
Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical
Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006), as
amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as
amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National
Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
Chapter 260. Streets and Sidewalks
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 224/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
Solid waste — See Ch. 250.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
Snow and ice on sidewalks and streets — See Ch. 282, § 282-53.
Article I. Municipal Improvements
[Adopted 11-19-1956 by Ord. No. 369 (Ch. 22, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 260-1. Improvement regulations.
No highway or road shall be laid out in the Township of North Versailles, excepting private roads,
except under the following rules, conditions and requirements.
A plan of any proposed highway improvement shall first be submitted to the Township
Commissioners for approval, which shall clearly show the width, length, termini, grade, drainage,
type of construction, curbing, sidewalks, or any other improvement therein that comes within the
jurisdiction, control and regulation of the municipality.
Not only must any plan of lots, or any road be approved by the Township Commissioners, but also
by the Allegheny County Planning Commission where such matter is within its jurisdiction.
The standards of layout of any public road or highway shall be equal to or higher than the
standards required by the Allegheny County Planning Commission under its rules and regulations.
No construction of any highway or road shall be made within the Township of North Versailles,
except such construction as shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the
Township of North Versailles as to hard-surface roadway, and as to sufficient storm sewer to
control the necessary drainage affected by said construction, the establishment of a grade which
is first acceptable to the Township of North Versailles.
No highway or street shall be accepted or become part of the public highway system of the
Township of North Versailles, which has been completed to the Township's standard requirements,
until all engineering services, inspection fees, legal services, costs of all labor, material and
equipment entering into such highway road construction, advertisement of the ordinance and other
subject matters relating thereto, as well as all other expenses incurred and incidental to making
said highway improvement, have been paid, or proof of payment thereof furnished.
No highway shall become part of the public highway system of the Township of North Versailles
hereafter, and no new highway or road laid out or constructed shall be deemed or accepted as
completed, until the ordained grade has been established for said highway, the work completed
according to Township standards and requirements and all costs or expenses of construction and
installation paid in full, and an ordinance adopted establishing and taking over of such highway or
road as part of the public highway system of the Township of North Versailles in accordance with
law.
§ 260-2. Storm sewer installation.
No storm sewers shall be installed in the Township of North Versailles except under the following rules,
conditions and requirements:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 225/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
The installation of any storm sewer on, in or opening on any public highway shall be approved as
to size, location, direction, slope, control of discharge, type and method of material and
construction used, not only by the Township of North Versailles, but also, where required, by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and by the County of Allegheny, where such approval is
applicable.
No such proposed storm sewer or completed storm sewer shall be accepted by the Township of
North Versailles as part of the storm sewer system of the Township of North Versailles unless and
until all expenses of engineering, inspection fees, legal services, costs of all labor, material and
equipment entering into such storm sewer construction, advertisement of the ordinance and other
subject matters relating thereto, as well as all other expenses incurred and incidental to making
said sewer improvement, have been paid, or proof of payment thereof furnished.
Said storm sewer shall not become part of the storm sewer system of the Township until fully paid
for, fully completed and finally accepted by action of the Board of Commissioners by accepting
same as part of the public storm sewer system of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 260-3. Sanitary sewer installation.
No sanitary sewers shall be installed in the Township of North Versailles except under the following
rules, conditions and requirements:
The installation of any sanitary sewer on, in or opening on any public highway shall be approved
as to size, location, direction, slope, control of discharge, type and method of material and
construction used, not only by the Township of North Versailles, but also, where required, by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and by the County of Allegheny, where such approval is
applicable.
No such proposed sanitary sewer or completed sewer shall be accepted by the Township of North
Versailles as part of the sanitary sewer system of the Township of North Versailles unless and until
all expenses of engineering, inspection fees, legal services, costs of all labor, material and
equipment entering into such sanitary sewer construction, advertisement of the ordinance and
other subject matters relating thereto, as well as all other expenses incurred and incidental to
making said sewer improvement, have been paid, or proof of payment thereof furnished.
Said sanitary sewer shall not become part of the sanitary system of the Township until fully paid
for, fully completed and finally accepted by action of the Board of Commissioners by accepting the
same as part of the public sanitary sewer system of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 260-4. Curbing and sidewalks.
Curbing and sidewalks shall be installed only where required by the Board of Township
Commissioners. The same shall be installed in accordance with Township standards heretofore or
hereafter ordained and established by the Board of Commissioners. Curbing shall be installed where
required by the Board of Township Commissioners, whether for drainage purposes, safety factors or
other reasons in the exclusive judgment of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Versailles. This does not preclude the installation of curbing in connection with storm and drainage
problems required to control storm- and rain waters by use of installation of storm sewers and streets
in other sections of this article.
§ 260-4.1. Installation and maintenance of sidewalks.
[Added 9-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1097]
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 226/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A sidewalk is that portion of a public right-of-way between the lateral line of the roadway and the
adjacent property line which is intended for the use of pedestrian travel. This shall include any
improved sidewalks and curbs.
All existing sidewalks and curbs (if any) must be maintained in conformance with this section. It is
declared and affirmed that the maintenance and care of all such sidewalks and curbs shall be and
are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
All adjacent landowners shall maintain and keep such sidewalks and curbs in good repair and in
conformance with this section.
If any adjacent land owner desires to install a sidewalk and/or curb, or to replace an existing
sidewalk or curb, such owner must perform the improvement in conformance with the specification
set forth in the following subsection.
Specifications for installation and maintenance of all such sidewalks and curbs are those prepared
by the Township Engineer as set forth in Exhibit "A" (Typical Sidewalk Detail. Drawing No.
IX:3.05:04B, dated 10/1/1997), attached hereto and incorporated herein.[1] These specifications
may be amended from time to time by resolution.
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
Penalties for violations of the terms and conditions of this section shall be the same as provided
for violations of the Property Maintenance Code.
§ 260-5. Utility line installation.
As to water, gas, utility and similar lines:
All main utility lines shall be installed in the public highways of the Township of North Versailles
only after first obtaining approval of the Board of Commissioners as to the exact location thereof.
Plans in triplicate therefor shall be submitted to the Township of North Versailles, in advance, for
such water, gas, electric or other utility lines, showing the location of such proposed installation
with relation to the grade, center line, or property line affected.
All utility lines, such as water, gas and sewer lines, shall be installed so that one type of line shall
not be superimposed over another type of line in order to facilitate and minimize installation costs,
reduce the expense of maintenance in case of breaks, replacements, repairs or other similar
maintenance operations; laying one line above another line is specifically prohibited, excepting
where conditions in the judgment of the Township Commissioners renders other installation
elsewhere impossible or prohibitive.
Customer service lines are not governed by these regulations.
All utility lines must be placed to conform to streets and grades with due regard for paving,
curbing, sidewalks and other public improvements presently in the street or which are to be
installed in the street.
Where hard-surfaced roads are removed or disturbed by the installation, maintenance, repair or
any other act of utilities, whether for main line, customer service line, or any other reason
whatsoever, by utilities, when the said hard surface of the highway or curb or sidewalk, as the
case may be, is restored, the earth or fill in the ditch or excavation shall be tamped sufficiently with
a compressor so as to prevent subsidence, sinking or collapse of any hard surface that is replaced
by such utility when the work is completed, and the hard surface shall be replaced and restored to
the type and quality of construction as previously existing. The said work of restoring the roadway,
curb or sidewalk shall be done under the inspection of the Township of North Versailles under one
of its authorized servants, agents or employees, the costs of which inspector services shall be
borne and paid for by the utility.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 227/411
F.
(1)
A.
The installation, maintenance, repair, use and enjoyment of the utility of its lines in a public
highway is subject to the established grade, or any change of grade, that the Township sees fit to
adopt. Any establishment or change of grade which might necessitate a change in the location,
elevation or other placement of the utility line shall be borne at the exclusive expense of the utility
for which the Township is in no way obligated.
§ 260-6. Bond.
The Township may require of any person, persons, partnerships or corporations seeking to install any
type of the aforesaid improvements a bond in an amount sufficient, to be approved by the Board of
Commissioners, to assure and guarantee completion of such municipal improvement, as well as a oneyear
maintenance bond after the acceptance of the completion of said municipal improvement by the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles.
§ 260-7. Establishment of detailed regulations.
The Township, in addition to the general requirements of this article, shall establish detailed rules,
regulations and conditions in regard to any subject matter herein, copies of which shall be available at
all times at the Township Secretary's office to any person, persons, partnerships or corporations
interested in the same.
§ 260-8. Violations and penalties.
[Added 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
Article II. Obstructions
[Adopted 12-17-1962 by Ord. No. 528 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 260-9. Prohibited acts.
Any structure, material or thing, or groups of things, animate, or inanimate, or any part or portion
thereof, belonging to any person, or owner (whether for sale or use, for any purpose whatever, whether
intended to be movable or immovable, and whether as part of, or as a convenience, addition or
ornament to, any building or business, and whatsoever the use or purpose may be) on, under or over
any portion of any highway (including the sidewalks thereof), is hereby declared to be unlawful and to
be a nuisance and removable as such, except only in the following instances and circumstances, and
then only provided that in these excepted instances and circumstances, they are maintained and used,
in the judgment of the Board of Township Commissioners, through its Chief of Police or Health Officer
or any other designated Township representatives or officers, so as not to endanger the safety of
persons or property, so as not to injure or interfere with the health, comfort and convenience of the
users of the highways and the inhabitants residing therein, and so as to carry out the purposes for
which they are permitted:
Exceptions allowed:
Any construction or use under a valid Township ordinance not inconsistent with the specific
provisions of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 228/411
(2)
(3)
Any construction or use which cannot be subjected to municipal regulation of the character
herein proposed.
Any construction or use made or maintained by the Township itself in the discharge of its
municipal functions or duties.
§ 260-10. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings herein indicated:
AUTOMOBILE OWNER
A person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed as required by law.
BAILEE
A person, not the owner, who has right to possession, custody, or control of any of aforementioned
materials, structure, substance or thing.
MATERIAL
Any substance, animate or inanimate, similar to, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
building materials, excavated materials, furniture, equipment of any nature, junk automobiles,
unlicensed automobiles, automobiles, whether licensed or not, resting on blocks or other supports,
rendering said vehicles in an inoperative or immovable state, automobiles, whether licensed or
not, standing in state of disrepair or dismantlement (excepting the case of emergency repairs), or
parts of automobiles or any other machinery or devices whatever.
OWNER
A person to whom any of the aforementioned materials, structures, substances, things or groups
of things belong in title, or right to possession and control.
PERSON
Any individual, firm copartnership or corporation.
PREMISES or PROPERTY
The lot, ground or property abutting or fronting any street or highway.
§ 260-11. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article III. Street Openings
[Adopted 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 922 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 260-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING INSPECTOR
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 229/411
[1]
That person occupying the office of Building Inspector within the Township of North Versailles as
may be designated from time to time, and shall include his representative or other person who
may be designated by the Township Board of Commissioners.
EMERGENCY
When there is an immediate threat or danger to person or property and to abate that threat it is
necessary to immediately open a street in North Versailles Township.
ENTITY
Any person, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, public utility, municipality, municipal
authority or any other legally recognized entity.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS
The North Versailles Authority (water) and the North Versailles Sewer Authority (sewage).[1]
PERMIT
The official written approval given to an entity by the Building Inspector allowing a street to be
opened.
SAW CUT
Method of opening or cutting into a street by use of a saw. It shall be illegal for any entity opening
a street to open or cut into the same by use of a jackhammer.
SOLICITOR
That person occupying the office of Solicitor within the Township of North Versailles as may be
designated from time to time, and shall include his representative or other person who may be
designated by the Township Board of Commissioners from time to time.
STREET
Any street, highway, alley, way, walkway, sidewalk or any other improved or paved public property.
STREET OPENING
Any disturbance, cut, excavation in a street as is described in § 260-13.
STREET OPENING REGULATIONS
A set of rules and regulations promulgated by the Township Engineer describing and delineating
the manner in which streets shall be opened, filled and repaved, as the same shall be amended
from time to time.
TOWNSHIP BUILDING CODE
The Township Building Code or BOCA code shall be that building code which is specifically set
forth and described in Chapter 120, Construction Codes, Uniform, of the Code of the Township of
North Versailles.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
That person occupying the office of Township Engineer within the Township of North Versailles as
may be designated from time to time, and shall include his representative or other person who
may be designated by the Township Board of Commissioners from time to time.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 7, Authorities, Municipal.
§ 260-13. Permit required.
No entity shall hereinafter open, dig, excavate or disturb the surface of any part of any public street,
sidewalk, way, alley or highway in the Township of North Versailles without having first obtained a
street opening permit, as hereinafter provided, which shall define the work to be done.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 230/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 260-14. Application; bond; fees.
Street opening permits shall be obtained in the following manner:
Every entity desiring to open a street shall make application in writing to the Township Building
Inspector on a form prepared by the Township Building Inspector setting forth the location of the
proposed opening or excavation, the dimensions thereof, the purpose therefor and the persons,
entity, partnerships, associations, firms or corporations doing the actual excavating work. The
authorized officer of any partnership, association, firm or corporation intending to open a street
and that entity doing the actual excavating work (if different) shall complete and sign the
application for the permit and shall be required to comply with all the provisions of this article as
hereinafter set forth.
Before the application shall be approved, the entity requesting the permit must either supply or
have on file with the Township a bond. Such bond shall be in an amount as shall be determined by
the Building Inspector to be reasonable under the circumstances to protect the Township from
damage or harm contemplated by this article; an annual bond shall cover all street openings or
excavations made or to be made in the Township in any calendar year; the entity may furnish a
bond in an amount determined by the Township Building Inspector to cover the proposed openings
or excavations set out in the application. Such bond shall have either corporate surety or surety
approved by the Township Solicitor and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Township in the
event of any loss, claim, suit, liability or damage that may result from the work done by the
applicant for the term of the work and for a two-year period thereafter.
Said application and bond must first be approved by the Building Inspector.
The fee for such permit shall be $25 for the first 10 linear feet of excavation or fraction thereof,
regardless of the type of street pavement or sidewalk construction. For excavation in excess of 10
feet, the charge will be $1 per each linear foot in excess of 10 feet. Exempt organizations as
defined herein shall not be obligated to pay such fee.
Upon approval of the application by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall receive a permit
delineating the work to be performed and the time period when it shall be completed.
Such permit shall be available for inspection upon request by any Township official or officer. It
shall only be valid for the entity described, the area defined and the time period allowed by the
Building Inspector.
§ 260-15. Opening and restoration.
[Amended 2-19-2015 by Ord. No. 1096]
Any entity opening a street must open the same by a saw cut and shall, in addition to refilling the
opening or excavation, replace the excavation and repair the street surface in accordance with the
Township Building Code and Township street opening regulations. If, within two years after the
restoration of the surface defects shall appear, the applicant shall immediately repair the same or
reimburse the Township for the cost of such repairs.
Restoration of surfaces.
All surfaces which are opened subject to this section shall be restored in accordance with the
attached three drawings[1] identified as follows:
North Versailles Township - Trench Backfill for Asphalt Pavement (full stone backfill)
prepared by Glenn Engineering and Associates, Ltd., dated January 5, 2015;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 231/411
(b)
(c)
[1]
(2)
B.
C.
Typical Sidewalk Detail prepared by Glenn Engineering and Associates, Ltd., dated
October 1, 1997; and
Medium Set Concrete Curb Detail prepared by Glenn Engineering and Associates, Ltd.,
dated December 22, 1997.
Editor's Note: Said drawings are on file in the Township offices.
These specifications and drawings may be amended from time to time based on engineering
recommendations in the sole discretion of the North Versailles Township Commissioners by
simple resolution.
Any materials and construction methods employed shall conform to both (1) the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications Publication 408, current edition, and as
it may be amended from time to time, and (2) Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Standards for Roadway Construction, Series RC-1M to 100M, current edition, and
as it may be amended from time to time. Both publications are incorporated into and made a part
of this section.
If there is a conflict in interpretation between any of the three sources above described, the one
setting the most stringent obligations shall govern.
§ 260-16. Tunneling and undermining.
No part of a street shall be tunneled under or undermined, except in such case as may be specifically
approved by the Township Building Inspector and the Township Engineer.
§ 260-17. Permit extensions.
Whenever the opening exceeds the area which is described in the permit or the work cannot be
completed within the time allowed or another entity is to do the work, an extension or amendment must
be secured to cover such contingency. The Building Inspector, in his discretion, may adjust the fee and
bond. Failure to secure such an extension shall result in the avoidance of the permit.
§ 260-18. Inspection and supervision.
The Building Inspector shall verify the extent of the opening and shall inspect and generally supervise
the work; he shall have full, plenary authority to oversee, direct or stop the work. In the event that it
becomes necessary for the Township Engineer to supervise or inspect or for any reason become
involved in any street opening beyond the scope of the regular Building Inspector's duties, then the
entity opening the street shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for all such reasonable
charges made by the Township Engineer.
§ 260-19. Emergency openings.
In the case of an emergency due to any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the entity owning or responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus to commence an excavation to remedy such condition prior to securing a
permit, provided that application for a permit shall be made no later than the next business day and all
provisions of this article are met.
§ 260-20. Trees and shrubbery.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 232/411
A.
B.
No permit shall confirm upon the entity the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery except as
the Building Inspector may prescribe in the permit.
§ 260-21. Removal of material.
All excess or excavated materials shall be promptly removed from the street or highway by the entity
receiving the permit and shall be lawfully disposed of.
§ 260-22. Work zone traffic control and protection.
Any entity granted a permit to make a street opening in the Township shall at all times maintain
suitable barricades and guards, and display proper warning signals, signs and flags in accordance with
PennDOT regulations; it shall further provide all necessary watchmen to prevent injury to any person
or vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected and appropriately illuminated with
sufficient lights. Streets and highways must be kept open for traffic at all times except when otherwise
ordered or approved by the Building Inspector and Chief of Police of North Versailles Township.
§ 260-23. Responsibility to contact utilities.
It shall be the entity's responsibility to contact each utility or other entity which has any facility in such
street or highway which has been legally recorded, or of which the entity has knowledge.
§ 260-24. Liability and responsibility; insurance.
Every entity opening a street shall be responsible for the excavations made, and shall defend,
indemnify and hold the Township, its agents, officers and assigns harmless from any and all
losses, costs, damages arising out of any act of commission or omission by the entity in the
performance of its work and shall further reimburse the Township for any costs or fees it incurs
due to claims made.
Every entity opening a street shall obtain and supply proof that it has in effect at the time the work
is being performed adequate and suitable workers' compensation insurance and full and complete
public liability insurance covering all operations with minimum liability coverage of $1,000,000.
§ 260-25. Violations and penalties.
Any entity violating any portion or provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a summary
offense and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense; in default of payment of
such fine and costs, such violating entity may be confined to the Allegheny County Jail for period not
exceeding 30 days for each offense. Each day of violation of this article shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
Chapter 265. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 1039. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 44.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 233/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 196.
Real estate — See Ch. 228.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 255.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Trees — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Article I. Title and Community Development Objectives
§ 265-100. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "North Versailles Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,"
or as "Subdivision Ordinance."
§ 265-101. Authority.
The requirements of this subdivision chapter are based in authority granted to municipalities by Section
501 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 265-102. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, in accordance with Section 501 of the Municipalities Planning Code,[1] is
to ensure the following through standard approval procedures and design requirements for all
subdivisions and land developments within North Versailles Township:
Proper design and installation of public improvements associated with subdivisions and land
developments including but not limited to streets and utilities.
Proper arrangement of sites to ensure optimal traffic circulation, consequently minimizing on- and
off-site impacts.
Implementation of the community development objectives through site design and the provision of
amenities installed to specified standards, including landscaping, lighting, and parking.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 265-103. Community development objectives.
This subdivision chapter recognizes the following community development objectives rooted in the
Comprehensive Plan:
Encourage and facilitate safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
Facilitate the provision and maintenance of community character through the redevelopment of
existing sites in a manner commensurate with community standards relating to site amenities and
integration with adjacent sites.
Provide for the proper arrangement of future developments in a manner contemplating future
access and development and impacts on neighboring communities.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 234/411
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Provide for connected open spaces, integrating wooded hillsides and active spaces, through
residential land developments and subdivisions.
§ 265-104. Compliance required.
No subdivision or land development, nor any sanitary sewer, public water supply, street, or access
drive associated therewith, shall be recorded or constructed unless in a manner as approved by
those approval processes set forth in this chapter, unless expressly exempted herein.
No transfer of property by deed shall occur unless all deed references are concurrent with plans
approved in accordance with the mandates of this chapter or represent the transfer of lots of
record.
Article II. Terminology
§ 265-200. Word usage and interpretation.
All words used in this subdivision chapter shall carry their customary definitions except where
specifically defined herein.
Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular.
The word "person" includes a corporation and unincorporated association, partnership or
individual.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory unless otherwise indicated. The word "may" is
permissive.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
The word "lot" shall include the words "parcel" and "tract."
Words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
References to "chapter" or "this chapter" shall refer to the North Versailles Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
§ 265-201. Definitions.
The following terms shall be interpreted as defined except where expressly defined otherwise:
ACCESS DRIVE
A private drive providing access between a public or private street and a parking area within a
land development, any driveway servicing a nonresidential land development or any driveway
servicing two or more residential dwelling units.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Any structure, excepting parking lots, that bears or houses a use incidental or supportive of a
principal establishment within the same lot or planned group of nonresidential uses.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT
Land development applications submitted more than one calendar year after the date on which the
initial occupancy certificate was issued by the Township where said occupancy directly followed
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 235/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
the Board approval of a land development on the respective lot or lots where:
Additions that are 1,000 square feet or less than or equal to 10% of the principal structure
shown on the most recent site plan approved by the Board, whichever is less. Where no such
plan has been approved, said addition shall be limited to one administrative approval; or
Accessory buildings not expressly exempt from site plan or land development requirements
that are equal to or less than 10% of the principal structure, not excepting instances where
additional accessory buildings were constructed or exist that were not approved by the Board
through a standard approval process; or
Expansion of parking that is 10% or less than the parking, inclusive of the surface area
covered by all access drives and pavement, approved through the last site plan approved by
the Board where no change is proposed in terms of site access and circulation. Where no site
plan was previously approved, expansion of parking as an administrative approval is limited to
one such approval; or
Revisions to the landscaping or lighting plan approved by the Board.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION
Subdivisions that shall be administered by the Zoning Officer with an informal review by the
Planning Commission Chair and Chairman of the Board which conform to one of the following
criteria:
The consolidation or combination of two or more lots of record.
A subdivision involving a lot line change between two existing lots that will result in only two
lots, where all lots lie within the same zoning district, and where resulting lots conform to the
requirements of Chapter 300, Zoning, in terms of minimum lot size and setbacks.
The subdivision of dwelling unit lots relating to a condominium arrangement, the finalization of
which relies upon as-built surveys and results in no material change, wherein the existing plan
was granted final subdivision approval under this chapter.
ADVISORY
A meeting, as requested by an individual who intends to act as an applicant for subdivision or land
development either with the Zoning Officer and applicable staff, or with the Planning Commission
at a publicly advertised meeting, wherein the Zoning Officer or the Commission offer verbal
commentary on design principles and proposals presented by the potential applicant.
ALLEGHENY COUNTY OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The designated planning agency of Allegheny County.
ALLEY
A service road that provides secondary means of through access to lots.
AMENITIES BONDS
Financial security required by this chapter for private improvements.
APPLICANT
An individual bearing a proprietary interest in a particular site, who makes formal application for a
subdivision or land development, in accordance with this chapter.
APPROVAL WITH CONDITIONS
An approval granted with conditions found by the Board to represent the minimal conditions
necessary and reasonable to ensure the objectives and standards of this chapter are met in the
approval of the related plan, as accepted by the applicant in accordance with this chapter.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT)
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 236/411
Traffic volume calculated in accordance with the most recent edition of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual.
BOARD
The Board of Commissioners of North Versailles Township.
BUILDING
A structure having a roof intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons,
animals or property; or a combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and
a roof, including all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation, storage, or
commercial use, whether defined as accessory or principal structures.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
Measured along the center lines of the intersecting streets, where L equals the distance along the
center line of the primary through street, measured from its intersection with the center line of the
secondary intersecting street, to an approaching vehicle on the primary street and on the
secondary intersecting street, from a point at least 20 feet back from the edge of the pavement of
the primary through-street, which is 3.5 feet above the surface of the pavement.
DEEMED APPROVAL
An approval automatically given where the Board fails to meet specified timelines, absent a waiver
from the applicant, as stated herein.
DUPLEX
A use where two dwelling units are contained in and constitute the sole principal uses of one
building and which are arranged such that the uses possess separate exterior entrances and
where the stories occupied are arranged adjacent to and not above or below the other dwelling
unit.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
Areas of steep slopes, wetlands, and floodplains.
FARM BUILDING
Any structure which houses or is used in connection with and as an accessory to an agricultural
operation and where no access to the general public is permitted in connection with a retail or
service-related business.
FLAG LOT
Any lot approved pursuant to the standards of Chapter 300, Zoning, the sole access of which is
provided by a strip of land under the same fee simple ownership as the remainder of the lot, where
the strip of land accessed provides less than the required street frontage in the district in which the
lot is situated.
GEOTECHNICAL REPORT
A report prepared by a qualified engineer demonstrating the stability of soils, mining overburden,
slopes, and other applicable areas, and the minimum measures necessary to demonstrate longterm
stability and integrity of proposed buildings or paved areas constructed thereon.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLANDS
Any area defined as a wetland by the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional
Wetlands.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively; a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure, or the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 237/411
A.
B.
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
LOT(S) OF RECORD
A lot separately designated as a lot, tract, parcel or otherwise on a plat of subdivision duly
recorded pursuant to statute or referred to in a deed or described by metes and bounds in a deed
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County.
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any land development which proposes the improvement of a lot comprised of 1,500 or more
square feet of lot coverage by building or structure, 1,500 or more square of paving, or a
combination of lot coverage by building or structure and paving that equals or exceeds 1,500
square feet, excepting administrative and revised land developments.
MAJOR PLANS
Major land developments and major subdivisions as defined herein.
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
Any proposed subdivision bearing more than five lots or that which proposes the construction of a
street intended to provide primary access to any one of said lots, excepting administrative
subdivisions.
MATERIAL CHANGE
A proposed movement of lot line location where:
The areas of any respective lot change by more than 10%; or
The movement results in or maintains a nonconformity or violation of Chapter 300, Zoning,
namely in terms of setbacks and lot area.
MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any land development which proposes the improvement of a lot comprised of less than 1,500
square feet of lot coverage by building or structure, or less than 1,500 square feet of paving, or a
combination of lot coverage by building or structure and paving which totals less than 1,500
square feet, excepting administrative and revised land developments.
MINOR PLAN
Minor land developments and minor subdivisions as defined herein.
MINOR SUBDIVISION
Any proposed subdivision bearing less than or five lots which does not propose the construction of
a street intended to provide primary access to any one of said lots, excepting administrative
subdivisions.
MPC
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended by
Act 170 of 1988, and as subsequently amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MULTIFAMILY
Any arrangement of attached dwelling units, excepting duplexes.
OFFICIAL MAP
A map adopted by the Board, pursuant to Article IV of the MPC.[1]
PARKING LOT
Any area utilized for the storage or parking of vehicles, on a short- or long-term basis.
PLANNING COMMISSION
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 238/411
A.
B.
C.
The Planning Commission of North Versailles Township, Allegheny County; and where
subdivisions or land developments submitted are of regional significance and impact as defined by
cooperative agreement with adjoining municipalities party to a multimunicipal Comprehensive
Plan. "Planning Commission" shall also mean a joint planning commission (in addition to the North
Versailles Planning Commission) established by ordinance, resolution and/or cooperative
agreement, where such exists.
PLANTINGS, LOW-LEVEL
Plantings consisting of shrubs and any other plant species that is greater than two feet in height at
planting and less than six feet in height at planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be
consistent with the American Standards for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association
of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
A building or structure housing the primary uses integral to an establishment or establishments on
a property or planned group of nonresidential uses.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS
Any improvements required by this chapter and intended to be privately held and maintained,
wherein no dedication to the Township is anticipated, including but not limited to landscaping,
parking lots, access drives, lighting, and private streets.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS
Persons who provide expert or professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects,
attorneys, certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects
or planners.
PROPRIETARY INTEREST
The holding of fee simple title via deed to a property, short certificate, or of any contract, whether
subject to any condition or not, or a certificate of title or other legal document whereby a person
shall have the legal or equitable rights of the landowner in all matters relating to an application
filed under this chapter, where title or equitable title is held in the entirety or where joint tenants or
tenants in common convey such title.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Those improvements, as required by this chapter, which are intended to be dedicated to, owned,
and maintained by the Township.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL FORESTER
A person who has a B.S. degree from a four-year school of forestry accredited by the Society of
American Foresters and a member in good standing of the American Forestry Association.
REVISED LAND DEVELOPMENT
Land development applications submitted less than one calendar year after the date on which the
initial occupancy certificate was issued by the Township where said occupancy directly followed
the Board approval of a land development on the respective lot or lots where:
Additions that are 1,000 square feet or less than or equal to 10% of the principal structure
shown on the most recent site plan approved by the Board, whichever is less. Where no such
plan has been approved, said addition shall be limited to one administrative approval; or
Accessory buildings not expressly exempt from site plan or land development requirements
that are equal to or less than 10% of the principal structure, not excepting instances where
additional accessory buildings were constructed or exist that were not approved by the Board
through a standard approval process; or
Expansion of parking that is 10% or less than the parking, inclusive of the surface area
covered by all access drives and pavement, approved through the last site plan approved by
the Board where no change is proposed in terms of site access and circulation. Where no site
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 239/411
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
plan was previously approved, expansion of parking as an administrative approval is limited to
one such approval; or
Revisions to the landscaping or lighting plan approved by the Board.
SITE
The area comprised of all existing parcels subject to a proposed subdivision, the phase as shown
on an approved preliminary plan within five years of said approval, or the area to be disturbed as
part of a proposed land development.
SKETCH PLAN
The plan submitted for purposes of an advisory review, in a manner as outlined in this chapter.
STEEP SLOPES
Areas of existing topography where, in over a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, or where the
difference in elevation is over 20 feet, the slope equals or exceeds 25% from the top to bottom of
the break in grade.
STREET
A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a
means of vehicular travel, encompassing the following types:
ARTERIAL
A public street intended to carry a large volume of local and through traffic to or from collector
streets and expressways with an ADT greater than 3,000.
COLLECTOR
A street that collects and distributes traffic between local access and arterial streets. Such
streets provide intraregional connections between residential areas and shopping areas,
employment centers and other local traffic generators.
RESIDENTIAL
One thousand to 3,000 ADT.
NONRESIDENTIAL
Eight hundred to 3,000 ADT.
MINOR COLLECTOR
A street that provides direct access to lots; and conveys traffic from local to collector streets.
RESIDENTIAL
Five hundred to 1,000 ADT.
NONRESIDENTIAL
Zero to 800 ADT.
CUL-DE-SAC
A street with a single means of ingress and egress and a turnaround.
LOCAL
A street that provides access to abutting property and connections to collector streets with an
ACT up to 500.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET
A service street that runs parallel to a higher-order street and provides access to abutting
properties and separation from through traffic.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including buildings and
parking, whether defined as accessory or principal structures.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 240/411
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
SUBDIVISION
The consolidation of two or more lots or the division or resubdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the "subdivision" by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.
TREES, LARGE
Trees whose height will ultimately exceed 40 feet, which have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches
diameter measured at 4.5 feet above natural grade at the time of planting.
TREES, MEDIUM
Trees with an ultimate height of 25 to 40 feet, which have a minimum caliper of 2.0 inches
diameter measured at 4.5 feet above natural grade at the time of planting.
TREES, SMALL
Those trees whose ultimate height will not exceed 25 feet, which have a minimum caliper of 1.5
inches diameter measured at 4.5 feet above natural grade at the time of planting.
WOODLANDS
An area of trees whose total combined canopy covers one acre or more, in which at least 70% of
the canopy trees have a DBH of 2.5 inches or more.
ZONING ORDINANCE
Chapter 300, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North Versailles, as adopted by the Board
and amended from time to time.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
Article III. Exemptions and Exclusions
§ 265-301. Land development exemptions.
The following land developments are expressly exempted from compliance with this chapter:
The conversion of an existing single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling into not more than
three residential dwelling units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
The addition of any accessory structure on a lot or lots subordinate to any existing residential
principal building.
Farm buildings.
Any change of use of an existing structure that results in a maintenance or reduction of
existing density, required parking or traffic generation and which does not require a
conditional use.
The addition of a commercial or nonresidential accessory structure less than or equal to 1,000
square feet wherein such structure exceeding 1,000 square feet shall be considered a
principal structure by this chapter.
Those land developments which qualify as administrative approvals shall be subject to the
express requirements of such approvals, and accordingly exempted from approval requirements
otherwise applicable or imposed by this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 241/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
§ 265-302. Subdivisions.
While no subdivision, as defined herein, is expressly exempted from the provisions of this chapter,
those subdivisions which qualify as administrative approvals are accordingly exempted from approval
requirements otherwise applicable or imposed by this chapter.
Article IV. Administrative, Revised and Minor Plan Approval
Processes
§ 265-400. Administrative subdivisions and administrative land
developments.
Application requirements. The applicant shall submit the following:
All items as specified and required by Article VI of this chapter.
Revised amenities or performance financial security, where revisions to previous approvals
warrant an increase in said financial security, as determined by the Township Engineer.
All plans and plats otherwise required shall be limited to those specific plans and locations
proposed for revision, where amendments to previously approved final land developments
and subdivisions are proposed.
Application acceptance, review, and procedural actions.
The Zoning Officer shall review the submitted application within 10 business or working days
of submittal. Where an application is found to be deficient by virtue of the submission of an
incomplete application or where the application proposes activities which violate any other
Township ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall return all submitted materials to the applicant,
citing the basis for said deficiencies.
The Zoning Officer shall, within five business or working days of submission, forward said
plans along with a recommendation to the Chairman of the Planning Commission and
Chairman of the Board. In the event that either party presents a reasonable written
disagreement, within five days of receipt, with Zoning Officer's recommendation, the plan shall
be reviewed at the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission to be processed in the
same manner as a minor plan.
The Zoning Officer shall submit a copy of the application to the Allegheny County Office of
Economic Development for review and shall not act upon the plan until comments are
received or 30 days have lapsed since the submittal of the plan to the county planning
agency. Additionally, where any similar review is required by an adjoining municipality, as
required by any intergovernmental cooperative or implementation agreement entered into by
the Township, said municipality shall be afforded the same review period required for the
county.
In the event of a denial by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Officer shall, within 15 days of the
denial, present a written letter to the applicant informing him of said denial along with express
deficiencies found and related ordinance citations, within 90 days of application submittal,
unless waived by the applicant in writing. Failure to act within the timeline specified shall
result in a deemed approval.
In the event of approval or an approval with conditions, the Zoning Officer shall direct the
signatures of the Municipal Engineer, Chairman of the Planning Commission, and Chairman
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 242/411
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
of the Board, in addition to his own signature to the plat. The date on which all signatures
have been received shall constitute the approval date. Said approval shall occur within 90
days of application submittal, unless waived by the applicant in writing. The Zoning Officer
shall provide the applicant written notice of the approval within 15 days of said approval and
may attach reasonable conditions as cited in his previous correspondence to the Chairs.
Administrative approvals are subject to all post-approval requirements as cited in Article VIII.
Any alteration to a recorded developer's agreement or subdivision plat shall be recorded at
the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of approval or shall lose its effect of
approval.
§ 265-401. Revised land development plans.
Application requirements. The applicant shall submit the following:
All items as specified and required by Article VI of this chapter.
Revised amenities or performance bonds, where revisions to previous approvals warrant an
increase in said bonds, as determined by the Township Engineer.
All plans and plats otherwise required shall be limited to those specific plans and locations
proposed for revision, where amendments to previously approved final land developments
and are proposed.
Application acceptance, review, and procedural actions.
The Zoning Officer shall review the submitted application within 10 business or working days
of submittal. Where an application is found to be deficient by virtue of the submission of an
incomplete application or where the application proposes activities which violate any other
Township ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall return all submitted materials to the applicant,
citing the basis for said deficiencies.
The Zoning Officer shall, within five business or working days of submission, forward said
plans along with a recommendation to the Chairman of the Planning Commission. In the
event that the Chairman provides a reasonable written disagreement, within five days of
receipt, with Zoning Officer's recommendation, the plan shall be reviewed at the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission to be processed in the same manner as a minor plan.
Otherwise the plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Commissioners.
The Zoning Officer shall submit copies of the application to the Allegheny County Office of
Economic Development for review and shall not act upon the plan until comments are
received or 30 days have lapsed since the submittal of the plan to the county planning
agency. Additionally, where any similar review is required by an adjoining municipality, as
required by any intergovernmental cooperative or implementation agreement entered into by
the Township, said municipality shall be afforded the same review period required for the
county.
In the event of a denial by the Board, the Zoning Officer shall, within 15 days of the denial,
present a written letter to the applicant informing him of said denial along with express
deficiencies found and related ordinance citations, within 90 days of application submittal,
unless waived by the applicant in writing. Failure to act within the timeline specified shall
result in a deemed approval.
In the event of approval by the Board, the Zoning Officer shall direct the signatures of the
Municipal Engineer, Chairman of the Planning Commission, and Chairman of the Board, in
addition to his own signature to the plat. The date on which all signatures have been received
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 243/411
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
shall constitute the approval date. Said approval shall occur within 90 days of application
submittal, unless waived by the applicant in writing. In approving a plan, the Board may attach
reasonable conditions. The Zoning Officer shall provide the applicant written notice of the
approval within 15 days of said approval and may attach reasonable conditions as cited in his
previous correspondence to the Chairs.
Revised land development plan approvals are subject to all post-approval requirements as
cited in Article VIII.
Any alteration to a recorded developer's agreement shall be recorded at the Allegheny
County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of approval or shall lose its effect of approval.
§ 265-402. Minor subdivisions and minor land developments.
Application requirements. The applicant shall submit the following:
All items as specified and required by Article VI of this chapter.
The Municipal Engineer, Zoning Officer, or Planning Commission may require the submittal of
additional items cited in § 265-606 for major subdivision and land development plans, where
said item or items are required to determine conformity with the standards of this and other
Township ordinances.
Application acceptance, review, and procedural actions.
The Zoning Officer shall review the submitted application within 10 business or working days
of submittal. Where an application is found to be deficient by virtue of the submission of an
incomplete application or where the application proposes activities which violate any other
Township ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall return all submitted materials to the applicant,
citing the basis for said deficiencies. Otherwise, the Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant
of application acceptance within 10 days of submittal. Said notification shall constitute of
official date of filing. The Zoning Officer shall forward the plan to the Allegheny County Office
of Economic Development for review and comment.
The Zoning Officer shall present the application to the Planning Commission at their next
regular meeting held within 15 days of application filing. The Planning Commission shall
recommend denial of the plan, approval, or approval with conditions to the Board of
Commissioners.
The Board shall not act on the plan until a recommendation from the Planning Commission is
received or until 60 days lapse from the first regular meeting of the Commission at which the
plan was initially reviewed.
The Board shall not act on the plan until recommendations are received from the Allegheny
County Office of Economic Development or until 30 days have lapsed since the plan's
submittal to the county. Additionally, where any similar review is required by an adjoining
municipality, as required by any intergovernmental cooperative or implementation agreement
entered into by the Township, said municipality shall be afforded the same review period
required for the county.
The Board, within 90 days of the official date of filing or within 120 days of the date on which
the application was submitted, in the event that a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission does not occur within 30 days of submittal, shall act to deny, approve, or
approve with conditions. The Board may require the execution of a developer's agreement in
accordance with § 265-803 of this chapter where the Board finds that such an agreement is
warranted in relation to other conditions placed and the scale or impact of the improvements
proposed. Failure to act within the stated timelines shall result in a deemed approval.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 244/411
(6)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Minor plan approvals are subject to all post-approval requirements as cited in Article VIII.
§ 265-403. Changes in ordinances.
The applications cited within this article shall be afforded the protections granted by Section 508 of the
Municipalities Planning Code[1] and in § 265-800 of this chapter, wherein approval of the above
applications constitutes both a preliminary and final approval. Where an applicant fails to record an
agreement or plan as required by this chapter and the effect of final approval is lost accordingly, the
effect of preliminary approval, granted on the approval date, shall remain.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
Article V. Preliminary and Final Plan Approval Process
§ 265-500. Applicability.
The following requirements relate to all major subdivision and land development plans.
§ 265-501. Approval stages.
All major plans shall require preliminary and final approval, wherein preliminary approval shall precede
the acceptance or approval of a final plan application involving land related thereto.
§ 265-502. Simultaneous preliminary and final approval.
An applicant may request simultaneous preliminary and final plan approval where no phases are
denoted on a plan, and where all required application materials are submitted for each. The application
shall be treated as one approval, wherein denial, approval, or approval with conditions shall apply to
the preliminary and final approval.
§ 265-503. Sketch plans.
The applicant for any major plan approval may request one advisory meeting with the Planning
Commission or Zoning Officer. The applicant shall provide all items required by Article VI of this
chapter.
No fees shall be assessed to the applicant for consideration of the sketch plan.
Where a meeting with the Planning Commission is requested, and upon submission of all required
items, the Zoning Officer shall notify the Planning Commission Chair, who shall make a good-faith
effort to place the item for consideration on the next available regular Planning Commission
Agenda.
The submission of an advisory meeting request shall not constitute submission of an application
for subdivision or land development. Additionally, written or verbal communication provided by the
Zoning Officer or Planning Commission shall be considered advisory in nature and subject to the
evaluation of preliminary and final approval reviews. Therefore, no deemed approval may occur in
connection with the review or discussion of an advisory meeting request.
§ 265-504. Preliminary and final approval.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 245/411
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
The applicant shall submit all items as specified and required by Article VI of this chapter.
For preliminary plans, the Municipal Engineer, Zoning Officer, or Planning Commission may
require the submittal of additional items cited in § 265-607 for final plans, where said item or items
are required to determine conformity with the standards of this chapter and other Township
ordinances.
Application acceptance, review, and procedural actions.
The Zoning Officer shall review the submitted application within 10 business or working days
of submittal. Where an application is found to be deficient by virtue of the submission of an
incomplete application or where the application proposes activities which violate any other
Township ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall return all submitted materials to the applicant,
citing the basis for said deficiencies. Otherwise, the Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant
of application acceptance within 10 days of submittal. Said notification shall constitute the
official date of filing. The Zoning Officer shall forward the plan to the Allegheny County Office
of Economic Development for review and comment.
The Zoning Officer shall present the application to the Planning Commission at their next
regular meeting held within 15 days of application filing. The Planning Commission shall
recommend denial of the plan, approval, or approval with conditions to the Board of
Commissioners.
The Board shall not act on the plan until a recommendation from the Planning Commission is
received or until 60 days lapse from the first regular meeting of the Commission at which the
plan was initially reviewed.
The Board shall not act on the plan until recommendations are received from the Allegheny
County Office of Economic Development or until 30 days have lapsed since the plan's
submittal to the county. Additionally, where any similar review is required by an adjoining
municipality, as required by any intergovernmental cooperative or implementation agreement
entered into by the Township, said municipality shall be afforded the same review period
required for the county.
The Board, within 90 days of the official date of filing or within 120 days of the date on which
the application was submitted, in the event that a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission does not occur within 30 days of submittal, shall act to deny, approve, or
approve with conditions. Failure to act within the stated timelines, unless waived in writing by
the applicant, shall result in a deemed approval.
Where approval or approval with conditions takes place, the Board shall acknowledge and
affirm the required amount of performance bonding associated therewith.
Major plan approvals are subject to all post-approval requirements as cited in Article VIII.
Article VI. Application Submission Requirements
§ 265-600. Minimum requirements.
The requirements of this article shall represent the minimum required for the acceptance and review of
the respective applications cited herein.
§ 265-601. Licensed surveyors.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 246/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
J.
All surveys, plats, and plans shall be prepared by a professional surveyor licensed in Pennsylvania or
by a landscape architect in cases authorized by Section 2 of the Act of January 24, 1966 (1965 P.L.
1527, No. 535), known as the "Landscape Architects' Registration Law."[1]
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 901 et seq.
§ 265-602. Standard submission items.
The following items shall be required for all subdivision and land development applications:
Completed and signed application forms as provided by the Township. All owners shall sign the
application forms.
Agent authorization form, where the applicant's engineer or surveyor plans to act as the
representative of the applicant(s) at public meetings.
Proof of proprietary interest.
Deeds of the property or properties party to the application.
Fees and escrow funds as specified and required by this chapter and municipal resolutions.
A list of all encumbrances and, if appearing on record, the book and page numbers.
A copy of all restrictions, covenants and limitations, if any, under which lots are to be sold.
Copies of applications for all state and federal permits required.
Each sheet of any plan set shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number
of sheets. Where there are four or more sheets, a key map on a scale sufficient to show their
relationship, shall be furnished on the first sheet of the plan. Where separate sets of construction
drawings are provided, a key shall reference the respective page numbers.
Plan requirements. An existing conditions survey showing:
The deed book volume and page of properties within the site.
The names, county tax identification numbers, and deed book volume and page of
surrounding property owners.
The zoning of parcels included and surrounding parcels.
The zoning district or districts on the site and zoning standards including minimum lot size, lot
coverage, and setbacks.
Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes
and seconds.
The plan shall include all existing buildings, structures, impervious surface areas, and sewage
and public water utility easements on and within 50 feet of the property.
Existing or proposed private sources of drinking water and septic systems on or within 50 feet
of the site or sites at which percolation tests were conducted.
All existing and proposed easements traversing the site, along with recording information or
instruments for recording, respectively.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 247/411
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(7)
(8)
(9)
K.
A location map inset showing streets and municipal boundary lines near the site, at a
minimum scale of 1:1,000.
A record plan or plat shall be required for all subdivisions and major land developments, and shall,
at a minimum, include the following:
The plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, or at an alternative scale
approved by the Township Engineer, on uniform sheets of paper.
Plans shall be drafted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets.
Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets.
Where there are four or more sheets, a key map on a scale sufficient to show their
relationship shall be furnished on the first sheet of the plat.
Any movement of lot lines shall show the original lot lines labeled as such and in a lighter line
type. The combination of lots of record shall be indicated by the inclusion of a land hook.
A title block on each sheet shall bear the name of the subdivision, the present zoning,
acreage, deed book volume and page, name of the owner, and name and address of the
surveyor.
Provisions for the following impressed seals:
The engineer or surveyor who prepared the plan.
The corporate seal, if the subdivider is a corporation.
The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer acknowledging the
owner's statement of adoption and dedication.
The North Versailles Township Seal.
The Township Engineer.
The following certifications with the sample language cited in the Allegheny County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Owner's adoption and certification.
Acknowledgement of the notary public.
Certification of title and concurrence of mortgagee, where applicable.
Surveyor's certification.
Township Engineer's certification.
Municipal declaration regarding the dedication of streets and related public
improvements, wherein the dedication imposes no responsibility for the Township to
accept or maintain said improvements.
Additionally, the signature blocks for the Board Chairman and the Planning Commission Chair
shall be provided along with statements alluding to the date of approval or the date upon
which all conditions of approval were met, whichever is approved by the Township.
All existing and proposed easements traversing the site, along with recording information or
instruments for recording, respectively.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 248/411
[1]
(10)
(11)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
B.
Where access to a state road is necessary, the plat shall include a notice that a highway
occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242,
No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law,"[1] before driveway access to a state highway is
permitted.
Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
The plat shall show all the bearings and distances of all parcel lines in metes and bounds and
shall indicate the size of each lot or parcel less than two acres in square feet or to the nearest
hundredth of an acre for parcels greater than two acres in size.
§ 265-603. Administrative subdivisions and administrative land
developments.
Five copies of all plan sheets and three copies of all application forms shall be submitted.
The application shall include references, recording information, or permit numbers of associated
subdivisions, land development approvals and subsequent occupancy permits granted.
Plan sheets submitted shall differentiate, by line type or character shading, existing versus
proposed amenities, including but not limited to landscaping, lighting, and parking.
§ 265-604. Revised land developments.
Twelve copies of all plan sheets and three copies of all application forms shall be submitted.
The application shall include references, recording information, or permit numbers of associated
subdivisions, land development approvals and subsequent occupancy permits granted.
Plan sheets submitted shall differentiate, by line type or character shading, existing, approved but
uninstalled, and proposed amenities, including but not limited to landscaping, lighting, and parking.
§ 265-605. Minor plans.
Fourteen copies of all plan sheets and three copies of all application forms shall be submitted.
All plan sheets produced in a legal or eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch-size paper, or in digital form
acceptable to the Township to facilitate reproduction of the plans.
A reproduction of the soils map for the site, from the Allegheny County Soils Survey.
A reproduction or inset of the site perimeter overlain with the applicable areas of the USGS
topography quad map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 520 feet or 1:6,250.
Access easements where secondary access or shared driveways are proposed.
§ 265-606. Preliminary subdivisions and land developments.
Applicant shall submit 14 copies of the following plans noted and three copies of reports.
An existing conditions plan pursuant to § 265-602J shall be submitted and shall include the
following additional elements:
Topography shown on five-foot contours.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 249/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
J.
Areas of steep slope shall be delineated, with areas of over 40% slope separately delineated.
Floodplains and floodways as denoted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
panel mapping.
Jurisdictional wetlands.
Woodlands, along with a general representation of the species, calipers, and types of trees
therein.
A proposed conditions plan pursuant to § 265-602J clearly labeled as "preliminary" shall be
submitted which may omit bearings and distances and shall include all the elements shown on the
existing conditions plan in a lighter shade or line type, along with following proposed elements:
Proposed lot and right-of-way lines drawn to scale.
Proposed street cartways.
Proposed street names.
Site distance information for all proposed intersections.
Proposed utility easements and stormwater facilities.
Lot sizes.
Preliminary grading and stormwater plans, showing sufficient demonstration of the plan's feasibility
in regards to local ordinances and any further information required by the Township Engineer
necessary to demonstrate such.
Traffic impact study when required by this chapter.
Subsurface information, namely the depths of underlying mines as denoted on the Pennsylvania
DEP Bureau of Mining and Reclamation mapping.
In residential subdivisions or land developments, required land area and parcels shown for open
space or an alternative written proposal including fee-in-lieu of such land.
Geotechnical report when required by this chapter.
Land developments shall include the following information:
Number of parking spaces and related table demonstrating compliance with zoning
standards.
Impervious surface coverage.
Building footprints and anticipated square footages.
Density of residential units, where applicable.
General parking lot and access drive design.
Delineation of all phases showing structures or lots, along with parking, proposed in each phase,
along with a timeline for final approval.
§ 265-607. Final subdivisions and land developments.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 250/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A record plat shall be submitted for all subdivisions.
A proposed timeline of public improvement construction shall be submitted.
Proposed covenants as they apply to this and other Township ordinances.
Estimates of all public improvements or private amenities shall be submitted prior to consideration
by the Board, giving sufficient time for the Township Engineer to review the estimates and make a
formal recommendation as to the amount of financial security to be posted.
A wetlands determination report for all sites which have hydric soils or soils with hydric inclusions
and, if applicable, a wetlands delineation report for all jurisdictional wetlands on the site and the
design techniques proposed to accommodate them.
A detailed grading and erosion and sedimentation plan.
A detailed stormwater plan.
Detailed street, access drive, and parking construction drawings showing typical street cross
sections, intersection details, and street profiles. Street profiles shall include complete vertical
curve information.
The Township Engineer may request additional information prior to final approval when such
information or details are required to demonstrate performance standards commensurate with this
and other applicable Township ordinances.
The type and location of landscaping along with a table demonstrating compliance with this
chapter and Chapter 300, Zoning.
Parking along with typical parking spaces, angles, and aisle widths. Arrows should be included to
show directional flow of traffic.
A detailed or final geotechnical report with recommendations, where applicable.
The percent of steep-slope areas altered by proposed construction.
Parcels designated as open space required for land dedication, along with proposed ownership
shall be shown on the record plat. All proposed recreational facilities shall include construction,
architectural, and cost estimates where construction of facilities are proposed in lieu of land or
fees.
Land developments shall include estimates of uses sufficient to determine parking along with
architectural elevations of structures and proposed square footages.
§ 265-608. Sketch plans.
Sketch plans shall include the following information, at a minimum:
USGS map of the proposed site overlaid with proposed access points.
A general description of uses proposed, along with a scaled drawing showing preliminary
arrangement of lots or structures.
A description of known environmental limitations, including slide prone soils, steep slopes,
wetlands, floodplains, and undermining.
Applications forms as required by the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 251/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Article VII. Fees
§ 265-700. Filing fee.
The Township may assess an application filing fee sufficient to cover administrative costs including
clerical labor, advertising, storage, hardcopy and digital communication, and other similar costs
necessitated by any certain class of application, commensurate with its scale. Such fees shall be
established by resolution or ordinance of the Board.
§ 265-701. Application review fees and escrow account.
An application review escrow deposit, in an amount that may be established by resolution of the
Board, shall be payable at the time of submission of the application to guarantee payment of the
estimated application review fees required by this article. The actual amount of the review fees in
excess of the escrow deposit shall be payable within 45 days of billing by the Township as an
interim itemized bill. Any monies remaining in the escrow account after all review fees have been
paid shall be returned to the applicant.
Application review fees shall include reasonable and necessary charges by the Township's
professional consultants, Township Engineer or by the Township Solicitor, to the extent permitted
by law, for review and report on the application to the Township. Such review fees shall be based
upon a schedule established from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the Board. Such
review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by
the Township Engineer or other professional consultants for similar service in the community, but
in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Township Engineer or other
professional consultants to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
The Township shall submit a final itemized bill or account statement no later than 15 days
following the denial, approval, or approval with conditions of a related plan. Any statement
submitted beyond that date shall be considered a supplemental invoice.
In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees, the applicant shall, within
45 days of the billing date, notify the Zoning Officer in writing that such fees are disputed, in which
case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
due to the applicant's request over disputed fees. Otherwise, no plan shall be released for
recording, related developer's agreement executed, or permits for any type of construction issued
until payment of the bill occurs.
In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of review fees which
are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township shall follow the procedure for
resolution of disputes as set forth below in § 265-702 of this chapter, provided that the
professionals resolving such dispute shall be of the same profession or discipline as the
consultants whose fees are being disputed.
§ 265-702. Inspection fees.
The Township shall require the reimbursement of expenses incurred in connection with the
inspection of public and private improvements, where the inspections represent that necessary to
ensure and verify the proper construction of said improvements in connection with Township
standards.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 252/411
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
The Board shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing the work performed in connection
with the inspection of improvements performed, identifying the person performing the services and
the time and date spent for each task. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, no later than 30
days after the date of transmittal of a bill for inspection services, notify the Township and the
Township Engineer that such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary
and shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged, in which case the Township
shall not delay or disapprove a request for release of financial security, a subdivision or land
development application or any approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
dispute of inspection expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within 30 days shall be a
waiver of the applicant's right to arbitration of that bill under this section.
Subsequent to the final release of financial security for completion of improvements for a
subdivision or land development, or any phase thereof, the Township Engineer shall submit to the
Board a bill for inspection services, specifically designated as a final bill. The final bill shall include
inspection fees incurred through the release of financial security.
If the Township Engineer and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within 45 days of the transmittal
of the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the applicant, to request the appointment of another
Township Engineer to serve as an arbitrator. The applicant and Township Engineer whose fees are
being challenged shall, by mutual agreement, appoint another engineer to review any bills the
applicant has disputed and which remain unresolved and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary. The arbitrator shall be of the same profession as the
Township Engineer whose fees are being challenged.
The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as the
arbitrator in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision no later than 50
days after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the arbitrator, the applicant or the
Township Engineer whose fees were challenged shall be required to pay any amounts necessary
to implement the decision within 60 days. In the event the Township has paid the Township
Engineer an amount in excess of the amount determined to be reasonable and necessary, the
Township Engineer shall within 60 days reimburse the excess payment.
In the event that the Township's Township Engineer and applicant cannot agree upon the arbitrator
to be appointed within 20 days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator, then, upon
application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial
district in which the Township is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the
senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such arbitrator, who, in that case, shall be neither the
Township's Township Engineer nor any Township Engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the preceding five years.
The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the review fee charged is sustained by the
arbitrator; otherwise it shall be divided equally between the parties. If the disputed fees are found
to be excessive by more than $5,000, the arbitrator shall have the discretion to assess the
arbitration fee in whole or in part against either the applicant or the Township Engineer. The Board
and the consultant whose fees are the subject of the dispute shall be parties to the proceeding.
Article VIII. Post-Approval Processes and Requirements
§ 265-800. Effect of preliminary approval.
Five-year rule. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, has been
approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 253/411
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the
approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be
counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a
preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the governing
chapters or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
Substantial completion rule. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension
thereof as may be granted by the governing body, no change of municipal ordinances or plan
enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of
the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or utility
location.
Schedule of work. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of improvements
beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary plat
delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the
applicant or before the anniversary of the preliminary plat approval until final plat approval of the
final section has been granted, and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of the governing body, in its discretion.
Failure to adhere to schedule. Failure of the landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to any and all
changes in zoning, subdivision and other governing ordinances enacted by the Township
subsequent to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
§ 265-801. Approval with conditions.
Where a plan is given an approval with conditions, the applicant shall provide a written acceptance of
said conditions within 30 days of the date on which the Township provided required notice of approval
to the applicant. Failure of the applicant to provide such acceptance within the aforesaid timeline shall
result in an automatic rescinding of the plan approval.
§ 265-802. Developer's agreement.
All major plans shall, upon final approval, require the execution of a developer's agreement, prepared
by or under the direction of the Township Solicitor, and at a minimum containing the following
information:
All recording information relating to the subject site.
Inclusion of approved land development plans as an attachment, where applicable.
All conditions applied by the Board.
Timeline of development related and reference to the financial security posted, as remedy to the
developer's failure to adhere to said timeline and improvements.
Assignment of the agreement's obligations to the developer's heirs and assigns.
Seal by a notary public, the Township, and the developer's corporation, where one exists.
Reference to the certificate of completion required by this chapter.
Requirement that covenants shall be recorded prior to the issuance of building permits on the site.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 254/411
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The agreement shall be produced in a format recordable with the Allegheny County Recorder of
Deeds and may be recorded at the discretion of either party, at that party's expense.
§ 265-803. Financial security or performance bond.
No plat or developer's agreement shall be signed or released, nor shall any permit be issued for
related subdivisions or land developments, unless all public and private improvements are
installed or until financial security is provided as follows.
The developer may post a performance bond with a federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending or other
forms of financial security acceptable to the Township. Such other forms shall be posted with a
bonding company or federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to
conduct such business within the commonwealth.
The performance bond shall guarantee construction prior to a date also specified in the
developer's agreement and through the plan approval. The bond shall renew or guarantee the
availability of funds to the Township at least until 30 days beyond said date.
The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required improvements
shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements that have been completed and
the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the
90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of
completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%. The developer
shall post any additional security in accordance with this section.
The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by
a professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such engineer to
be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
municipal engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the
final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.
If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date of posting of
the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from
posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the
required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the above bidding procedure.
In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Township may authorize
submission of final plats by section or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for
the protection of any finally approved section of the development.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Township to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 255/411
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing
the work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the Township, and the Township shall
have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the municipal engineer to certify,
in writing, to the Township that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
competed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification the Township shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
municipal engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or, if the Township
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Township shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested. The Township may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
§ 265-804. Release of recordable plat.
The developer shall submit two recordable Mylars to the Township for the application of all
signatures and seals required, in a form as approved by the Board at final plan approval.
Upon the completion of conditions specified in the approval, posting of required bonding or
construction of improvements, and execution of the developer's agreement, the Township may
affix all signatures to a plat. In the case where a recordable plat is signed, the Township shall
require the deposit of an escrow to be released upon the delivery of a recorded Mylar to the
Township. The escrow shall be determined by resolution or ordinance and shall be sufficient to
cover the costs of obtaining a Mylar copy of the recorded document.
§ 265-805. Release of performance bond.
When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
developer shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of
the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The
Township shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report, in writing, with the Township, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the
developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after
receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board; said report shall
be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part,
and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such rejection.
The Board, based upon the Township Engineer's report, shall take action to approve or reject, in
whole in or in part, the aforesaid improvements and shall notify the developer within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered mail of the Board's action with
relation thereto.
Failure of the Board to act within the aforementioned timeline shall constitute a deemed approval
of the improvements.
The Township shall require the posting of a maintenance bond for all public improvements,
including recreational equipment, to be dedicated to the Township. The bond shall equal 15% of
the accepted cost of construction accepted by the Township Engineer and developer and
approved by the Board at final approval and shall be posted for a period of 18 months from the
date of acceptance of said improvements. The bond or bonds shall be posted prior to the
acceptance of any related public improvements.
§ 265-806. Release of amenities bonds.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 256/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
Where private improvements, excepting streets, are approved, including but not limited to
landscaping and private recreational facilities, the developer may separately post an amenities
bond for the private improvements in the same manner and under the same criteria, requirements,
and dispute resolution options afforded public improvements, outlined in § 265-804.
Release of amenities bonds. The developer shall follow all procedures outlined in § 265-804.
The Board, through the adoption of this chapter, authorizes the Township Engineer to finally
approve the release of said bonds. The Engineer shall provide a report in accordance with the
timelines outlined in § 265-804, except that where the report does not contain a final decision, said
decision shall be mailed to the developer via certified or registered mail within 15 days of the
mailing of said report.
§ 265-807. Rights of developer.
Nothing in this article, however, shall be construed to limit the developer's right to contest or question,
by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board or the Township Engineer.
§ 265-808. Certificate of completion.
All land developments shall require a certificate of completion prior to the issuance of occupancy
permits for establishment or dwelling units therein.
The developer shall submit a formal request, in writing, to the Township Manager.
The Manager shall direct the Zoning Officer and Township Engineer to review the completeness of
all improvements related thereto and the fulfillment of any outstanding conditions imposed through
the Board's conditional approval.
Final acceptance of public improvements and private amenities shall occur prior to the issuance of
a certificate of completion.
The Manager, based upon the reports of the Zoning Officer and Township Engineer, shall issue or
deny the issuance of the certificate of completion within 20 days of the submitted request.
§ 265-809. As-built drawings.
Upon completion of the public and/or private improvements in a plan, as-built plans and profiles of
the public and/or private improvements, as constructed, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer by
the developer within 10 days of the mailing of a the formal remittance accepting the construction of
public or private improvements. A sepia and print of each as-built drawing for public improvements
shall be submitted. As-built plans and profiles shall be marked "as-built" and shall contain the final
grade of all sanitary and storm sewers and appurtenances.
As-built drawings shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of completion or the
Board's acceptance, by ordinance, of public streets or recreational facilities.
Article IX. Design and Construction Standards
§ 265-900. Preliminary plan phasing.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 257/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
F.
G.
H.
I.
Twenty-five-percent requirement. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development,
except for the last phase, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
depicted on the preliminary plan. Provided that the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or
violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance with the
landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the various sections, then the
protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat within
five years of the preliminary plat approval or the aforesaid schedule shall apply. For any section or
sections beyond the initial section in which the required improvements have not been substantially
completed within said five-year period, the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term or
terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for each section.
§ 265-901. Lot, block and building location design standards.
Lots shall be designed in a manner which accommodates driveway access from a street
commensurate with the requirements of this chapter without excessive grading accomplished by a
driveway not exceeding 10% of elevation with reasonable transition areas thereto from the street
to the proposed building or structure.
Lots shall be designed in a manner which permits a reasonable building area, determined by the
setbacks and related zoning requirements of the district in which the lot lies, outside of existing
steep slopes.
No block shall be longer than 2,000 feet nor less than 500 feet, except in unusual circumstances
or where comparable levels of safety are assured. Where a loop street exists, the street or block
length shall bear a minimum of 500 feet and a maximum of 4,000 feet, where the two-thousandfoot
maximum is measured from each intersection.
Where a subdivision adjoins a major highway the greater dimension of the block shall front along
such major highway to minimize the number of ingress or egress.
Lots shall be so designed that access to said lots is made to the furthest extent possible, in
consideration of street construction and design standards, through the natural or existing grades
and topography.
Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in any designated
floodplain district may be platted for development with the provision that the developer construct
all buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other laws
and ordinances regulating such development.[1]
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 154, Flood Damage Prevention.
Proposed lots shall bear a reasonable building area in consideration of disturbance limits placed
upon areas of steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, and watercourses.
Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or accommodation shall not be
permitted in any designated floodway district. Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the
floodway district if the sites or dwelling units are elevated up to the regulatory flood elevation. If fill
is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend out laterally for a distance of at
least 15 feet beyond the limits of the proposed structures.
Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses shall also not be permitted
in any designated flood district. Also, such sites for structures or buildings outside the floodway
shall be protected as provided for above. However, the Township may allow the subdivision and/or
development of areas or sites for commercial and industrial uses at an elevation below the
regulatory flood elevation if the developer otherwise protects the area to that height or assures
that the buildings or structures will be floodproofed at least up to that height.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 258/411
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
No structure, street, access drive, or parking facility shall be constructed in a manner which
disturbs areas of steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains, and watercourses, other than in a manner
expressly permitted by this chapter.
Through lots, namely in residential areas, shall be discouraged.
Pedestrian easements within a ten-foot easement may be required by the Board of
Commissioners for pedestrian circulation through blocks of over 800 feet in length and shall be
integrated into open space areas, where applicable. The Board may require improvement of said
area as sidewalks according to Township specifications.
Flag lots. Flag lots are permitted under the following circumstances:
One flag lot is permitted per existing or proposed block.
The strip accessing the portion of the lot, the width of which is less than the minimum lot width
at the building line, shall not extend more than 500 feet from the right-of-way from which it is
accessed.
The access strip, as described, shall be subject to all site distance requirements otherwise
applicable to the respective type of access proposed.
The net area of the lot, excluding the access strip, shall meet the minimum lot size
requirements within the respective district as imposed by Chapter 300, Zoning.
§ 265-902. General street design and construction standards.
The arrangement of streets shall be in compliance with the Township's Official Map, where said
map exists.
In general all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets and shall compose
a convenient system to insure circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, with exception that
local streets shall be laid out to include the use of loop and cul-de-sac streets, such that their use
by through traffic will be discouraged.
All streets shall be graded to the full right-of-way width thereof to grades established by the plan.
All fills shall be thoroughly compacted by approved methods to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer and completely settled before any paving is placed thereon.
Where in the judgment of the Township Engineer pipe and/or stone underdrains are required, the
developer shall construct such underdrains under the direction of the Township Engineer.
Streets, including access drives and alleys, shall have a grade not to exceed 7% for a distance
within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of any intersecting street.
Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such
intersection shall be designed with care for safety, and suitable curbs, barriers, signs and other
devices in accordance with PennDOT standards may be required.
Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite one
another or else shall have a minimum offset of 150 feet between the center lines of said opposite
streets.
Where a proposed development abuts or encompasses an existing or proposed collector or
arterial street, marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with buffer yards, or deep lots with
rear service alleys may be required in order to protect properties and provide separation of
through and local traffic.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 259/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
Major street standards. All land developments and subdivisions bearing frontage on State Route
30 shall be limited to one access per the parcel existing at the time of approval, in recognition of
the following standards.
Access drives or streets proposed within 400 feet of existing streets and access drives shall
be located the greatest distance from said intersections given site distance requirements
relating to the proposed access, greatest distance possible from public street intersections,
and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation highway occupancy permit requirements.
In cases where a subdivision of a parcel bearing frontage on Route 30 is proposed, the
applicant shall provide an access easement, in consideration of all standards outlined in this
chapter, which demonstrates one point of access and provides for a marginal access street to
all parcels involved.
The Board may require similar easements and access limitations on other arterials within the
Township based upon findings of required traffic studies, known safety issues and accident
histories, the Official Map, and the reasonable ability to utilize existing marginal access
streets.
Private street maintenance. Where private streets are proposed, maintenance shall be
demonstrated through homeowner's or condominium association declaration documents or
covenants in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor as a means of providing maintenance of
the streets as proposed and approved, including winter maintenance. Where no such association
is proposed, namely in minor plans, a note shall be affixed to the final plat giving notice to all
owners of lots within the plan that each shall share equitably in the aforesaid maintenance.
Association documents, as required, shall be recorded with the final plat.
Where the grade of the street is above or below the grade of the adjacent land, walls or slopes
shall be constructed in a manner satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners and shall be
sufficient to support the street or adjacent lands, as may be the case. Such walls or slopes shall
be outside the required right-of-way, except that slopes may extend not more than five feet in the
right-of-way, with the prior written approval of the Board of Commissioners.
Guide rails shall be required by the Township Engineer where PennDOT standards require the
installation of guide rails or where other compelling safety factors exist.
Street shoulders and all filled areas within street right-of-way shall be constructed with suitable
materials from roadway or structure excavation supplemented by additional suitable material, if
directed from borrowed excavation; the entire fill area shall be uniformly and thoroughly
compacted to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer and shall be performed in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications Form 408. Embankments at the
sides of streets and cross sections of drainage ditches shall not exceed a maximum slope of one
foot vertically to two feet horizontally in a cut section and one foot vertically to two feet horizontally
in a fill section; shoulders shall slope upward from the back of the curb a distance of seven feet at
approximately 1.5 inches per foot but not exceeding 12 inches. On low side lots one inch per foot
for seven feet shall slope downwards from the back of the curbs.
All streets shall be constructed on a prepared subgrade conforming to Section 210 of the
publication of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, Form 408,
Specifications (latest edition).
Before any paving, placing of base material or finish grading of subgrade is performed in a new
plan of lots, all underground utilities within the right-of-way should be in place and properly
backfilled. "Utilities" includes water and gas lines and house connections laid in trenches under
the pavement; manholes, storm sewers, catch basins; subgrade drains; and any other utility line
laid in a trench or located under the pavement. "Utilities" does not include those lines which are
jacked or drilled under the pavement. "Utilities" does not include those water and gas house
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 260/411
P.
Q.
R.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
connections and those sewer laterals and house connections which do not cross under the
pavement.
Generally, all private streets shall be held to the same standards as public streets.
Deceleration, turning or merging lanes maybe required by the Township along existing and
proposed collector or arterial roads.
A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the end of dead-end streets which are intended to be
extended as through streets in the future. If the length of a dead-end street exceeds the depth of
one lot, the temporary turnaround shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and a minimum
cartway radius of 25 feet, and its use shall be guaranteed to the public.
§ 265-903. Street curb radii.
Street curb radii shall be as follows:
Twenty-five feet for local and collector street intersections with collector streets, other local streets,
and alleys.
Up to 50 feet for arterials streets and streets intersecting arterial streets, depending upon
projected trips and overall proposed functionality as evaluated by the Township Engineer.
§ 265-904. Clear sight triangle requirements.
Minimum values for "L" are as follows:
Arterial roads: L = 500 feet.
Collector streets: L = 300 feet.
Minor collector streets: L = 200 feet.
Local streets and access drives: L = 200 feet.
No plantings or structures exceeding 30 inches in height shall be permitted in the clear sight
triangle. A public right-of-entry shall be reserved for the purpose of removing any object that
obstructs the clear sight triangle and so dedicated by separate instrument or on the recorded plat.
§ 265-905. Design speeds.
Design speeds shall be as follows:
Arterial roads: 50 mph.
Collector streets: 35 mph.
Minor collector streets: 25 mph.
Local streets: 15 to 20 mph.
§ 265-906. Street grades.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 261/411
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
The entire width of the right-of-way of each street in a proposed subdivision shall be graded,
except where areas of steep slope or landslide prone soils are unavoidably present within the
right-of-way.
Minimum permitted street grade for all streets shall be 1%.
Maximum street grades, other than due allowance for vertical curves, shall be as follows:
Arterial roads: 6%.
Collector streets: 8%.
Minor collector streets, nonresidential: 10%.
Minor collector and local streets, residential: 12%.
Street grades shall be measured along the center line of the street.
Center-line grade on the head of a cul-de-sac or hammerhead shall not exceed 5%.
§ 265-907. Street alignment.
Minimum safe stopping sight distances on all vertical and horizontal curves shall as follows:
Twenty miles per hour: 110 feet.
Twenty-five miles per hour: 180 feet.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Thirty-five miles per hour: 250 feet.
Minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
Arterial roads: 700 feet.
Collector streets: 350 feet.
Minor collector streets: 200 feet.
Local streets: 100 feet.
For other than local streets, a minimum tangent of 100 feet between reverse curves shall be
provided. For local streets a lesser tangent may be acceptable, provided safe stopping distances
are maintained as per Subsection A. Broken-back curves shall be avoided; however, when they
must be used, a minimum tangent of 150 feet shall be provided.
Vertical curves shall be provided for all changes in grade exceeding 1%. For each 1% of algebraic
difference between tangent grades over 3%, at least 15 feet of vertical curve length shall be
provided. Minimum vertical curve lengths shall be as follows:
Arterial roads: 150 feet.
Collector streets: 100 feet.
Local streets, residential: 50 feet.
Intersections.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 262/411
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
The angle of intersecting streets shall be as close to 90° as possible.
No streets shall intersect at an angle less than 60°.
Distance between intersections shall be as follows:
Arterial roads: 800 feet.
Collector streets: 300 feet.
Local streets: 150 feet.
§ 265-908. Right-of-way requirements.
Fifty feet of right-of-way is required for all streets.
The Board may require additional right-of-way where necessary for the installation of utilities and
lanes required by this chapter and PennDOT standards.
§ 265-909. Alley standards.
Alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way of 20 feet and a minimum cartway of 16 feet.
Where necessary, a radius shall be provided at the alley intersection, sufficient to accommodate
any large vehicles that may be expected to use the alley.
§ 265-910. Cul-de-sac standards.
The following standards shall supersede or withstand those standards otherwise applied within
this chapter.
Culs-de-sac shall have a right-of-way width of no less than 32 feet and shall have provision at the
dead-end for a turnaround. The turnaround shall be either a circle with a diameter of at least 80
feet or a tee, the arms of which shall extend at least 15 feet on each side beyond the normal rightof-
way width. No street grade shall be steeper than 10%.
Culs-de-sac may end in a turnaround which has a paved cartway not less than 20 feet in width,
surrounding a landscaped island with a minimum radius of 24 feet or a cul-de-sac head with a
radius of 40 feet and a cartway width of 14 feet surrounding a landscaped island, which shall be
acceptable for one-way circulation.
Hammerhead turnarounds may be used, if the cul-de-sac street does not provide access for more
than eight dwelling units. The long dimension of the turnaround head shall be not less than 50
feet.
§ 265-911. Access drives.
Access drives for nonresidential land developments shall be at least 20 feet in width when serving
parking areas of up to 30 spaces and 24 feet when serving more than 30 parking spaces.
Access drives serving residential land developments shall be at least 20 feet in width.
§ 265-912. Marginal access streets.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 263/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Board may approve marginal access streets as private access drives subject to the standards
of access drives specified in § 265-911.
The Board may require the dedication of right-of-way up to 50 feet, at a minimum sufficient to
accommodate utilities and stormwater facilities associated, where future access and trip levels
warrant said development.
In such a case, the street shall otherwise meet those street standards, typically local or collector,
as defined by ADT.
Access drives shall meet the grading requirements as applied to minor collector streets.
§ 265-913. Private streets as driveways; driveway standards.
No driveway or access drive shall enter a public street closer to an existing intersection than 50
feet, and a reasonable safe sight distance shall be provided.
The maximum permitted grade on residential driveways shall be 14%.
A leveling area for all driveways shall be provided for a minimum distance of 12 feet, measured
from the edge of the pavement of the intersecting street, at a maximum grade of 5%.
Shared driveways for up to four single-family homes shall be permitted and may have a maximum
grade of 14%, provided that safe sight stopping distances are provided the length of the driveway.
Pavement width may vary, but shall be appropriate to the length, width and gradient of the
proposed driveway. The Township Engineer may require shoulders or guide rail, if deemed
necessary for safety. Said driveways shall be discouraged in preliminary or final subdivisions of
greater than four lots, including those party to a site approved as a major plan within five years of
said approval.
§ 265-914. Water supply.
An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided for every building to be used for human
occupancy or habitation in a subdivision or land development.
Where an existing public water system is accessible to or can be extended to the proposed
development site, the applicant shall provide a complete on-site system with connections to such
public water system in conformance with the standards and requirements of DEP and the
Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County. Feasibility and accessibility shall be determined the
Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County and the Township Engineer.
Where an existing public water system is not accessible to the proposed development, water may
be supplied by a new public water system, subject to the approval of DEP and the Allegheny
County Health Department.
In the case of Subsection B or C, the applicant shall present evidence to the Department that the
subdivision or development is to be supplied with water by a certificated public utility, a bona fide
cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application
for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
Subdivisions and land developments to be served by public water systems shall be provided with
fire hydrants that meet all reasonable specifications of the Township and fire company that will
serve the development, including the spacing of hydrants such that all structures proposed lie
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 264/411
F.
G.
H.
I.
(a)
(1)
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
within 1,000 linear feet of a hydrant. Hydrants shall be delineated on the construction drawings
submitted.
Where public water supply systems, as defined in the Allegheny County Health Department Rules
and Regulations, Article XV, Plumbing and Building Drainage, Chapter 17 (Chapter 5, Part 15),
are inaccessible and cannot be extended to the proposed development site, the applicant may
provide potable water through individual water supplies, designed and constructed in conformance
with the standards and requirements of the Health Department.
The use of private water systems shall not be permitted in any subdivision or land development
with more than 10 lots, unless the applicant provides hydrogeologic data, acceptable to the Health
Department, assuring that adequate quantity and quality of water are available.
Private water systems and individual water supplies may be permitted to be located off-site,
provided that a permanent easement is recorded on the final plan, a legal agreement that sets
forth clearly all of the rights and responsibilities of all affected parties is executed, and all other
applicable provisions of this section are met.
The Township may require easements, commensurate with Municipal Authority of Westmoreland
County standards, where an accessible water supply is deemed to be feasible at some future
date, based upon plans, topography and elevations, and development patterns.
§ 265-915. Sewerage.
Sanitary sewage facilities required. All subdivisions and land developments, unless excepted in
Subsection E below, shall be provided with sanitary sewage facilities which are in accordance with
the North Versailles Act 537 Plan[1] and North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority and which
have been approved by the Allegheny County Health Department, the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, and the Township, authority or other public agency responsible for
the collection, conveyance and treatment of sanitary sewage in the Township in which the
development is located.
No plat shall be finally approved or recorded until the plans and specifications for sanitary
sewage facilities have been approved and permits issued, as required, by the Health
Department and/or the DEP.
Conditional final approval may be granted, however, provided that the complete sewage
facilities planning module, as required for the proposed development, has been approved
by the Township in which the proposed development is located, and transmitted by the
Township to the Allegheny County Health Department and/or Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, together with a resolution adopting the revision to its
sewage facilities plan, if required.
Editor's Note: Act 537 refers to the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act; see 35 P.S. § 750.1 et
seq.
All sanitary sewers and related facilities shall be constructed in accordance with requirements of
DEP, the construction standards of the Township, and the Allegheny County Health Department,
Rules and Regulations, Article XV, Plumbing and Building Drainage (Chapter 5, Part 15).
If the subdivision can reasonably be served by the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer,
as determined by the Township Engineer and the North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority, the
developer shall be required to provide a system of sanitary sewer mains and shall provide lateral
connections for each lot.
Private sanitary sewer systems may be permitted to be located off site, provided that a permanent
easement is recorded on the final plan, a legal agreement that sets forth clearly all of the rights
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 265/411
(1)
[2]
(2)
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
and responsibilities of all affected parties is executed, and all other applicable provisions of this
section are met.
Exceptions.
Administrative approvals, revisions, or lot line revisions. Sewage facilities shall not be
required for the aforesaid subdivisions that are classified as such in this chapter, that is,
where no new lots are created or the expansion of facilities requires no additional equivalency
dwelling units.
Plans with no new development. Subdivisions and land developments in which no
development of buildings or improvement of land for purposes requiring sewage facilities is
proposed need not provide sanitary sewage facilities, provided a properly executed "Form B
— Request for Non-Building Waiver" (PA DEP Bureau of Water Quality Management form
ER-BWQ-349:6/92) has been submitted to and approved by DEP. Where a waiver is
approved by DEP, the final plan for recording shall include the notation specified in Appendix
2(7)(A).[2] The Board may require the additional recording of covenants or plan notes to
ensure the proper notice and utilization of the subject lot for the purposes stated by the
developer, where the Board deems such requirement(s) appropriate.
Editor's Note: Said reference to "Appendix 2" refers to such document included with Ch. 780,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of Allegheny County. See now Appendix 3.
The Township may require easements, commensurate with North Versailles Sanitary Authority
standards, where accessible sewers are deemed to be feasible at some future date, based upon
plans, topography and elevations, and development patterns.
§ 265-916. Other utilities and easements.
General requirement. Subdivisions and land developments shall be served by gas, electric, cable
television, and telephone service distribution systems, where these systems are accessible to the
development.
Easements. Easements for public and private utilities shall comply with the requirements of the
utility providers and with the following standards:
Easements shall be adjacent to property lines where possible.
Minimum widths for utility easements shall be 20 feet for public utilities and 10 feet for private
utilities. Utility companies shall use common easements wherever possible.
Underground wiring.
Electric, telephone, television and other communication service lines shall be provided by
wiring placed underground within easements or dedicated rights-of-way, installed in
accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies
providing such services unless the applicant demonstrates to the Public Utilities Commission
that physical conditions render such underground installation infeasible.
If a lot abuts an easement or right-of-way with existing overhead electrical, telephone,
television or other service lines, the lot may utilize the overhead lines, but service connections
shall be installed underground. Where a subdivision or land development requires a road
widening or service, extension that necessitates the replacement or relocation of overhead
lines, replacement or relocation may be underground, in accordance with the requirements of
the Public Utilities Commission.
Where overhead lines are permitted, the placement and alignment of poles shall be designed
to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines as follows: Alignments and pole locations should
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 266/411
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
B.
be routed to avoid locations along horizons. Poles should be located so that the need to clear
swaths through treed areas is avoided or mitigated. Trees should be planted in open areas
and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and lines. Alignments should generally
follow rear lot lines.
Utility apparatus placed above ground, other than utility poles, shall be screened with plant
materials.
Article X. Amenities Standards
§ 265-1000. Landscaping standards.
Street tree requirements.[1]
Street trees shall be required at the perimeters of all parking lots adjoining an existing or
proposed street, and along all lots and open space within a subdivision adjoining an existing
or proposed street at a minimum spacing of one small tree every 25 feet on center or medium
or large trees at spaced at a distance not to exceed the average spread of the fully developed
canopy of the trees plus five feet.
Trees shall be planted in a manner wherein the plantings are alternated when required in
each side of the street such that the trees on one side are planted directly across from a point
on the opposite side of the street equidistant from the street trees planted thereon.
Uniform species shall be planted in regard to streets and adjacent streets or parking lots. The
Board may require low, medium, or large trees commensurate with express plans and
character of a neighborhood or business district.
Street trees shall be planted no further than five feet from an adjacent right-of-way and may
be planted within the right-of-way only with the express approval of the Board.
Street trees shall be located so as not to interfere with the maintenance of utilities, required
sight distances and visibility of street and traffic signs.
The species chosen shall be appropriate to the location. Factors such as microclimate, soils,
habit of growth, salt, air pollution and disease tolerance, proximity of sidewalks and overhead
utility lines, and social conditions (likelihood of soil compaction, vandalism, damage due to
dogs, deer, etc.) shall be considered.
Editor's Note: See also Ch. 276, Trees.
Parking lot landscaping.
In addition to the requirements listed above, the perimeters of parking lots shall be
landscaped with those low-level plantings required by this article. Landscaping area shall be
at least 10 feet in depth from any adjacent street.
The Board may require additional screening such as hedges at a minimum height of 2.5 feet,
masonry walls, and decorative fencing where the Board finds that such screening is required
to buffer the proposed use from nearby residential uses or residentially zoned properties.
Parking lot interior areas.
Landscaping in the interior of parking lots shall be designed to provide visual and climatic
relief from large expanses of paving, to channelize vehicular traffic and to define lots for
safe pedestrian circulation.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 267/411
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
Where lots exceed 30 spaces, one landscaping island shall be provided at least every 15
spaces in each row.
The other requirements placed upon interior parking lot areas not withstanding, at least
5% of the total area of any parking lot containing 30 spaces or less shall be landscaped,
and at least 7% of any parking lot containing more than 30 parking spaces shall be
landscaped.
In addition to other requirements of this article, at least one large or medium tree and
three low-level plantings, or one small tree and three low-level plantings, shall be planted
per 10 parking spaces, with at least one tree planted centrally in each island between
spaces and with trees evenly spaced in islands between rows.
Where parking lots contain more than two rows of stalls, requiring access through
multiple aisles, landscaped islands shall be provided between each row of stalls.
Trees required in this section shall be planted in protected lots such as along walkways,
or within curbed islands located between rows of parking spaces, at the ends of bays, or
between parking stalls.
Curbed landscaped islands shall have a minimum width of eight feet, or a minimum
radius of four feet, exclusive of the curbing, and shall be as long as the adjacent
space(s).
No low-level planting shall grow within two feet of any curb.
General site planting requirements.
All land developments shall install low-level plantings at a minimum of one planting for every
1,000 square feet of site area.
In all land developments and major subdivisions, all areas of existing steep slope, where
required by this chapter or Chapter 300, Zoning, to be preserved or undisturbed, shall
possess a continuous coverage of deciduous native trees at maturity. A qualified professional
forester shall prepare a plan determining the amount and location of additional tree plantings,
where necessary, to achieve this standard. The plan shall contain an assessment of existing
woodlands, and the state thereof, wherein diseased trees shall be replaced. Native
evergreens may be employed where screening from adjacent uses is necessary.
In addition to street trees required, each lot in a subdivision shall bear two small trees or one
medium or large tree.
In addition to street trees required, land developments shall provide two small trees or one
medium or large tree for every 10,000 square feet of site area.
Required landscaping shall be distributed around parking areas, building perimeters and
required buffer areas.
The Board may require additional landscaping where Chapter 300, Zoning, requires buffering
to adjacent properties.
Stormwater detention facilities shall require the planting of evergreen, medium, or large trees
in a manner that effectively screens the facility of integrates the facility into adjoining open
space.
Prior to final approval, the developer of a major subdivision shall provide covenants in favor of the
Township whereby the maintenance or replacement of required tree plantings is guaranteed.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 268/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
A.
§ 265-1001. Lighting standards.
Lighting proposed shall be in accordance with the nuisance standards, heights, and locations
required by Chapter 300, Zoning.
Nonresidential land developments shall adhere to the following standards:
The following shall apply to all land developments cumulatively bearing less than or equal to
5,000 square feet of gross floor area. Parking lots or pedestrianways, access lanes to parking
lots and external storage of merchandise shall provide a uniformity ratio of 3:1 where the
average footcandles maintained within said areas equals 2.4.
The following shall apply to all land developments cumulatively bearing more than 5,000
square feet of gross floor area. Parking lots or pedestrianways, access lanes to parking lots
and external storage of merchandise shall provide a uniformity ratio of 3:1 where the average
footcandles maintained within said areas equals 3.6.
Lighting proposed in all other areas shall bear no more than three footcandles at any point on
said portion of the property and an average of two footcandles distributed over said areas.
Multifamily developments shall provide lighting in parking lots or pedestrianways, access drives to
parking lots at an average of one footcandle where no light emits more than two footcandles on
the ground at any point.
Article XI. Development and Design Standards in
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
§ 265-1100. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to:
Ensure development that minimizes stormwater impacts.
Ensure the preservation of wooded hillsides, thereby furthering the respective objectives of this
section.
Minimize short- and long-term soil erosion within land development and subdivision sites.
Minimize the impact on streams, wetlands, and steep slopes.
Ensure the safety and integrity of structures constructed within the sites of land developments and
subdivisions through proper construction in consideration of mine overburden and construction on
slide-prone soils.
§ 265-1101. Limitations on slope disturbance.
The following standards shall apply to all grading and disturbance of land with slopes of 25% or
greater.
Slopes between 25% and 40%. No more than 30% of slope areas with existing grades
between 25% and 40% shall be stripped of vegetation or disturbed through grading. Grading
and clearing for roads on these slopes shall be limited to that necessary to accommodate the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 269/411
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
cartway and shoulders or berms. Wherever possible, roads should follow the contours of the
land.
Slopes exceeding 40%. No development or disturbance shall be allowed on slopes exceeding
40%. Limited disturbance for utilities may be allowed where no reasonable alternative location
exists.
Where construction is proposed in accordance with this section, within or disturbing steep slopes,
the applicant shall include a geotechnical report, acceptable to the Township Engineer. The report
shall demonstrate a safety factor of 1.5 of greater and shall outline a revegetation plan ensuring
immediate and long-term stability.
§ 265-1102. Undermined areas.
No land development involving construction of buildings and no subdivision of land intended to
create lots for building construction shall be approved on a site which has been undermined at
shallow depths or in an area where there is evidence of past subsidence unless the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed subdivision or land development will be safe and will not create
hazards for adjacent properties. Evidence of safety shall be one of the following.
If the site or any area of the site has been undermined and has 100 feet or less of
overburden, evidence of the safety of the proposed subdivision or land development shall
require site investigation and certification in writing by a professional engineer, experienced in
subsidence risk assessment, that the proposed development will be safe.
If the site has been undermined and has more than 100 feet of overburden, a subsidence risk
assessment included in a geotechnical report by a professional engineer and written
certification that the proposed subdivision or land development will be safe may be required if
the Township, Township Engineer, or applicant has knowledge of any past occurrences of
subsidence in the general vicinity of the site.
The Board may require the installation of certain construction measures accepted by the Township
Engineer as per recommendations of the risk assessment required, as a condition of building
permit(s) on the site. The Board may further require the inclusion of such standards in the plan
covenants, as a note on the plat, or through a developer's agreement applicable to the developer's
heirs and assigns.
§ 265-1103. Landslide-prone areas.
No grading, removal of vegetation, construction or other disturbance shall be permitted on soils that
are classified as slide-prone or unstable in the Soil Survey of Allegheny County or on any other areas
of a proposed development site that exhibit signs of instability, except in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
Disturbance of landslide-prone areas of construction thereon shall be severely limited.
Disturbance of unstable areas may be permitted, where alternative site designs have been
exhausted, and where the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer
through a geotechnical report that the proposed disturbance will not cause sliding or movement or
any unsafe condition either on the development site or on any property adjacent to it.
Evidence of the safety of any proposed disturbance shall require site investigation and certification
in writing by a registered soils engineer, engineering geologist or professional engineer with
experience in soils engineering that the proposed activity will not create or exacerbate unsafe
conditions.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 270/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 265-1104. Watercourses and wetlands.
Setback or open space easement required. No grading, cutting, filling, removal or vegetation, or
other disturbance of land shall be permitted within the required setback.
The minimum setback for watercourses shall be 20 feet, measured from the top of the channel
bank. In addition, land development involving the construction of new buildings shall not be
permitted within 100 feet of the top of the bank of the Monongahela River.
The setback for wetlands shall be 50 feet for wetlands one acre or greater and 25 feet for
wetlands less than one acre or at a variable setback depth, based on a wetland management plan
prepared by a certified professional wetlands biologist. In no case, however, shall the setback be
less than 10 feet from the delineated edge of a wetland less than one acre in extent; or 20 feet
from the delineated edge of a wetland one acre or more in extent.
Minor earth disturbance and construction within the area of the required setback or easement,
required for development in other areas of the site, may be allowed in accordance with all
regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection and Township floodplain regulations,
where applicable.
Construction may also be allowed within the required setback area of rivers to enable the
development of uses that require proximity or access to the river, in accordance with applicable
federal, DEP and municipal regulations.
This section shall not withstand the ability of a developer to utilize wetland mitigation measures
offered by the DEP. Approval of all applicable permits, associated bonding, and other
commitments guaranteeing the completion shall then become a condition of approval to be
provided prior to plan recording.
Article XII. Open Space and Land Dedication Standards
§ 265-1200. Purpose.
The Township aims to conserve, enhance, and promote the use and retention of common open
space, including active and passive open space, to develop a network of recreation, parks, trails,
and interconnected natural areas.
The Township also aims to protect environmentally sensitive areas including steep slopes and
wetlands as a natural resource and integral part of open space.
§ 265-1201. Dedication of open space; standards.
All developers of major residential subdivisions or land developments, excluding those creating
five or less dwelling units, shall dedicate open space commensurate with the number of dwelling
units proposed and in a manner meeting the standards of this article and the North Versailles
Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
A deed for the dedication of land required for a particular phase of a plan shall be provided prior to
the release of the plat for recordation, not withstanding the Board's right to accept alternative
instruments guaranteeing the reservation of required land for public dedication or the developer's
reservation of all open space in a preliminary plan as subsequently authorized herein.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 271/411
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Preliminary plans. Where open space is dedicated in a phased plan, the first phase shall include
all such space required on the preliminary plat or the developer shall ensure the reservation of the
remaining land through deed covenants or reservations acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
Open space shall be dedicated at a minimum rate of 0.0223 acres per dwelling unit proposed.
Where the aforesaid rate of dedication does not provide at least an area equal to the minimum lot
size for a single-family home in the respective zoning district in which the development is located,
the developer shall provide the remaining amount as the minimum required. The Board may waive
this additional requirement when the location and size of the additional land on the site is
undesirable for the purposes recommended in the Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open
Space Plan.
The Parks and Recreation Department and Recreation Board shall provide a recommendation to
the Board within the time allotted for review by the Planning Commission. The Board shall
consider said recommendation in its implementation of the Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and
Open Space Plan through the evaluation of the open space proposed and consideration of any
mutual agreement with the developer regarding alternatives described in this article, including but
not limited to fee-in-lieu and construction of facilities.
While the Board may require public dedication of land to the Township, the Board and developer
may mutually agree to dedicate the required land to a homeowners' association. In such a case,
the Township Solicitor, prior to final approval, shall approve easements, covenants, homeowners'
association documents or condominium declarations. The aforesaid instruments shall ensure the
availability of the land to the residents of the subject plan, long-term maintenance with provisions
guaranteeing such in favor of the Township wherein properties within the Township may equitably
lien properties within the plan for work completed where the related association defaults on such
maintenance, preservation of wooded areas and other natural resources, and the perpetual usage
of the land for the intended open space or recreational purposes.
§ 265-1202. Site selection standards.
The land offered for dedication shall be accessible to residents in a manner commensurate with
National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) standards, in terms of service radius. The land
shall bear at least 50 feet or the minimum lot frontage required for single-family homes within the
zoning district in which the plan is constructed, whichever is greater, unless portions of the land
are accepted for the use of trails by the Board.
At least 25% of the land dedicated shall be active recreational land and shall be comprised of one
contiguous tract area averaging 50 feet in width.
No more than 25% of the land required to be dedicated shall include areas of wetlands,
watercourses, and floodplains, unless the Board finds that additional dedication of such land
provides an integral asset to active or passive recreational interests and furthers the objectives of
the Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
Public sewer and water shall be available to land dedicated.
Land provided shall not be unduly burned by utility easements and rights-of-way, slide-prone soils,
and undermining such that active and passive recreational uses commensurate with the
Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open Space Plan are unreasonably inhibited.
The configuration of dedicated land shall consider open space corridors, trails, and connections
noted in the Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open Space Plan, Official Map, and other
applicable plans as formally recognized by the Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 272/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 265-1203. Alternatives to land dedication.
Fee in lieu of land dedication.
The developer, upon mutual agreement with the Township, where each finds that the
provision of adequate recreational facilities for the future residents of the subject subdivision
or land development are better served by the acquisition or expansion of recreational facilities
developed directly by the Township, may provide a fee in lieu of land dedication otherwise
required.
The fee, charged on a unit basis, shall be reasonably commensurate with the average value
of undeveloped residentially zoned land throughout the Township on a per acre basis divided
by 0.223 acres required with reasonable consideration for the additional costs of grading
improvements required to provide proper active recreational areas. The per-unit fee in lieu of
land dedication shall be $800 per dwelling unit.
The fee shall be allocated to a specific park accessible to the future residents of the plan per
NRPA Standards, to be utilized in the purchase of additional land, development thereof, or
installation of additional facilities. The fee shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account
clearly identifying the recreational facility or project for which the fee was received. Interest
earned shall become a fund of that account.
Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection, the Township shall
refund such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the Township
has failed to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this section within three years
from the date such fee was paid.
The developer shall consent to the allocation of the fee in lieu to a particular park or project
through the acceptance of a specific condition noted such in the Board's approval of the
respective subdivision or land development.
The fee-in-lieu authorized by this chapter shall, upon receipt by the Township, be deposited in
an interest-bearing account, clearly identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the
fee was received. Interest earned on such accounts shall become funds of that account.
Funds from such accounts shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost
incurred to construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds were collected.
Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this article, the Township shall refund
such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has
failed to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this article within three years from the
date such fee was paid.
Construction of facilities.
Where the developer proposes the construction of recreational facilities accessible to the
residents of the proposed plan, the Board may accept the value of these facilities as a
fulfillment of the requirements of this section if the value meets of exceeds the fee in lieu
otherwise required for the development.
The facilities shall meet applicable safety and construction standards, including the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and NRPA standards.
The Board shall find that the proposed facilities equate to the needs of the anticipated
residents of a plan and provide the types of recreation and open space recommended in the
Comprehensive Park, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 273/411
C.
A.
B.
The Board, upon mutual agreement with the developer, may accept a combination of land, fees,
and facilities where the value of all land, fees, and facilities equal or exceed the value of the fee in
lieu of land dedication required for the site. The land value assigned shall equal the per unit fee-inlieu
for every 0.223 acres of land offered, or fraction thereof.
§ 265-1204. Financial guarantees.
The Board shall require the posting of security necessary to guarantee the construction of facilities
or grading of active recreational land as public improvements.
Said dedication shall be required for construction and improvements to land that is approved to be
publicly dedicated and that land that shall be privately owned and maintained.
Article XIII. Waivers and Modifications
§ 265-1300. Applicability.
The Board may grant a modification or waiver of the requirements of one or more provisions of this
chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that
the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
§ 265-1301. Granting of modification.
The Board may grant a request for a modification of the requirements of this chapter where the
developer or applicant demonstrates that the performance objectives of the subject provision are met
or exceeded by the modification proposed.
§ 265-1302. Application for modification.
All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application
for development. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship
on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
§ 265-1303. Evidence required.
Where an alternative to adopted ordinance requirements is proposed, absent the claim of a hardship is
presented, the applicant shall submit sufficient evidence to substantiate the equal of greater
performance of the proposed alternative versus that required by this chapter.
§ 265-1304. Review of request.
The request shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, wherein the Commission's
recommendation to the Board shall include specific reference to the modification of waiver requested.
§ 265-1305. Records.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 274/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
The Board shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
Article XIV. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 265-1400. Preventative remedies.
The Township shall refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or
develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. Aforesaid development shall include any improvement of a
property substantially inconsistent with an approved land development or subdivision, any conditions
related thereto as accepted by the applicant, or the construction of a land development in violation of
this chapter. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
The owner of record at the time of such violation.
The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as to
whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without
regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the
time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real
property, the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
§ 265-1401. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Article XV. Amendments
§ 265-1500. Procedure.
This chapter may be amended by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the procedures
specified in the MPC.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 275/411
A.
Chapter 270. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles as indicated in
article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 4.
Tenant registration — See Ch. 232, Art. I.
Article I. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-15-1954 by Ord. No. 329; amended in its entirety 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 24,
Part 6, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of North Versailles Township."
§ 270-2. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the transfer of real estate or
interest in real estate situated within the Township, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took place,
as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 270-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or
conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION
A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust or banking institution which is organized
under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences
any transfer or demise of title of real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust
or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to
the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total
consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the
consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely
grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration of
acquisition required to be presented for recording under § 270-2.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture
and at least 75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members
of the same family.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 276/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets
or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
Fur farming;
Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY
Any individual, such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the foregoing, a spouse
of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by half-blood or
legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by whole-blood.
PERSON
Every natural person, association, or corporation, whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both. The term "person" as applied to associations shall
include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including, without limitation,
buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper
or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests which by
custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association
under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY
A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or
leasing real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
and which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of real
estate; or
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible
asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded
on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not
fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by reason of
the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise,
consist of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory interest
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 277/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest
or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of North Versailles.
TRANSACTION
The making, executing, delivering, accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth, the
amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof
where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against real estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale;
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage
by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or
possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired company,
the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of
the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base
calculations;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of which is not
determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement for the
construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate between
the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related corporation, association
or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 270-4. Imposition of tax; interest.
Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document, or
in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording,
shall be subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of
1% of the value of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at
the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the affixing of an official stamp or
writing by the Recorder of Deeds whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax
and the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed herein on a person or transfer
shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,[1] so that if any other political subdivision shall impose or
hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or transfer then the tax levied by the Board of
Commissioners under the authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 shall become
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 278/411
[1]
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
effective without any action on the part of the Board of Commissioners; provided, however, that
the Township and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided,
they will impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate
permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax Enabling
Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered. See now 53
P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest, at the rate in effect at the time the tax is
due, shall be added and collected.
§ 270-5. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 270-6. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 270-4 shall not be imposed upon:
A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed or confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of
the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which
reconveyance may include property line adjustments provided said reconveyance is made
within one year from the date of condemnation.
A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of
the United States.
A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by
the municipality, Township, school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale
or tax claim bureau sale.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a transfer
previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of property passed by
testate or intestate succession and held by covenants; however, if any of the parties take
shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously husband and
wife who have since been divorced, provided the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother
or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or
sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except
that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the
grantor were making such transfer.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or intestate
succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 279/411
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the
transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the
grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary
trust.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee.
A transfer: i) for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or straw
party; or ii) from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his
principal, no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this subsection.
A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation or statutory
division of a nonprofit corporation, except where the department reasonably determines that
the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed
by this article.
A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the name of the
corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in
the association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has been
held by the grantee for more than two years.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property
conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing
directly from it, but only if: i) the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and
development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control,
warehousing or agriculture; and ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership interest in
the real estate transferred.
A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a
foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona
fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding title for a
religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor
for commercial purposes.
A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has
as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open space opportunities.
A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm corporation by
a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock
thereof.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 280/411
(20)
(21)
(22)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real estate
company or family farm corporation.
A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and assignments
thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the
transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax
statement of value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
§ 270-7. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 270-6, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or
demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 270-8. Acquired company.
A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership interest in the
company, however effected, if the change does not affect the continuity of the company; and of
itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or
more of the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm corporation is an
acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family
farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or
transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.
Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a declaration of
acquisition with the recorder of each county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of
documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax
declaration of acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
§ 270-9. Credits against tax.
Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker which property
was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall
be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the builder
within the preceding year as a consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder
shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 281/411
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit for the amount of
tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a land
contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the difference
shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover
credit shall be allowed.
§ 270-10. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a
lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental
charge is established.
§ 270-11. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of
real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ
upon which the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other officer
conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the
purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 270-12. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L. 40, No. 21), the
Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the local realty transfer tax, including any
amount payable to North Versailles Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without
compensation from the Township.
In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is located in more than one
political subdivision, the recorder shall not accept for recording such a deed unless it is
accompanied by a statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
On or before the 10th of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the Township all local realty
transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The commission of 2% shall be paid to the county.
Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or record the additional realty transfer tax form
only when both the state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
§ 270-13. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording shall set forth therein
and as a part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a
statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 282/411
A.
B.
document is not subject to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax
statement of value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship.
Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
document and statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 270-14. Violations and penalties.
If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due to fraud, there shall be
added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article on the date prescribed
therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to
the tax 5% of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not
exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 270-15. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements or hereditaments, or any
interest therein lying, being situated, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Township, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed by or transferred by
the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin
at the time when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharged by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in
the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 270-16. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties prescribed herein, shall be
recoverable as other debts of like character are recovered.
§ 270-17. Regulation; incorporation by reference.
The Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County is charged with enforcement and collection of tax and is
empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
Article II. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-18-1961 by Ord. No. 504 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances); amended in
its entirety 10-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1063]
§ 270-18. Incorporation by reference.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 283/411
[1]
[2]
A.
Act 32 (53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901) and its definitions, duties, directives, rules, regulations,
powers and penalties is hereby adopted by reference as if same had been set forth fully herein.
§ 270-19. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings given to them
in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
DOMICILE
The place where a person lives and has a permanent home and to which the person has the
intention of returning whenever absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for
domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather
than transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a
mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home,
until some event occurs to induce the person to adopt some other permanent home. In the
case of a business, "domicile" is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME
The compensation as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of
Revenue under Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"[1] and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971[2] shall constitute allowable deductions in
determining earned income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The
amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as
earned income.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, other than a corporation, as required to be
reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971,"[3] and rules and
regulations promulgated under that section.
NONRESIDENT
A person or business domiciled outside the political subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT
A person or business domiciled in the political subdivision levying the tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (TCC)
The Southeast Tax Collection Committee established to govern this tax collection district for
the purpose of income tax collection.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (TCD)
The Southeast Tax Collection District is established under Section 504 of Act 32.[4]
TAX OFFICER/TAX COLLECTOR
The agency engaged to administer and collect earned income taxes for this tax collection
district. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an employer,
the term shall mean the tax officer for the tax collection district within which the employer is
located, or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more than one district, the tax officer for
each such district with respect to employees principally employed therein.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7301 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 284/411
[3]
[4]
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
[1]
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
In addition to the above definitions, this section incorporates by reference those words, phrases
and definitions as listed in Act 32 (53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901).
§ 270-20. Imposition of tax.
Resident tax. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby levied on all earned income and net profits, as
defined by Act 32,[1] on residents of Township of North Versailles.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 through 6924.901.
Nonresident tax. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby levied on all earned income and net profits
earned by nonresidents for work done or services performed or rendered in Township of North
Versailles.
All changes shall remain in effect on a calendar year basis without annual reenactment unless the
rate of tax is subsequently changed.
§ 270-21. Administration.
The collection and administration of the tax provided for in this article shall be performed by the Tax
Officer appointed by the Tax Collection Committee. Said Tax Officer shall receive compensation for
services and expenses as determined by agreement between the TCC and the Tax Officer. The Tax
Officer shall have the powers as provided for by the Local Tax Enabling Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 270-22. Exemptions and credits.
No exemptions or credits based on age or income or any other conditions are granted by this article.
Nothing in this article is intended to preclude or inhibit any credit or exemption imposed by act of law or
regulation.
§ 270-23. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2012. It is the intention of the governing body of Township of
North Versailles that this article shall provide procedural modifications only to the previously adopted
earned income tax resolution, and no gap as to imposition of the tax set forth herein should be inferred.
Article III. Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 12-19-1966 by Ord. No. 607; amended in its entirety 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 24,
Part 4, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-24. Authority for enactment.
This article is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31,
1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. (1982),[1] as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by
the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 285/411
[1]
A.
B.
A.
Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax Enabling Act
formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered. See now 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq.
§ 270-25. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS
Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the Township of North Versailles,
including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or other tangible personalty or the
performance of services and the rental of personalty and/or realty.
CALENDAR YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
LICENSE YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, firm or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to partnerships shall
mean the partners thereof, and as applied to corporations and associations, shall mean the
officers thereof, and if there are no officers, the shareholders thereof.
TAXPAYER
A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS
Business conducted at one location for less than _____ () consecutive calendar days.
VENDOR
Person who, from a store, warehouse, lot or other established place of business in the
Township, sells merchandise or other tangible personalty previously purchased by him, such
property being in the same state and condition as when purchased by or for such vendor, or, if
manufactured by him, being sold from a store or warehouse apart from the manufactory.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR
Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise with respect
to such goods and to no other persons.
As used in this article, the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 270-26. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed for the first tax year and annually thereafter a mercantile tax for general
revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein defined in the Township of North
Versailles as follows:
Rate and basis. The rate of the tax on each and every dollar of the whole or gross volume of
business transacted within the territorial limits of the Township shall be one mill, which mills shall
mean $1 per $1,000 gross volume of business; except that the rate of the tax on each and every
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 286/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
C.
dollar of the whole or gross volume of business transacted by wholesale dealers or wholesale
vendors within the territorial limits of the Township shall be one mill. All nonwholesale business of
wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors shall be taxed at the general rate of 1 1/2 mills.
Computation of volume of business.
Every person subject to payment of the tax hereby imposed who has commenced his
business prior to the full calendar year prior to the tax year shall compute his estimated
annual gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during said immediately preceding calendar year. For the first tax year only, such computation
shall be based upon the actual gross amount of business transacted from December 19,
1966, through December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year.
Every person subject to payment of the tax hereby imposed who has commenced or who
commences his business before the beginning of the tax year but after the beginning of the
full calendar year prior to the tax year shall compute his estimated annual gross volume of
business upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the prior calendar year,
taking the monthly average during said period and multiplying the same by 12. In the event
that he shall be in business fewer than 90 days in the prior calendar year, he shall be
permitted to use sufficient days in the calendar year in which the tax year begins to equal 90
successive days after commencement of business, to take a monthly average thereon, and to
multiply the average by 12. For the first tax year only, such computation shall be based upon
the monthly average multiplied by 10.
Every person subject to payment of the tax hereby imposed who has commenced or
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year and prior to the
effective date of this article shall compute his estimated gross volume of business for such tax
year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the period from the
commencement of his business to the end of the year, taking the monthly average during the
first three months of business and multiplying the same by the number of months from the
commencement of business to the end of the tax year. For the first tax year only, such
computation shall be based on the monthly average multiplied by 10. In the event that such
persons shall be in business fewer than 90 days in the tax year, he shall be permitted to use
sufficient days in the next succeeding calendar year to equal 90 successive days after
commencement of business to take a monthly average thereon, and to multiply the average
by the number of months from the commencement of his business to the end of the tax year.
Every person subject to payment of the tax hereby imposed who engages in business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature shall compute the estimated gross amount of
business to be transacted by him for the period said person engages in such temporary,
seasonal or itinerant business by a method to be determined by the Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the amount of
mercantile tax claimed by the Township of North Versailles in any case where the taxpayer
disputes the validity or amount of the Township's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Township has been overpaid, the
amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Any action instituted for such
judicial determination shall be instituted within two years of the last day of the period for which
the tax is disputed or claim made.
Persons, business and receipts exempted.
Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporation or
association organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the
government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the business
of any political subdivision, or of any authority created or organized under and pursuant to any
Act of Assembly are exempt from the provisions of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 287/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege, transaction, subject, or
occupation which is subject to a state tax or license fee and which tax or license fee has been
held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to be the basis for exemption from the imposition of a
business privilege tax by a municipality.
Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts from utility service
of any person or company whose rates of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, or on any public utility service rendered by any such person or
company or on any privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such person or
company or on any privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public utility
service.
State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the privilege of
employing such tangible property as is subject to a state tax except on sales of admission to
places of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of property.
Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on goods, articles,
and products, or on by-products of manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources,
and farm products, manufactured, produced, or grown in the Township, or on the preparation
or processing thereof for use or market, or on any privilege, act or transaction relating to the
business of manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber and
natural resources or farm products, by manufacturers, by producers, and by farmers with
respect to the goods, articles and products of their own manufacture, production or growth, or
any privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of processing by-products of
manufacture, or on the transportation, loading, unloading or dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products or by-products.
Determination of gross or whole volume of business. Gross or whole volume of business upon
which the tax hereunder is computed shall include the gross consideration credited or received for
or on account of sales made, rentals and/or services rendered, subject only to the following
allowable deductions and exemptions:
The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail dealers derived from the
resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment
for other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds
the trade-in allowance.
Refunds, credits, or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser on account of defects in
goods, wares or merchandise sold or on account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of a purchase or sales
contract initiated, executed or cleared with such other broker.
Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for federal income taxation
purposes.
Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
County of Allegheny or the Township of North Versailles.
Partial exemptions. Where gross or whole volume of business in its entirety cannot be subjected
to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United
States or any other provision by law, the Tax Collector with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township shall establish rules and regulations and methods of allocation
and evaluation so that only that part of the gross or whole volume of business which is properly
attributable and allowable to doing business in the Township shall be taxed hereunder.
Rate when same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies. If any person is liable for the same tax on
the same subject imposed under the Local Tax Enabling Act,[1] to the Township and one or more
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 288/411
[1]
G.
A.
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
[3]
D.
E.
F.
political subdivisions of the state, then and in that event the tax shall be apportioned by such
percentage as may be agreed upon by such political subdivisions, but in no event shall the
combined taxes of both subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the said Enabling
Act permitting the imposition of such taxes.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions and deductions, shall keep
books and records of his business so as to show clearly, accurately, and separately the amount of
such sales and services as are excluded from the tax and the amounts of such sales and services
which he is entitled to deduct from the gross volume of business as hereinbefore provided.
§ 270-27. Returns.
Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector. Every person making a
return shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced his business on or before
January 1 of the full calendar year previous to the beginning of any tax year shall on or before the
15th day of February for the first tax year and on or before the first day of June of all subsequent
tax years file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, business, business address,
and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the preceding calendar year, and the amount of the tax due.[1]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has commenced his business before
the beginning of any tax year but after January 1 of the full calendar year previous to the
beginning of the tax year shall on or before the 15th day of February for the first tax year and on or
before the first day of June of all subsequent tax years file with the Tax Collector a return setting
forth his name, business, business address, and other information as may be necessary in arriving
at the estimated gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated under § 270-27B(2)
hereof and the amount of tax due.[2]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has commenced or commences his
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of February
for the first tax year and on or before the first day of June of all subsequent tax years, file with the
Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, business, business address, and other information as
may be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross amount of business transacted by him as
calculated under § 270-26B(3) hereof and the amount of tax due, provided that 100 days have
elapsed from the commencement of the business to February 15 of the first tax year, and to June
1 of all subsequent tax years. If a taxpayer has not been in business for 100 days as of February
15, or June 1 of all subsequent tax years, his return shall be filed within 100 days of the
commencement of his business.[3]
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Every person subject to payment of the tax imposed by this article who engages in a business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature shall at the time application is made for the business
privilege license file a return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, business, business
address and other information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross amount of
business to be transacted by him as calculated in accordance with § 270-26B(4).
Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven days from the date of
ceasing to do business, file a return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted and
done by such person during that tax year in which said person ceased doing business, and pay
the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the time of filing said return. If
such tax has been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 289/411
G.
H.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
entitled to a refund, without interest, of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which business was
terminated.
Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. The tax imposed by this article for the first tax year
which shall include the period from effective date of this article through December 31, shall be due
and payable as follows: For the second and subsequent years this tax is imposed, the tax shall be
due and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a return. In the event the
amount due and payable is not paid on the date required as set forth above, 5% shall be added
thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of a month until paid.
Receipt. The Tax Collector shall, upon payment to him of the tax hereby imposed, give the person
paying the same a receipt therefor.
§ 270-28. License.
After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct, or to continue to conduct any
business, as herein defined, within the Township shall file with the Tax Collector an application for a
mercantile license and shall pay a fee of $5 for the initial license and $5 for each annual renewal
thereof.
§ 270-29. Posting.
The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which such license is
issued, and shall remain in effect for the license year or fraction of year for which said license was
issued. In cases where more than one place of business is conducted, a separate license shall be
issued for each place of business. Any taxpayer who is in default in payment of the tax due hereunder
shall be refused a license until such tax is paid in full.
§ 270-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall conduct, transact or engage in any of the businesses subject to the tax imposed
by this article, without having first secured a mercantile license for the year, or any person who shall
fail to file a tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person who shall wilfully file a
false return shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $600, and/or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-31. Duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving taxes, fines, and penalties
imposed by this article. It shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him,
from whom received, and the date of such receipt.
The Tax Collector and his duly appointed agents are hereby empowered with the approval of the
Board of Commissioners of the Township to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article, including
provisions for the examination and correction of returns, and payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or overpayments claimed or found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the
provisions of this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a return, then in such case the
Tax Collector or his duly appointed agents shall assess said person or persons on such an amount
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 290/411
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
of whole or gross volume of business as the said Tax Collector or his agents deem reasonable
and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax Collector or his duly appointed agents shall
give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade, business, occupation or
class, and the amount of the mercantile tax imposed.
The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will enable him to make a true
and accurate return in accordance with this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's gross volume of business, and
must be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Collector or his agents to verify all transactions.
The Tax Collector or his agents are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records
of any person or persons subject to or supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article, in
order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made, ascertain the tax due.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas.
§ 270-32. Confidential nature of information.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other official, agent or employee of the Township as
a result of any returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this article
shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 270-33. Suit on collection.
The Tax Collector or his duly appointed agents shall have the power in the name of the Township
of North Versailles to institute proceedings against persons who violate the provisions of this
article.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefor, shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and interest and
penalties herein imposed.
Article IV. Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 782 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-34. Definitions.
[Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 842]
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE ENTITY
An entity which exists solely and exclusively for nonprofit motives and organized solely and
exclusively for charitable or educational purposes. The burden shall be on the taxpayer to show
that it is one of purely public charity, was founded by a public or private charity, and is maintained
by a public or private charity. It must possess all the following characteristics:
It must advance solely charitable purposes; it must donate or gratuitously render substantial
portions of its services and funds to purely public charity or use. It must benefit a substantial
and indefinite class of persons who are legitimate subjects of charity and thus relieve the
government of some of its burden; it must operate entirely free from a profit motive. A place of
religious worship shall be deemed to be a public charity, but only if the facility involved is used
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 291/411
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
primarily as a place for persons to attend religious worship, and the facility and operation is
necessary to engage in the conduct of religious worship. It is resolved by this article that a
radio and television facility is not a place of religious worship. Broadcasting shall not be
deemed to be a charitable function.
CONDUCTING, DOING, OR ENGAGING IN BUSINESS
Any activity within the Township of North Versailles at a location or locations, whether in a
storeroom, dwelling, lot, flea market, movable stand, vehicle, or elsewhere, within or from without
the Township of North Versailles, of exchanging, or offering to exchange, for value, or for a
consideration of any article(s), wares and merchandise, goods, or any other thing other than
realty, or the carrying on or exercising whether for gain or otherwise within the Township any trade
or business, including, but not limited to a financial business, profession, vocation, service,
construction, communication, surrendering of services, or any other commercial activity of any
nature, to the general public. Persons who are engaged in any employment by employers for
wages, salaries, or commissions are not deemed to be persons "engaged in business" under the
terms hereof. "Business" shall not include any business which is any business of any political
subdivision or any other business upon which the power to levy a tax under this article is
prohibited by law. It is the intent of this article to tax all services and functions of any commercial
nature within the Township pursuant to this article.
GROSS RECEIPTS
Cash, credit, property of any kind or nature, received or allocable or attributable to the
Township of North Versailles from any business or services rendered, or commercial or
business transactions without deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the material
used, labor, service or any other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses.
"Gross receipts" shall further be deemed to exclude the following:
In the case of financial business, costs of security on other property as it is sold,
exchanged, paid to maturity or redeemed, money or credits received on repayment of
advances, credits and loans. However, in no event shall it exceed the principal amount of
such advances, credits, loans or deposits; and
In the case of broker financial paper, commissions paid to another broker on account of
purchases; and
Receipts for that portion of business attributable to interstate or foreign commerce or to a
bona fide place of business outside the Township of North Versailles which is regularly
maintained by the Taxpayer outside of the Township limits and not for the purpose of
evading tax payments hereunder. Such receipts shall be segregated on each and every
tax return but only the part of the receipts which are properly attributable to doing
business in the Township of North Versailles shall be taxed or are deemed to be taxable.
Entities engaged in the conduct of maintaining, operating and/or using broadcasting
towers for dissemination of words, figures or images through the air waves shall be
deemed to be engaging in a business activity which is taxable under this article. Receipts
attributable to all such broadcasts shall be all fees paid for such broadcasting, telephone
usage, communication usage of any nature and/or fees, donations or contributions
attributable to or made on account of such broadcasting.
The tax which is due under this article is intended to be imposed on gross receipts as a fair
representation of the business and the taxpayer's activities within the Township. In the event
that any taxpayer claims that his or its gross receipts are being taxed by business privilege
resolutions or ordinances elsewhere, it shall be incumbent upon the taxpayer, in order to
sustain his burden of proof, to produce a copy of the return as filed and accepted by such
other jurisdiction together with proof of payment. The production of such proof shall not be
conclusive on the validity or invalidity of the assessment against the taxpayer by North
Versailles Township.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 292/411
A.
PERSON
Any entity, foundation, individual, partnership, limited partnership, unincorporated association
business or nonprofit corporations engaged in business or other activities for profit or otherwise,
within the Township of North Versailles in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. Whenever used in any
section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations the officers thereof. The
term "person" as defined above shall not include charitable entities as defined herein, or charitable
educational institutions, municipalities, school districts, agencies of the government of the United
States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any person to the extent of his vending or
disposing of articles of his own manufacture. The word "person" as used in this article is
synonymous with the word "taxpayer."
TAX
A business privilege tax on the privilege of operating, conducting, doing or engaging in business
by persons within the Township of North Versailles.
TAX COLLECTOR
Any person, entity or agency appointed by Township of North Versailles for the collection of the tax
levied under this article.
TAX YEAR
The twelve-month period commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year,
except that the first taxable year shall commence February 1, 1980, and end December 31, 1980.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS
Any business that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days, but no
distinction shall be made hereunder between temporary, seasonal, itinerant, permanent, or any
other qualified business operation as to the amount of the tax rate due hereunder. Such business
operations shall also be subject to the tax.
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY
The duly appointed Township Secretary of the Township of North Versailles.
VOLUME OF BUSINESS
Includes both cash and credit transactions.
§ 270-35. Levy of tax.
The first taxable year shall commence on February 1, 1980, and end on December 31, 1980, both
inclusive; thereafter, the tax shall be levied annually on a twelve-month calendar year basis. The
Township does hereby impose a tax on the privilege of operating, conducting, doing or engaging in
business by persons within the Township of North Versailles in the manner and rates as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 270-36. Payment of tax; receipt; rate.
[Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 842]
Beginning in the taxable year 1980 and annually thereafter, every person desiring to continue to
engage in or hereafter to begin to engage in any business of any nature whatever in the Township
shall procure a business privilege tax receipt for his place or places of business in the Township of
North Versailles from the Tax Collector, as required by law. Such tax receipt shall be
conspicuously posted at the place of business, or a copy thereof in each additional business, of
every such person at all times.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 293/411
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The tax for the taxable year 1980 shall be paid to the Tax Collector thereof, and the receipt
therefor procured not later than the 15th day of February 1980 or may be paid prior to
commencing business in the taxable year 1980; annually, after the taxable year 1980, a receipt for
such tax paid shall be procured not later than the 15th day of February, of each taxable year
thereafter, or may be procured immediately prior to commencing business in such tax year.
It is the intent of this taxing ordinance by North Versailles Township to impose a tax of one mill on
gross receipts, and that the proceeds shall not be shared. This tax shall be in addition to any tax
imposed by the East Allegheny School District which likewise imposes a business privilege tax. If
any Court shall decide that this tax must be shared with the school district, then it is the intent of
this article that this tax shall be at the rate of two mills.
§ 270-37. Imposition and rate of tax.
[Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 842]
Every person operating, conducting, doing or engaging in business within the Township of North
Versailles shall pay an annual tax for such operation for the fiscal year of 1980 as herein defined,
and annually thereafter on a twelve-month basis, on the annual gross business transacted by the
taxpayer during each taxable year based on the gross receipts of the enterprise. The tax shall be
at the rate of two mills as applied to the gross receipts. One mill equals $1 per $1,000 of gross
receipts or 0.01%.
It is the intent of North Versailles Township that the business privilege tax and the mercantile tax
shall be imposed and collected under a consolidated tax return. The Tax Collector is directed to
use a consolidated tax form which designates the form as the business privilege/mercantile tax. All
dates, deadlines and filing periods and forms of return shall be applicable to both taxing
ordinances. It is the intent of North Versailles Township to render both taxing ordinances
compatible and to facilitate the collection, return and reconciliation of all tax returns for each tax.
§ 270-38. Computation of gross volume of business.
During the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced business at least one full year prior to the first day of January 1980, shall
compute 11/12 of his annual gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the period between first day of January 1979, and the 31st day of
December 1979, inclusive.
Annually after the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby
imposed who has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of any
taxable year shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual gross volume of
business transacted by him during the preceding taxable year.
During the taxable year 1980 every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced, or who commenced his business less than one year prior to the first day of
January 1980, shall compute his gross volume of business for the tax year 1980 upon the gross
volume of business transacted by him during the first month of his engaging in business, multiplied
by 11.
Annually, after the Township fiscal year 1980, every person subject to the payment of the tax
hereby imposed who has commenced business or who commences his business less than one
full year prior to the beginning of any tax year shall compute his annual gross volume of business
for such tax year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the first month he
engages in business, multiplied by 12.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 294/411
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who commences his business
subsequent to the beginning of any taxable year shall compute his gross volume of business for
such tax year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the first month of his
engaging in business multiplied by the number of months he engages in business in such tax year.
Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who engages in a business
temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature, shall compute his annual gross volume of business
upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such taxable year.
§ 270-39. Returns.
[Amended 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 842]
Returns shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector. Every person making a return
shall verify the correctness thereof by affidavit. A copy of the federal and state tax return must be
attached as exhibits to the local tax return including, but not limited to Schedules A, B and C of the
federal income tax.
During the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the first day of January 1980, shall on or
before the 15th day of March 1980 file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his
business, his business address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of the business transacted by him during the period between the first day of
February 1979 and December 31, 1979, both inclusive and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
Annually, after the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
has commenced business at least one full year prior to the beginning of any tax or fiscal year,
shall, on or before the 15th day of February following, file with the Tax Collector a return setting
forth his name, his business and his business address, and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year and the amount of tax due.
During the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the first day of January 1980, shall on or
before the 15th day of February 1980, file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his
business and his business address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him, during the number of months in business,
and the amount of tax due.
Annually, after the taxable year 1980, every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
has commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning of any tax year shall,
on or before the 15th day of February following, file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business and his business address, and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the number of months in
business, and the amount of the tax due.
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences business subsequent to
the beginning of any tax year shall within 40 days from the date of commencing such business file
a return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and his business address, and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during his first month of business and the amount of tax due.
Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article who engages in a business
temporary, seasonal, or itinerant by its nature shall on the day he completes such business file a
return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and his business address, and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during such period and the amount of the tax due.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 295/411
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Quarterly payments on account of taxes for a current year shall be due and payable on the 15th
day of April, July, October and January of the following year. Final return reconciliation and
payment for the current year shall be due on February 15th of the following year.
§ 270-40. Exemptions for new businesses.
Any person who relocates his business into the Township during the time when this tax is in force shall
be exempt from this tax for the first two years during which he does business within the Township.
Such exemption shall apply only to business undertakings which had not theretofore done business in
the Township. A change of name, form or entity shall not be deemed to be a new business. Any
change in the business form of a going concern shall be deemed to have been made solely to obtain
exempt status, and shall not entitle the person making such change to exempt status under this
section.
§ 270-41. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties
imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by
him from each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns, and payments alleged or
found to be incorrect, or as to which the overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas as in other cases provided.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any taxpayer
or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any returns made, or, if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and
required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations
and investigations as are hereby authorized.
The Tax Collector shall have the power of subpoena.
§ 270-42. Power to recover taxes and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties imposed under this article, shall be
recoverable by the Township as other debts of like amount are recoverable.
§ 270-43. Penalty for late payment.
All persons who fail to make payment, when due, of any tax charged against or imposed upon them by
virtue of this article shall be charged with a penalty of 10% additional on the amount of tax due and
owing, and thereafter, an additional penalty of 1/2% for each month, or a fractional part thereof, until
paid, which penalty shall be added to the tax by the Tax Collector, and collected by him for the benefit
of the Township. Where suit is brought for the recovery of such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest, penalties and attorney fees.
§ 270-44. Compensation of Tax Collector.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 296/411
[1]
The compensation to be paid the Tax Collector be and the same is hereby fixed at 3% on all taxes
collected under the provisions of this article, or at such rate of compensation as may be amended or
revised from time to time by resolution.
§ 270-45. Bond of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall post surety bond in a sufficient amount as fixed from time to time by resolution,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duty or duties under the provisions of this article.
§ 270-46. Confidential nature of information.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other official or agent of the Township as a result of
any returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be
confidential, except for official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information contrary to the provisions of this section
shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 270-47. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 857; 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 867]
Any person convicted before any Magisterial District Judge within the Township or any other
municipality that are coterminous with this Township or elsewhere within the County of Allegheny and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for violating any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of
failing, neglecting, or refusing to pay any tax or penalties imposed under this article, or knowingly
making any incomplete, false, or fraudulent returns, or of attempting to do anything to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall be liable to a fine or
penalty not exceeding $600 and/or undergo imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail or Allegheny
County Workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. Such fine or penalty shall be
in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Sections 15 through 18 of Ord. No. 782, which immediately followed this section,
were omitted from the 1987 codification because they related to court challenges rather than the
administration of the law.
§ 270-48. Interpretation regarding other business taxes.
[Added 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 842]
It is the intent that this article must be construed together with the underlying business privilege tax and
mercantile tax ordinances and with taxing resolutions imposed by the East Allegheny School District. If
there is a conflict between any of these taxing ordinances or resolutions, that interpretation should be
favored which renders the maximum amount of tax due and payable.
Article V. Discounts and Penalties on Real Estate Tax
[Adopted 9-15-1986 by Ord. No. 843 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-49. Discount for prompt payment.
Real estate taxes commencing with the calendar year 1987 shall be payable at a discount of 2% for
the two-month period commencing one day after the date of the original tax notice. Taxes shall
thereafter be payable at face amount for the next ensuing two-month period.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 297/411
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
§ 270-50. Penalty for tardy payment.
Taxpayers who fail to make payment during said four-month period from the date of the tax notice shall
then be charged a penalty of 10% which shall be added to the tax to be collected by the Tax Collector
and shall be so collected by the Tax Collector.
§ 270-51. Tax notices.
This article shall be effective for the year 1987 and for all subsequent years, or until amended by the
Board of Commissioners by simple resolution. However, upon changing the date of the tax notice, it
shall be the obligation of the Board to publish the date when the tax notices will be sent. For purposes
of this resolution for 1987, the date of the tax notice shall be May 1, 1987.
§ 270-51.1. Failure to pay taxes.
[Added 7-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1089]
The Township Tax Collector or the Delinquent Tax Collector as the case may be is hereby
authorized to utilize and enforce the provisions of the Act of May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050, 19, 72 P.S.
§ 5511.19. If any tenant fails to pay any rent to the Tax Collector following service of a notice of
distraint, the Tax Collector or other Township officials are authorized to institute civil litigation
against such tenant for the tenant's failure to comply with the distraint. Such civil litigation is
authorized by the Tax Collector and may be prosecuted in the name of the Township and initiated
by any Township official.
Any tenant who fails to comply with a distraint notice shall be subject to a civil penalty for such
refusal in the amount of $500 for each month such tenant fails to pay commencing on the first day
of the month following service of the distraint. Such tenant shall also be liable for court costs and
reasonable costs and fees incurred by the Township or Tax Collector in pursuing a remedy against
a noncomplying tenant. Any net proceeds received by the Tax Collector or Township shall be
applied to the outstanding tax bill.
Article VI. Waste Tax
[Adopted 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 908 (Ch. 24, Part 7, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-52. Authority.
This article is passed pursuant to the authority of the following statutes:
The Municipal Waste Planning Act and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No.
101, § 101 et seq., as amended, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., as amended.
The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 1 et seq., as amended, 53
P.S. § 6901 et seq., as amended.[1]
Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax Enabling
Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered. See now 53
P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
The First Class Township Code, Act of June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206, Art. I, § 101 et seq., as
amended, 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq., as amended.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 298/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
§ 270-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OPERATOR
A person or entity engaged in operating, controlling or owning a waste landfill or disposing of
waste as defined herein. This shall include ownership or control of the site and/or the operations
on a site.
TAX COLLECTOR
Person or entity named from time to time by simple resolution of the Township Board of
Commissioners. Tax Collector shall post such bond as the Township Board of Commissioners
shall direct by simple resolution, and shall have full power and authority under this article.
WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunch room, office waste or any other material including solid,
liquid, semisolid or that which contains gaseous material resulting from the operations of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities; it
shall further include any sludge which is not hazardous waste. It shall also include sludge from
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply or treatment plants; it shall further include
wastewater and materials used in treatment plants for pollution control facilities. It shall further
include recyclable materials. It shall further include construction and demolition waste and sludge
from sewage treatment plants. It shall further include yard debris, leaves, sticks, wood, grass,
shrubbery, tree trimmings and like material. It is the intention of this article to include any material
which may be dumped, treated, disposed of, stored or otherwise dealt with under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The tax shall be due whether or not such dumping, treating,
storing, filling and disposal operations are lawful.
WASTE LANDFILL
Any facility which is designed, operated or maintained for the storage, treating, dumping or
disposal of waste as defined above. It shall not include a sewage treatment plant.
§ 270-54. Levy of tax.
The incidence of taxation of this article shall be the dumping, disposal, storing, receipt, utilization of
waste and/or operation of any waste landfill within the Township of North Versailles. A tax is hereby
levied on all such transactions and conduct. If any portion of any of the taxable conduct occurs in North
Versailles, then the entire tax is due without proration. All operators shall be responsible for the
collection and payment of the tax pursuant to this article.
§ 270-55. Calculation of tax; responsibilities of operator.
The tax shall be calculated by measuring all waste which is stored, disposed, dumped or treated
at a waste landfill within the Township of North Versailles at whichever of the following described
methods are used by the operator to charge for the use of the subject facility:
At the rate of $1 per ton for all waste which is weighed.
At the rate of $1 for every three cubic yards of waste which is measured by volume.
When the charge is the capacity of the container, $1 for each ton of capacity of such vehicle.
If the operator fails to charge or uses some other method to charge, then that method shall be
used which produces the maximum tax.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 299/411
B. The tax year shall be the calendar year commencing January 1 of each year and ending
December 31 of each year. The tax shall be payable on a monthly basis and payments shall be
remitted to the Tax Collector by the 15th day of the month following the month for which payment
is made. This tax shall be automatically renewed from year to year without specific reenactment or
advertising. The terms and conditions of this article shall automatically be renewed and the tax
shall be due and payable without any further notice or public action. Each operator shall remit the
tax on a monthly basis as indicated immediately hereinabove and shall file a final return for the
year of operation by March 1 of the year following the year for which the tax return is to be filed.
The operator as defined herein shall be responsible for collecting and remitting the tax, and for
filing tax returns.
§ 270-56. Tax Collector designated.
The Township Secretary is hereby designated as the Tax Collector to serve without bond except as the
Secretary is presently bonded. The Tax Collector shall have authority to collect the tax, demand and
receive accounting from all operators for all activities and procedures. The Tax Collector shall further
have the authority to enact such regulations and prepare such forms as it deems to be appropriate.
Such regulations and forms must first be approved by the Township Commissioners. The Tax Collector
shall have authority to sue, prosecute and lien in the name of the Township for all such taxes, interest
and penalties that may be due. Tax Collector shall have all full rights as any Tax Collector under the
statutes hereinabove cited to enforce collection and to determine the amount of tax due. This includes,
but is not limited to, the right to audit operators' records and the right to review all tax returns and
records of any operator.
§ 270-57. Violations and penalties.
The failure of an operator to file a tax return or provide information as directed or requested by the Tax
Collector, or as imposed by this article, shall be deemed to be an offense. It shall also be an offense for
failing to remit by the 15th of each month for all taxes due and owing from the prior month, or for failing
to remit on an annual basis as set forth herein. All such sums which are not paid when due shall be
subject to a penalty of 10% and simple interest at 6% per annum from the due date. For each violation
of this article, the responsible entity shall be subject to a fine not in excess of $1,000. Each day of
delinquency shall be a separate offense.
§ 270-58. Interpretation.
If any portion of this article shall be deemed to be improper, illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, then it is
the intent of the Township Board of Commissioners that it would have enacted the balance of this
article irrespective of said invalid portion. It is further the intent of the Township Board of
Commissioners to impose a system of taxation and to collect the tax on dumping, filling and waste
disposal operations. This article shall be interpreted to best carry out that intention so that a tax is
imposed, collected and not evaded. Further, it is the intention of the Township of North Versailles that it
receive no less than the maximum amount allowed by statute.
Article VII. Tax Assessment Limitation Program
[Adopted 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 933 (Ch. 24, Part 8, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 270-59. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 300/411
A.
B.
ACT 77
The Act of December 22, 1993, P.L. 529, No. 77, codified as the Allegheny Regional Asset District
Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW
See the definition of "Act 77," above.
ASSESSMENT
The fair market value of property as determined by the Board of Property Assessment, Appeals
and Review.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
The Board of Commissioners of Allegheny County.
COUNTY
Allegheny County.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT
The Department of Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER
A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence in Allegheny County who is:
A single person aged 65 or older during a calendar year in which county real property taxes
are due and assessed.
Married persons if either spouse is 65 years or older during a calendar year in which county
real property taxes are due and assessed.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
All income received by an eligible taxpayer while residing in his or her principal residence during a
calendar year.
INCOME
All income from whatever source derived including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses,
commissions, income from self-employment, alimony, support money, cash public assistance and
relief, the gross amount of any pension or annuities including railroad retirement benefits, all
benefits received under state unemployment insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all
interest received from the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's compensation and the gross amount
of loss time insurance benefits, life insurance benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the
total of death benefit payments) and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift between
members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300, but shall not include surplus food or
other relief in kind supplied by a governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation
dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT
Any person who for at least 10 continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling
place as a principal residence and domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of
the property as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
PERSON
A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE
The dwelling place of a person, including the principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in
connection therewith which contributes to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience; or a building
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 301/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three residential units of
which one residential unit must be a principal resident of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT
The Act of March 11, 1971, P.L. 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at Pa. Stat. Ann. Tit. 72, § 4751-
1 et seq.[1]
Editor's Note: The Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Act, codified as 72 P.S. §§ 4751-1 through
4751-12, was repealed 6-27-2006, by P.L. 1873, No. 1. See now the Senior Citizens Property Tax and
Rent Rebate Assistance Act, 53 P.S. § 6926.1301 et seq.
§ 270-60. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers.
All eligible taxpayers in Allegheny County who are longtime owners/occupants shall be entitled to have
the assessment on his or her principal residence maintained at or limited to the amount determined by
the Department of Property Assessment for the calendar year 1993 if the eligible taxpayer meets the
household income limits for qualification for any amount of property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.
§ 270-61. Participation in program.
Any person paying property taxes in the county may apply to the Department of Property Assessment
for certification as a participant in the assessment limitation program authorized under this article. In
order to be eligible to participate in the program, the person must meet the following conditions:
The person must be a single person aged 65 or older or be married persons with either spouse
being 65 years of age or older.
The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and domicile of the resident.
The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive any amount of property tax
rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.
§ 270-62. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Property Assessment shall have the authority to issue rules and regulations with
respect to the administration of the limitation of tax assessment program established under this article.
Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable proof of household income,
proof of residence, proof of qualifications for or receipt of a property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act and any other reasonable requirements and conditions as may be
necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation program.
Article VIII. Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 972A]
§ 270-63. Adoption.
A taxpayer's bill of rights is hereby adopted as set forth in the disclosure statement, attached hereto
and incorporated herein as Exhibit A.[1] This disclosure statement may be amended from time to time
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 302/411
[1]
[2]
[1]
by Township Council by simple resolution. This disclosure statement and article shall only apply to the
wage tax, the occupation privilege tax and the real estate transfer tax.[2]
Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: See, respectively, the following articles of this chapter: Art. II, Earned Income Tax; Art. X,
Local Services Tax (formerly known as the "occupational privilege tax"); and Art. I, Realty Transfer Tax.
§ 270-64. Tax Hearing Board.
There is hereby created the North Versailles Tax Hearing Board to consist of a panel of three persons
to serve at the will of council. No remuneration shall be paid to panel members. Council shall name the
Board members by separate resolution from time to time. The Board shall have the authority to request
opinions and legal advice from the Township Solicitor.
§ 270-65. Duties of Board.
The Board is directed to carry out the duties provided by Act 50,[1] to adjudicate local tax disputes as
provided by law and to adopt appeal forms for use by taxpayers in filing appeals.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 270-66. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on January 1, 1999.
Article IX. Real Estate Tax Millage for Fire Protection
[Adopted 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 1029]
§ 270-67. Tax rate.
In the millage designation levied for 2007, the Township earmarked 1/2 mill for firefighting purposes.
This designation was ordained pursuant to 53 P.S. § 56709(a), Subsection Two(i) (A), (B), (C) and (E).
§ 270-68. Imposition in future years.
It is acknowledged that this shall not impose an obligation on the Township to impose this millage in
future years. However, the Board of Commissioners shall be free to impose or not to impose such
millage in future years in its sole discretion. If the Board of Commissioners does not include such a
millage appropriation in its budget in any future year, it shall be presumed that the Board of
Commissioners elected not to earmark or appropriate millage for firefighting purposes.
§ 270-69. Separate account.
There is hereby created a separate account for the deposit of all such funds derived from this millage
appropriation, and the Township Treasurer is authorized to open such an account with the Township
official depository for the safekeeping of such funds and for the investment of such funds pending
appropriation and distribution.
§ 270-70. Use of funds.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 303/411
Such funds shall and may be appropriated and paid by the Treasurer pursuant to duly enacted
resolutions as may be approved by the Board of Township Commissioners from time to time in its sole
discretion for firefighting purposes consistent with the goals of the First Class Township Code as
enumerated in § 270-67 above.
§ 270-71. Effective date.
This article shall take effect as of January 1, 2007.
Article X. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 1037]
§ 270-72. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Township of North Versailles Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 270-73. Definitions.
The following terms and words unless otherwise expressly stated shall have the meanings as
hereinafter described:
COLLECTOR and TAX COLLECTOR
The person or entity appointed by Township Board of Commissioners from time to time to collect
the tax imposed herein and to administer the provisions of this article.
CORPORATION
Any corporation, joint-stock company, association or other legal entity organized and operating
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
EMPLOYER
Any individual, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, governmental body or unit or agency or any
other entity who or which employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or any
other type of compensation basis, or who or which pays any remuneration or anything of value for
services or forbearance. Where used in this article, a "partnership" shall mean and include the
individual partners and members of a partnership or association, and a "business entity as a
corporation" shall mean and include the officers of the same.
INDIVIDUAL or PERSON
A natural person.
NONRESIDENT
A corporation, employer, individual or any other entity which is domiciled outside the geographic
limits of the Township of North Versailles.
OCCUPATION
Any enterprise, activity, profession, any undertaking or forbearance of any nature conducted for
profit, or ordinarily conducted for profit by an individual, whereby any wage, salary, commission,
something of value, a forbearance or other remuneration is earned, given and/or paid.
RESIDENT
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 304/411
[1]
A.
[1]
B.
A.
A corporation, employer, individual or any other entity which is domiciled within the geographic
limits of the Township of North Versailles.
TAXPAYER
An individual, corporation or partnership required to file a return and/or to remit a tax under this
article.
WAGES, SALARIES, COMMISSIONS, COMPENSATION AND OTHER REMUNERATION
Any of these words or combinations include salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, gratuities that may accrue or be paid or received by an individual for services
rendered or for forbearance, whether directly or through an agent, and whether in cash, property
or anything of value. The words shall not include periodic payments for sick or disability benefits
and those commonly recognized as old-age benefits, retirement benefits or retirement pay or
pensions paid to individuals retired from service or employment or after a stated period of
employment. It shall further not apply to public assistance or unemployment compensation
payments. It shall further not apply to compensation paid by the United States to individuals for
active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States, or to any bonus or additional
compensation paid by the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other State
of the United States for such military service.
§ 270-74. Imposition of tax.
A tax is hereby imposed in the maximum amount authorized by the statue referenced above,[1] which
is currently set at $52 per year per individual for the year 2008, at the rate of $1 per week during the
calendar year of 2008, and for every year thereafter until repealed or amended by Township Board of
Commissioners. The tax is levied for the purposes of police, fire and emergency services. The tax is
imposed on all individual residents and nonresidents who hold an occupation in the Township of North
Versailles.
Editor's Note: The statute referenced in the Preamble of Ord. No. 1037 is the Local Tax Enabling, which
is now found at 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 270-75. Exemptions.
Individuals subject to this tax under this article who or which earn less than $500 annually from all
sources shall be exempt from paying the tax under this article. In order to be entitled to the
exemption an affidavit by each employer for the applicable year must be filed with the Tax
Collector that the individual subject to the tax is anticipated to earn less than $500 for the
applicable tax year due to the seasonal nature of employment or other applicable reason.
Exempt from the application of this tax are persons who served in any war or armed conflict with
the Armed Forces of the United States of America in accordance with 53 P.S. § 6902(c),[1] which
provisions are incorporated herein.
Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.301.1(c).
§ 270-76. Collection of tax.
Every employer who employs one or more individuals for a wage whose wages are subject to the
tax imposed by this article shall deduct the amount of tax levied by this article from such wages as
defined which are paid to the individual from each payment made during the year as measured
from the enactment of this article, from January 1 of each succeeding year or from the date of
hiring for each employee hired subsequent to the enactment of this article.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 305/411
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The tax shall be paid by the employer to the Tax Collector on a form to be supplied by the Tax
Collector, if any, which shall include no less information than the employer's name, address and
tax identification number, the employee's name, home address and social security number. The
tax shall be remitted to the Tax Collector within 30 days of deduction from an individual's wages.
Every employer shall be liable for the amount of the tax due whether the employer deducts the tax
or not, and shall be liable to the Township of North Versailles for the full amount of the tax and all
penalties, charges, interest, fees and costs as may be due or which may become due.
§ 270-77. Tax Collector.
The Township Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles shall designate a Tax
Collector by simple resolution from time to time, who or which shall have full authority to collect
such tax and to enforce and administer the terms of this article. The compensation of the Tax
Collector shall likewise be set by Township Board of Commissioners by simple resolution from
time to time.
The Tax Collector shall collect and receive all taxes and other collections authorized and imposed
under this article. The Tax Collector shall further furnish receipts for payments, keep and maintain
accurate records showing the identities and addresses of all employers and individuals, dates and
amounts of payments and when such payments are remitted to the Township of North Versailles.
The Tax Collector shall further keep such other records as may be ordered by Township Board of
Commissioners from time to time.
Taxes collected by the Tax Collector shall be deposited in such account or accounts as may be
approved by Township Board of Commissioners from time to time. The Tax Collector shall report
to Township Board of Commissioners every 30 days, or as often as Board of Commissioners
directs, on all activities and include all such information as Township Board of Commissioners may
direct and order from time to time.
§ 270-78. Powers of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector is charged and authorized to collect all taxes and other payments due pursuant to
this article, and is further authorized as follows:
The Tax Collector is authorized and empowered to administer and enforce the provisions of this
article and all rules and regulations prescribed, adopted or promulgated by Township Board of
Commissioners from time to time relating to the collection, enforcement and administration hereof.
Consistent with such rules and regulations, the Tax Collector shall have the power and authority to
collect and deposit taxes and other payments as directed by Township Board of Commissioners,
to examine, reexamine and correct any and all returns filed hereunder, and to compute, settle,
resettle and discharge all taxes and other charges hereby levied.
The Tax Collector or any agent, employee or official so designated by the Township of North
Versailles is authorized and empowered to examine the books, papers, documents and records of
any employer or taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was
made to determine and verify the amount due. Employers are obligated and directed to give to the
Tax Collector or the duly authorized agent of the Township of North Versailles the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized. The Tax
Collector or such other agent of the Township of North Versailles is hereby authorized to examine
any person under oath concerning any income or wages which was or should have been earned,
paid or recorded and taxes which were or should have been remitted. The Tax Collector is
authorized and empowered to compel the production of books, papers and records and the
attendance of all persons whether as parties or witness who the Tax Collector reasonably believes
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 306/411
[1]
C.
D.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
have knowledge of such income. The Tax Collector is authorized and empowered to seek search
warrants and issue subpoenas to fulfill the duties imposed on the Tax Collector under this article.
All information learned by the Tax Collector in the performance of the duties imposed hereunder
shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except where disclosure of the information is
required for a proper judicial order, decree or relief, or as may be otherwise provided by law. Any
person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a summary offense and
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, or to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days for nonpayment of such fine, penalty and costs.[1]
Editor's Note: See also § 270-80, Violations and penalties.
It is the intent of the Township of North Versailles that the tax imposed by this article shall apply to
the fullest extent permissible under law and within the legal powers of the Township of North
Versailles to impose the tax and the duties provided herein.
§ 270-79. Interest, penalties, costs and attorney fees.
All taxes and payments due the Township of North Versailles remaining unpaid after they become
due shall bear interest at the maximum rate as permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; such persons or employers shall further be subject to a penalty of 10% of the
amount due during which time the tax remains unpaid.
All sums due under this article shall be recoverable by the Township of North Versailles in the
same manner as debts, taxes or other obligations due the Township are recoverable with full rights
in the Township of North Versailles as are authorized by state law.
The Township of North Versailles has heretofore enacted an Attorney Fee Ordinance, Ordinance
No. 867.[1] The Tax Collector is authorized and empowered to employ and utilize the services of
an attorney and to invoke and impose the fees and costs enabled by that ordinance in the
collection of the taxes and charges due under this article.
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 867 (Ch.1, Part 9 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances) was superseded
2-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1055; see now Ch. 200, Municipal Claims and Liens, Art. I, Attorneys Fees
and Collection Charges.
§ 270-80. Violations and penalties.
Any entity or individual who or which violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil fine
or penalty in the amount of $600, costs of prosecution and attorney fees as provided herein for each
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 270-81. Severability; repealer.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any sentence, clause or provision is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township of North Versailles that it
would have enacted the balance of this article irrespective of the invalid portion. Any ordinances
conflicting with this article are hereby repealed so far as the same may affect this article, including the
Occupation Privilege Tax Ordinance, as reenacted by Ordinance No. 857, which is repealed,
conditional on the validity of this article, and the EMST tax referenced above, which is hereby
reenacted as the LST tax.
Chapter 276. Trees
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 307/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 25, Part 1, of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Logging and timbering — See Ch. 185.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 222, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
§ 276-1. Planting trees in right-of-way.
Planting of trees in the rights-of-way of the Township without the permission of the Township is hereby
prohibited.
§ 276-2. Maintaining trees in right-of-way.
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain and trim trees in the rights-ofway
of the Township.
Chapter 282. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 11-16-1987 by
Ord. No. 857 (Ch. 15 of the 1987 Code of Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 206.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Article I. General Regulations
§ 282-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or articles to which different or
additional definitions apply, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act
of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162 No. 81),[1] as amended, except that, in this chapter, the word "street"
may be used interchangeably with the word "highway", and shall have the same meaning as the
word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and include New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 282-2. Adoption of traffic and parking regulations.
[Amended 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 863]
All traffic regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances, as parts of
ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as amendments to this chapter, except where the
law specifically authorizes less formal action.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 308/411
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
The Township Board of Commissioners may hereinafter designate and regulate parking on all
public streets by simple resolution duly enacted. The Board of Commissioners may determine in
its sole discretion how parking shall be regulated on public streets by either banning parking on
one or both sides, or determining that parked vehicles must park with two wheels off the paved
portion of the roadway so long as the vehicle remains inside the public right-of-way. All such
determinations shall be posted in the sole discretion of the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 282-3. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and regulations in
force immediately before the enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier
ordinances and regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect any act
done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted under any of those
repealed or superseded ordinances or regulations.
§ 282-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
The Board of Commissioners shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking
temporarily and in time of emergency:
In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or
parking regulations; and
In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades,
processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for
periods of not more than 72 hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department in the
same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor
in violation of any such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign
or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of
such nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 282-5. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon and along
the highways in the Township where for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or
parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be
effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or
tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person
who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation
for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more
than $25 together with costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for the test
and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 282-6. Closing or restriction of streets.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 309/411
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a street to
vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion
while construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the
closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon any street
where construction or maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of the
restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE
A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any street;
PROCESSION
A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving along a street in a way that
interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral
caravan or military convoy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any assemblage unless the person
organizing or conducting the assemblage first obtains a permit from the Board of Commissioners,
which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in
advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks
in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date when the
assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it
shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate
in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place other than that
authorized by the permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any procession unless the person
organizing or conducting the procession first obtains a permit from the Board of Commissioners,
which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in
advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a statedesignated
highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in
advance of the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be
held, the route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants may
commence to assemble and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the
procession shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the procession shall
have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or
otherwise than those stated in the permit.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-8. Authority of police officers.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 310/411
A.
B.
A.
The police officers of the Township of North Versailles are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the
highways of the Township and at intersections thereof.
§ 282-9. Speed-timing devices.
The North Versailles Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed-timing devices for
the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the
Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within the Township, be they
Township, county or state highways, and does also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to
local authorities under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P.S. § 101 et
seq. (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 282-10. Maximum speed limits on certain streets.
Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets, as follows, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any part of a street where a maximum speed limit
applies at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Angeline Entire length 15
Arlene Entire length 15
Cedarhurst Street Entire length 15
Crestas Avenue Entire length 20
Crooked Run Road Entire length 35
Diane Entire length 15
First Street Entire length 25
Foster Road Entire length 30
Girard Avenue Entire length 25
Graham Street Entire length 15
Joanne Entire length 15
Lawrence Street Entire length 15
Mahoney Avenue Entire length 15
Mary Ellen Entire length 15
Maryland Avenue Entire length 15
McKee Road Entire length 35
Oakdale Entire length 15
Overhill Drive Entire length 25
Palma Street Entire length 25
Penn Street Entire length 15
Penning Way Entire length 15
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 311/411
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Preston Drive Entire length 15
Second Street Entire length 15
Valley Avenue Entire length 25
Woodland Street Entire length 15
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 282-11. Maximum speed limits on certain bridges and elevated
structures.
Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and elevated structures, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a
higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 282-12. Maximum speed limits for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such hazardous grade, no
person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight in excess of that referred to for that grade, in
the direction stated for that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that
grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle shall stop the
vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction of
Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed Limit
Required to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum
speed limit.
§ 282-13. Maximum speed limits in parks.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 312/411
[1]
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and roadways in the public parks
maintained and operated by the Township,[1] except in the following locations, where the lower
maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location Maximum Speed Limit
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See also § 206-3D, Motor vehicles, of Ch. 206, Parks and Recreation.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 282-14. Minimum speed limits.
[Amended 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 965]
All public streets, roads, avenues and rights-of-way within the Township of North Versailles are
deemed to be "urban" as that term is used in the First Class Township Code, the Motor Vehicle
Code and the Pennsylvania Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq., 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and 1 Pa. Code § 1.1 et
seq.
The minimum speed limit on all public streets, roads, avenues, alleys and rights-of-way within the
Township of North Versailles is hereby established at 35 miles per hour, except as may be
otherwise established to the authority of the First Class Township Code, the Motor Vehicle Code
and the Pennsylvania Code.
Township officials are given authority by this section to obtain traffic studies and to establish lower
speed limits according to those traffic studies. Approval of such lower or higher speed limits may
be accomplished by simple resolution.
§ 282-15. Traffic signals.
At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected), and traffic at those locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-16. Turn on red signal prohibited.
The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles headed in the direction or
directions indicated are prohibited from making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
(Reserved)
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 313/411
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-17. One-way streets.
The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Ault Street
[Added 9-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 1046]
East Pittsburgh
McKeesport Boulevard
East Pittsburgh
McKeesport Boulevard
North
Delaware Avenue Congress Street Elm Street South
Thomas Street
[Added 8-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1108]
Route 30 Peach Way South
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $250 and costs, and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by North Versailles Township for
prosecution.
[Amended 8-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1108]
§ 282-18. Turning at certain intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each
case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time
when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Not to Make Into When
Type of Vehicle
Applicable to
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-19. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the first-named street at any of the
following intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make other than a
right turn, at any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-20. U-turns.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 314/411
A.
B.
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of the following portions of
streets, in the direction or directions indicated for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-21. No-passing zones.
The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-22. Through highways.
The following highways are established as through highways, thus authorizing stop or yield signs
to be erected facing traffic approaching every intersection with the through highway except for
those intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section shall stop the
vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,[1] as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed
all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-23. Stop intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways established by
§ 282-22) are established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direction
or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as
required by Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code,[1] and shall not proceed into or across the
second-named or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable requirements of
that section of the law.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 315/411
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Auberle Street Fifth Avenue
Arcania Street Fifth Avenue
Broadway Extension Washington Avenue
Central Avenue Greensburg Pike
Clyde Avenue Lincoln Highway
Clyde Street Perry Avenue
Cornelia Street Kline Avenue
Crooked Run Road Lincoln Highway
Delaware Avenue Washington Avenue
Devilton Road Fifth Avenue
Edward Street Lincoln Highway
Elder Street East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Elizabeth Street Lincoln Highway
Elm Street Washington Avenue
Emlyn Avenue Fifth Avenue
Emma Street Kline Avenue
First Street Greensburg Pike
First Street Versailles Avenue
Hamer Avenue Greensburg Pike
Heckman Road McKee Road
Heckman Road Route 48
Hoffman Lincoln Highway
Irish Town Road East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Jack's Run Road Lincoln Highway
Kline Avenue Greensburg Pike
Lloyd Avenue Greensburg Pike
Luehm Avenue (northbound)
[Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 1116]
Hill Street
Luehn Street Lincoln Highway
Mary Street Kline Avenue
Maser Road Lincoln Highway
Maysmith Road Fifth Avenue
McKee Road Lincoln Highway
Mehaffey's Lane Route 48
Miller's Lane Lincoln Highway
Moss Side Boulevard Lincoln Highway
Naser Road Moss Side Boulevard
Oakdale Road Fifth Avenue
Penn Avenue Fifth Avenue
Perry Avenue East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Porter Street Perry Avenue
Port Perry Road Braddock Avenue
Route 30 ramp Greensburg Pike
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 316/411
[1]
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Route 48 Crooked Run Road
Route 990 East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Route 990 Route 30
St. Barmohas Street Fifth Avenue
Second Street Versailles Avenue
Station Street East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Taylor Street Lincoln Highway
Third Street Lincoln Highway
Tinsman Avenue Greensburg Pike
Tinsman Street Kline Avenue
Valley Avenue Lincoln Highway
Versailles Avenue East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Washington Avenue Fifth Avenue
Westinghouse Avenue East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard
Wood Street Fifth Avenue
Wood Street Washington Avenue
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-24. Yield intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways established by
§ 282-22) are established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle
as required by Section 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,[1] and then yield the right-of-way as required
by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-25. Pushcarts.
The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other than a pedalcycle,
propelled solely by human power, and used or intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or
sale of goods, wares or merchandise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any sidewalk in any business district
except as necessary to move the pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 317/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
or from which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under permit from Board
of Commissioners as provided in Subsection C of this section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk except for the purpose of
selling or dispensing from that pushcart goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit
from Board of Commissioners. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making application
for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the Township, of $100 for any
calendar year, $50 for any six-month period, or $25 for any three-month period. The permit shall
be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with
Board of Commissioners that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by Board of
Commissioners and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more stated locations upon the
sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each location;
Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the disposal of garbage and refuse
resulting from the operations carried on;
Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or regulation pertaining to health,
sanitation and the handling of food or drink.
Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition of any permit granted
under this section, shall be guilty of a summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 282-26. Skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in the Township, or upon
any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of
§ 282-5 of this chapter, provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from
pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating or to ride upon or propel any coaster
or other toy vehicle upon:
Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent
a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a
sidewalk.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $5 and costs.
Article III. Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicles
and Load
§ 282-27. Vehicle weight limits on certain streets and bridges.
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by Section 4902(a) of
the Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 318/411
[1]
[2]
B.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
A.
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross Weight
(pounds)
All streets 10,000
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under Sections 4902(a)
and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1).
§ 282-28. Vehicle size limit on certain streets and bridges.
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by Section 4902(a) of
the Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in
violation of the size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under Section 4902(a)
and Section 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of $75 and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1).
§ 282-29. Vehicle restrictions due to hazardous traffic conditions
and other safety factors.
By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by authority granted by Section
4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or
combination in violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under Section 4902(b)
and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $25 and not more than $100 and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b) and (g)(1).
§ 282-30. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a passenger car on any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 319/411
B.
C.
Provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle
on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of those streets or parts of
streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
Article IV. General Parking Regulations
§ 282-31. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle
parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 282-32. Parking prohibited at all times.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Location
Dale Alley
[Added 2-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1057]
Both Entire length
East Pittsburgh McKeesport Boulevard Front of Dixon Hollow School
Logan Road
[Added 9-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1061]
Both Between Madden Drive and East Drive
Thomas Avenue West Lincoln Highway to Peach Way
§ 282-33. Parking prohibited certain days and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days and between the hours
indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
§ 282-34. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked, on any of the following streets
or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor
home or passenger car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 282-35. Parking time limited certain days and hours.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 320/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than the time indicated, in any of
the following locations, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking Time
Limit
(Reserved)
§ 282-36. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle, or to allow it to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided for
that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose or
Vehicle
(Reserved)
§ 282-37. Handicapped parking.
[Added 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 917]
There is hereby created in North Versailles Township specific parking spaces to be determined
and located which will be available only for parking motor vehicles bearing a "handicapped" or
"severely disabled veteran" vehicle registration plate or which displays a "handicapped" or
"severely disabled veteran" parking placard as such are prescribed by the Motor Vehicle Code.[1]
Such vehicles must be then used solely for transportation of a handicapped person or a severely
disabled veteran. In such instances parking shall not be limited to 60 minutes. Such license plate
must be affixed to the vehicle or such placard must be readily visible from without the vehicle.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
The Township Commissioners may from time to time designate handicapped parking spaces as
near as practicable to the residence of a handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran upon
the written request of such person. Thereafter, following the erection of appropriate signage in
accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code, that space may only be used by persons who are in fact
disabled persons or severely handicapped veterans in compliance with Subsection A. The
Township shall be under no obligation to create such spaces, but may do so in its sole discretion
considering all the circumstances.
Such handicapped parking spaces described in Subsection B or in any other area within the
Township either on private or public property may be made, approved or disapproved by simple
resolution. They shall become effective upon erection of appropriate signage in accordance with
the Motor Vehicle Code.
Owners of private commercial property using that property for the invitation to the public in general
may likewise establish handicapped parking spaces in accordance with this section. Such spaces
shall have erected thereon signs indicating the restricted type parking spaces in accordance with
the Motor Vehicle Code. Thereafter, violations as provided for herein for the unauthorized use may
be enforced as a violation of this section. The owner must erect signs in accordance with the
Motor Vehicle Code; the erection of such signs shall be deemed to be a dedication by the owner
during the time when the sign is present that space is devoted to handicapped parking as defined
and circumscribed herein.
Handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans shall have the right to issue statements to
violators and violating vehicles for the violation of this section. The form of such statement shall be
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 321/411
F.
A.
B.
[1]
prescribed and prepared by the North Versailles Township Chief of Police.
Penalties. Penalties prescribed shall be those penalties as set forth in the Motor Vehicle Code, as
amended from time to time.
§ 282-38. Loading zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) on the
roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing
or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 282-39. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 863]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $15 and costs, provided that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of
parking enforcement personnel of the Township to report to the appropriate official all violations of
any provision of this article, indicating, in each case: the section violated; the license number of
the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also attach to or
place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this
article. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will
report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $5 within 48 hours after the time of
the notice, or if he will place the sum of $5 within the envelope provided and mail or deliver it to
the Township office, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
In lieu of payment of fine, the Magisterial District Judge of competent jurisdiction is authorized to
sentence a violator to 30 days in jail. It is determined that each day of parking shall be a separate
offense. In order to allow free and easy access to fire, police, ambulance and snow removal
vehicles, in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, vehicles may be summarily towed if they
interfere with the movement and passage of such vehicles.
Article V. Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked
Vehicles
§ 282-40. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code[1] and gives authority
to the Township to remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined by
the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to
others, may be towed under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 322/411
§ 282-41. Authority.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the removal and impounding, of
any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 282-40 of this article, and provided that no such vehicle shall be
removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article or the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 282-42. Tow-away zones.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established as tow-away zones. Signs
shall be posted to place the public on notice that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the
Township parking regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 282-43. Approved garages; bonding; towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done only by approved storage
garages that shall be designated from time to time by Board of Commissioners. Every such garage
shall submit evidence to Board of Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in
an amount satisfactory to Board of Commissioners as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded
vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to Board of Commissioners
its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter, and, when the schedule
is approved by Board of Commissioners, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage; no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose
vehicle is removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage. The Board of
Commissioners shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 282-44. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this chapter shall, unless payment is
made under protest, be final and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid. If payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the offender shall
be entitled to a hearing before a district justice. Payment of towing and storage charges shall not
relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 282-45. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage costs, plus a fee of $25, of
which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to
which the vehicle was taken.
§ 282-46. Recordkeeping.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 323/411
[1]
A.
B.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this article and shall be
able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 282-47. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle Code if, at the time of the
intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and
expresses a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 282-48. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 282-49. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a report shall be filed with
PennDOT in accordance with Section 7311 of the Vehicle Code,[1] by the person having legal custody
of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq., as amended).
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
Article VI. Snow and Ice Emergency and Removal
§ 282-50. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on the snow
emergency routes named in § 282-52 of this article, the Board of Commissioners, in its discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on
the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township through radio, newspaper or other
available media, and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 282-51. Prohibited and restricted activities.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the
emergency, for any person:
To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere on any snow
emergency route designated in § 282-52 of this article; or
To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless that vehicle is equipped
with snow tires or chains.
§ 282-52. Snow emergency routes.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 324/411
A.
B.
C.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 282-53. Removal of ice and snow from private property; putting
ice and snow in public right-of-way.
[Added 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1007]
Hereinafter, any property owner having an improved public sidewalk abutting his or her premises must
remove all accumulated snow and ice from the same within 24 hours of a snowfall. Furthermore, it
shall be unlawful for any person or entity to remove, shovel, place or cause snow and or ice to be
placed upon the public right-of-way. It is the intent of this section that property owners, managers,
person or entities engaged in snow removal on private property including sidewalks for public use may
not place, put, shovel, plow or utilize snowblowers to cause snow and or ice to be placed upon or
come to be upon the public right-of-way.
§ 282-54. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 1007]
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 282-50 of this article, a person
shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow
emergency route, that person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $300 plus costs.
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 282-50 of this article, a person
shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped
with snow tires or chains, that person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $300 plus costs.
Each violation of § 282-53 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $300 plus costs. Each incident shall
be deemed to be a separate violation of this article.
Article VII. Engine Brake Retarders
[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 1030]
§ 282-55. Findings.
The operation and use of a brake retarder on a motor vehicle creates excessive noise and adversely
affects the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of North Versailles Township, and
therefore, is a nuisance.
§ 282-56. Prohibited acts.
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any portion of Wall Avenue located within the boundaries of
North Versailles Township utilizing in said operation a brake retarder.
§ 282-57. Emergency driving situations.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 325/411
[1]
A.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving situations which require the utilization of a brake
retarder for the purpose of protecting the safety and property of the residents of North Versailles
Township, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians, and the operator and passengers of the motor
vehicle involved in said emergency situations.
§ 282-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or knowingly permits the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon
summary conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not less than $300 and not more
than $1,000, plus court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by North Versailles
Township for prosecution.
Chapter 300. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Versailles 8-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1109.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 44.
Adult uses — See Ch. 75.
Airport District Overlay — See Ch. 81.
Communications apparatus — See Ch. 116.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 160.
Junkyards — See Ch. 179.
Logging and timbering — See Ch. 185.
Mining — See Ch. 191.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 196.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 222.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 265.
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Use Authorization Table
Attachment 2 - Commercial Zoning District Standards Table
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 300, Zoning, adopted 1-17-2008 by Ord. No.
1040, as amended.
Article I. Title
§ 300-100. Title.
This chapter shall hereafter be cited as the "North Versailles Township Zoning Ordinance."
Article II. Purpose and Community Development Objectives
§ 300-200. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish zoning districts for the Township of North Versailles.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 326/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
§ 300-201. Overall community development objectives.
The overall community development objectives are to:
Encourage infill housing at a scale and manner appropriate to surrounding and predominately
single-family neighborhoods.
Prevent blight, while preventing overcrowding.
Encourage the preservation of open space throughout the Planning Area through the preservation
of wooded hillsides and interconnected common open space.
Protect the Planning Area's natural resources, including steeply sloped and wooded areas.
Provide for and encourage reasonable community growth, to include a broad and adequate range
of permitted uses based, in part, on the findings of the Multi-Municipal Comprehensive Plan, and
redevelopment of existing neighborhoods while protecting the Planning Area's natural resources
and fostering the stability of existing development within the Planning Area.
Encourage efficient pedestrian, as well as vehicular, circulation.
§ 300-202. Individual community development objectives.
The following constitute the objective of the municipality within the Planning Area and expressly
recognize the general objectives cited in § 300-201.
North Versailles Township.
Encourage large-scale development and redevelopment of blighted and vacant land near
main arterials in a manner that encourages stable growth of needed industries, thereby
providing such uses that are defined by a larger scale at those areas of the Planning Area
(typically lying within the Township) where they may be accommodated.
Create specific community character through the development of unique and creative
residential plans, including planned residential development, while buffering such
developments from adjacent existing and traditional neighborhoods within the boroughs or
creating traditional neighborhood development integrated therewith.
Article III. Definitions
§ 300-300. Word usage.
All words used in this chapter shall carry their customary dictionary definitions as provided in the most
recent edition of Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, except where specifically defined herein. Words used
in the present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not permissive; the word "may" is
permissive. The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or structures, shall be construed to
include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." The word "person" shall
include the individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association or any other entity. Words in
the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender. The words "includes" and "including" shall not
limit the defined term to the specific examples, but are intended to extend the terms meaning to other
instances of like kind and character.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 327/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 300-301. Definitions.
The following definitions shall constitute the basis for the meaning and interpretation of the following
terms in their use throughout this chapter.
ACCESS DRIVE
A privately owned, constructed, and maintained vehicular access from a public or private right-ofway
to off-street parking or loading spaces accessory to nonresidential uses and to shared
driveways or parking areas accessory to more than one residential unit.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Any structure designed to accommodate or used solely to house the occupation of an accessory
use.
ACCESSORY USE
Secondary or subordinate uses, which exist to serve or are incidental to a principal use, wherein
said secondary use could not exist as its own establishment independent of the principal use.
ADJACENT BUILDING
The structure which is most proximate a subject building or structure as cited in this chapter, that
shares frontage and an adjacent front yard on the same street, as measured from the corner of
the subject structure to the nearest corner of the structure at the building line.
ADULT DAY SERVICES CENTER
A premises, or part thereof, in which services are provided to assist in meeting the needs of
consumers, including personal care, social, nutritional, health and educational needs,
simultaneously provided for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator and who are
60 years of age or older or who have post-stroke dementia, Parkinsonism or a dementia-related
disease such as Alzheimer's or other organic brain syndrome.
ADULT USES
Any of the following activities and uses as defined below:
ADULT BUSINESS
Any establishment having 25% or more of its stock in trade or service provided any goods or
services that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Such uses
shall include adult book stores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult entertainment cabaret,
adult videocassette rental and sales outlet, adult massage parlors or other adult uses.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER AND/OR ADULT CABERET
Any public or private establishment that features topless dancers, employees or performers
displaying exposed specified anatomical areas, strippers, male or female impersonators or
similar entertainers.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR
Any place of business where any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation
engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any method of pressure on,
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating
parts of the body, relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, with the
hands or with the aid or any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance, with
or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, oil or other such items and any place
of business offering any type of massage activity between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER AND/OR ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building used more than 25% of the time it is open for business for presenting
motion-picture, video or similar media distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 328/411
E.
F.
G.
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL
A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public
for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or offers any
single sleeping room for rent four or more times in one calendar day during five or more
calendar days in any continuous thirty-day period.
ADULT VIDEOCASSETTE RENTAL AND/OR SALES OUTLET
An establishment that has 25% or more of its stock in videocassettes and/or video discs for
rental or sale and that excludes minors by virtue of age.
OTHER ADULT USES
Any business, activity or use similar to or of the general nature of adult book stores, adult
motion-picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets or adult massage parlors that provides
goods or services distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas such as escort bureaus, nude wrestling studios, phone
sex services, Internet sex services, spas and studios, that exclude minors.
ALLEY
A street which does not exclusively serve any single lot, whether vacant or occupied, or a street
designed and approved as an alley according to specifications specified in this chapter or the local
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance[1] where exclusive access to any tract of land or
building is restricted.
ANSI
American National Standards Institute or successor.
BASEMENT
The space enclosed by the foundation or ground-floor walls of a building such that not more than
an average of 50% of said walls are exposed above the average grade of the ground in which it is
situated.
BLOCK
A unit of land containing one or more lots, bounded by existing or proposed streets which provide
direct frontage to the majority of said lots or units thereby served.
BUILD-TO LINE
A setback line to which the building footprints or extents of newly erected buildings are required to
be built or extended.
BUILDING
Any structure arranged and partially or completely enclosed or covered in order to accommodate
the storage or occupation of any person or persons, materials, or animals; whether permanent or
temporary in nature.
BUILDING LINE
A line that parallels the wall of a structure most parallel to and nearest the front lot line, excepting
extensions such as unenclosed porches.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN
A sign with removable panels or letters which may be changed, removed and replaced from time
to time without altering or reconstructing the sign structure itself.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 329/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections, defined by lines of sight between points at a
given distance from the intersections of center lines of streets.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Any vehicle or combination of vehicles, the operation of which requires a commercial driver's
license by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
Any open space accessible to the residents of a residential development or the patrons of
nonresidential developments or the public at large, the improvements of which are limited to those
contemplated in this chapter.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
A structure that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio or telephone/cellular
communications and any related accessory building and equipment which is situated on a lot
absent a principal structure or which extends more than 10 feet above the average grade of the
ground or, if attached to a principal structure, extends more than six feet above the height of said
structure, wherein these exceptions shall be considered accessory structures.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING
A building designed and constructed so that all exterior walls shall be solid from the ground to the
roofline, containing no openings except for windows and doors which are designed so that they
may be closed and any other small openings required for the ventilation system.
DAY-CARE CENTERS
The following centers as defined and regulated by the Department of Public Welfare.
DAY-CARE CENTER
A state-certified facility providing care for seven or more children;
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME
A state-certified facility providing care for no more than 12 children;
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME
A state-certified family residence with one caregiver providing care for four, five or six children
unrelated to the caregiver;
NURSERY SCHOOL
A part-time preschool facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Education.
DECIBEL
A unit of sound level which is a division of a logarithmic scale used to express the ratio of the
sound pressure of the source to the pressure of an arbitrarily chosen reference pressure; the ratio
is expressed on the decibel scale by multiplying its base 10 logarithm by 20.
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT
Any land development that, because of its character, magnitude, or location, will have substantial
effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of citizens in more than one municipality in the planning
area which are:
On parcels within 500 linear feet of the municipal border of a respective municipality; or
On parcels within 2,000 linear feet of the municipal border of a respective municipality and
create more than 500 trips per day as defined by the Trip Generation Manual published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineer; or
Any development which generates more than 1,000 peak hour trips as defined by Trip
Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 330/411
A.
B.
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
Signs that provide direction or instruction to guide persons to facilities intended to serve the public,
provided that such signs contain no advertising of any kind.
DOMESTIC PET
A domesticated animal such as a cat or dog or a small domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare,
guinea pig, rat, or mouse, that is normally or can generally be kept within the immediate living
quarters of a residential structure in a manner that constitutes neither a nuisance nor a principal
use in and of itself.
DRIVE-THROUGH MENU READER BOARD
A sign that provides information concerning the menu of a food service or restaurant
establishment, intended to provide information and advertising to drive through patrons of the
establishment, and which contains no advertising or print of a scale intended to bear advertising to
the general public.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL INTENSIVE OUTPATIENT CENTER
A premises or part thereof in which the provision of psychiatric, psychological, social and other
therapies are provided on a planned and regularly scheduled basis. Intensive outpatient provides
time-limited structured therapies, primarily in group sessions designed to address the specific
objectives on the treatment plan leading to stability for those individuals with a substance use
disorder. Intensive outpatient is designed for individuals who do not require the structure and
intensity of partial hospitalization but do require more intensity and structure than outpatient as
determined by the Pennsylvania Client Placement Criteria or other Department of Healthapproved
criteria. The individual resides outside the center in the community.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL OUTPATIENT CENTER
A premises or part thereof in which the provision of psychiatric, psychological, social and other
therapies are provided on a planned and regularly scheduled basis. Outpatient provides structured
therapies, primarily face-to-face one-on-one interactions between the individual and the counselor
designed to implement the specific objectives on the treatment plan leading to stability for those
individuals with a substance use disorder. Participation in a specific group can occur on an asneeded
basis. Outpatient is designed for individuals who do not require the structure and intensity
of partial hospitalization or intensive outpatient as determined by the Pennsylvania Client
Placement Criteria or other Department of Health-approved placement criteria. The individual
resides outside the center in the community.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION CENTER
A premises or part thereof in which the provision of psychiatric, psychological, social, and other
therapies are provided on a planned and regularly scheduled basis. Partial hospitalization
provides multiple behavioral interventions through intensive group and individual therapy and skill
development in a structured milieu. Partial hospitalization is designed for those individuals with a
substance use disorder who would benefit from more intensive services than are offered in
intensive or outpatient treatment, but who do not require twenty-four-hour inpatient care as
determined by the Pennsylvania Client Placement Criteria or other Department of Healthapproved
criteria. The individual resides outside the center in the community.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof which contains sleeping, eating, and living facilities designed for
residential use or any portion thereof employed as a residence by one family. Dwelling unit types
are defined as follows:
SINGLE-FAMILY
A dwelling unit, which constitutes the sole dwelling unit and only principal use of a single
building, occupied by one family.
DUPLEX
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 331/411
C.
D.
E.
A use where two dwelling units are contained in and constitute the sole principal uses of one
building and which are arranged such that the uses possess separate exterior entrances and
where the stories occupied are arranged adjacent to and not above or below the other
dwelling unit.
TOWNHOUSE
Any number of dwelling units arranged wherein one or two of the exterior walls of any of the
units constitute party walls shared by an abutting unit in a manner in which the abutting unit is
horizontally adjacent and does not occupy space above or below a separate dwelling unit or
more than one duplex on one lot.
PATIO HOME
An arrangement of three or more units wherein each unit bear at least two walls,
perpendicular to one another, that are exposed exterior walls that do not function as party
walls.
MULTIFAMILY
Dwelling unit where a building or portion thereof contains two or more dwelling units that do
not constitute a duplex, patio home, or townhouse arrangement as defined herein.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE BUILDINGS
Any building that serves as the location for storage, distribution, maintenance and/or repair of
facilities and/or equipment associated with the operation of an essential service, including pump
stations.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or authorities, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication,
steam or water transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewer pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment, or structures accessory to the consistent and
efficient delivery of the aforementioned transmissions, fuels, resources, and products between
residential and nonresidential units and source of production, refinement, or treatment of said
items excepting communications towers and buildings.
ESTABLISHMENT
A place that comprises an economic unit, generally at a single physical location, where business is
conducted or services or industrial operations performed.
FAMILY
An individual, a group of two to three individuals unrelated by blood or marriage which may be in
addition to a group of individuals related by blood or marriage, or a group of individuals related by
blood or marriage; which occupies one dwelling unit.
FENCE
A structure designed, intended or utilized to circumscribe, designate, delineate, define or in some
manner enclose an area or some feature or element thereon including retaining walls greater than
four feet in height.
FORESTRY
The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted
silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes that does not involve any land development.
FRONTAGE
The linear footage of a lot line directly abutting a street.
GAS WELL
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 332/411
A bore hole drilled or being drilled for the purpose of or to be used for producing, extracting or
injecting any gas, petroleum or other liquid related to oil or gas production or storage as regulated
by the Act of December of 1984, known as the Oil and Gas Act,[2] including brine disposal, but
excluding bore holes drilled to produce potable water to be used as such.
GROSS FLOOR AREA
The square footage of floor space within a completely enclosed building occupied by all elements
of an establishment, including but not limited to public and semipublic areas, storage, offices, and
garage space utilized for the storage of vehicles commercially utilized for any particular
establishment.
GROUND SIGN
A sign that is directly affixed to the ground and not supported by or attached to any building.
HALF STORY
A story which is entirely housed within a hip, gable, mansard, or similar type of roof structure.
HANDICAP
A physical or mental impairment which limits one or more of a person's major life activities, a
record of having such impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Any of the following materials or substances: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide,
carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, magnesium, nitric acid,
nitric oxides, petroleum products, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, sulphur, sulphur products,
pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and all poisons, flammable gases and radioactive substances.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Garbage, refuse or sludge from an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant; sludge from a
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material, including
solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from municipal, commercial,
industrial, institutional, or mining activities, or combination of the above, which because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may do one of the
following: Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase in morbidity in
either an individual or total population; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise
managed. The term does not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act (52 P.S. §§ 30.51 to 30.101). The term does not include treatment sludges from coal mine
drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on under and in compliance with a
valid permit issued under the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.1001). The term does
not include solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are
point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1341) or source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 to 2284).
HIGH LEVEL LANDSCAPING
Consists of trees of a deciduous nature with a minimum height of six feet at planting and a caliper
of 1 1/2 inches at planting and trees of an evergreen nature with a minimum height of six feet at
planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the American Standards for
Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.,
which will bear an ultimate height exceeding 25 feet.
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Any low-impact or home-based business which does not constitute a separate principal use as
defined and regulated within this chapter.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 333/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
Materials that are impenetrable and thus unable to absorb stormwater or other liquids; areas such
as buildings, structures and paved areas.
LOCAL PUBLIC USE
Building structures and land owned and occupied by the Township within the Planning Area, the
East Allegheny School District, or any of either's agencies and used to provide services to the
residents of the Planning Area. Such municipal or school district facilities may include but not be
limited to schools, administrative offices, public works buildings, storage yards, libraries, fire
company building and grounds, ambulance service buildings and grounds, senior centers,
recreation facilities and fields, and parks and buildings. Bus garages shall not be included within
this definition.
LONG-TERM CARE NURSING FACILITY
A facility licensed by the Department of Health pursuant to the act of July 19, 1979 (35 P.S.
§§ 448.101-448.904), known as the Health Care Facilities Act that provides skilled or intermediate
nursing care or both levels of care to two or more patients, who are unrelated to the nursing home
administrator, for a period exceeding 24 hours.
LOT
A parcel or a tract of land defined by deed, recorded plat, or a land lease.
LOT, CORNER
Any lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, except alleys, having an angle of
intersection of not more than 135° and when abutting a curved street possess tangents to the
curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the point of intersection of the side lot lines
with the street line where the intersection at an interior angle is not more than 135°.
LOT, FLAG
Any lot approved after the adoption of this chapter, the sole access of which is provided by a
strip of land under the same fee simple ownership as the remainder of the lot, where the strip
of land accessed provides less than the required street frontage in the district in which the lot
is situated.
LOT, REAR
Any lot approved after the effective date of this chapter, which is accessed from a street only
by an access easement over another separate lot.
LOT, THROUGH
Any lot having frontage on two streets such that the streets are either parallel or where
continuing at the same angle would not intersect at any point abutting said lot.
LOT AREA
The area, in square feet or acreage, of the polygon that a lot comprises, bounded by all lot lines
and excluding rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE
The area of a lot, as a percentage, covered by buildings.
LOT LINE
The bounding lines of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line that directly abuts a street except an alley, whether in whole or in part; or where rear
lots or flag lots exist, that which most nearly parallels the street through which access is provided.
LOW-LEVEL LANDSCAPING
Consists of shrubs and any other plant species that is greater than two feet in height at planting
and less than six feet in height at planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 334/411
with the American Standards for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.
MENTAL HEALTH PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION CENTER
A premises or part thereof in which mental health treatment is provided including psychiatric,
psychological, and other related therapies. This is designed for children/adults with serious mental
illness or children/adolescents with a serious emotional disturbance who would benefit from more
intensive services than are offered in mental health outpatient treatment centers, but who do not
require twenty-four-hour inpatient care. Partial hospitalization is provided on a planned and
regularly scheduled basis.
METHADONE CLINIC or METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY
A facility licensed by the Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons.
MINERAL REMOVAL OR MINING
The development or extraction of mineral deposits, including but not limited to limestone, coal,
sand, rock, clay, dirt, gravel, and other materials, and quarry aggregate from their natural
occurrences on affected land. The term includes but is not limited to open pit mining and surface
operations, strip mining, quarrying, dredging, pumping and the disposal of refuse therefrom,
excepting mining of previously mined sites for the purpose of reclaiming the land and the
extraction of crude oil and/or natural gas.
MIXED-USE BUILDING
A building in which contains one or more principal nonresidential uses permitted within the
respective zoning district, and one dwelling unit.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit,
or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except
for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed such that it is used
without a permanent foundation as otherwise required by this chapter and applicable building
codes.
MOBILE HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MPC
The Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, PL 805, No. 247 as reenacted and amended.[3]
NAICS
The North American Industrial Classification System, 2002, as published by the Office of
Management and Budget.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS
A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient
traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the
premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use where the business or
commercial activity satisfies the following requirements:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 335/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a
substantial nature.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking,
signs or lights.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or
type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more
than 25% of the habitable floor area.
The business may not involve any illegal activity.
NOISE LEVEL
Airborne sound levels expressed in dB or decibel and obtained by the use of certain frequencydependent
weighting networks, as specified in the reference standards and indicated by proper
notation; where A-weighting is employed, and the sound level is indicated as dB(A).
NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
Any lot that is defined by deed prior to the adoption of this chapter, and any lot shown on an
approved preliminary or final subdivision plat as approved within five years prior to the adoption of
this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or
extent of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or
prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in
a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of
such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE
Any principal use which does not constitute a dwelling unit as defined in this chapter.
NORMAL AGRICULTURAL OPERATION
The customary and generally accepted activities, practices and procedures that farmers adopt,
use or engage in year after year in the production and preparation and processing for market of
any and all plant and animal products and is for market of poultry, livestock and their products and
in the production and harvesting of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquicultural crops and commodities, which for purposes of this chapter shall include NAICS Sector
115210, Support Activities for Animal Production.
OBSOLETE SIGN
A sign which serves to draw attention to or commercially advertise for an establishment which is
no longer actively operating.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 336/411
OFFICE
Any establishment principally engaged in management, professional service, or administrative
activities as defined by the NAICS.
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE
Common open space which may include recreational fields, play equipment, tennis courts,
basketball courts, and similar facilities constructed in accordance with National Recreation and
Parks Administration Standards or locally recognized standards; wherein structures are limited to
those accessory to the aforesaid structures.
OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE
Common open space which may include walking trails, pedestrian amenities such as park
benches, picnic areas and pavilions accessory thereto; that acts to preserve existing or proposed
woodlands and natural areas and topography.
ORNAMENTAL TREES
Trees at least four feet in height at planting, with a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches, the ultimate
height of which will not exceed 25 feet.
PARTY WALL
A wall separating independently accessed structures and containing the proper fire rating as
required by the Uniform Construction Code such that the adjoined units function independently in
terms of access and utilities.
PERSONAL CARE HOME (HOME)
A premises in which food, shelter, and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a
period exceeding 24 hours, for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do
not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but who do require assistance or
supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a
home in the event of an emergency, or medication prescribed for self-administration.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwelling units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the development plan for
which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot
coverage and required open space to the regulations established in any one district created, from
time to time, under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING AREA
The municipal jurisdiction of North Versailles Township, located within Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
POLITICAL SIGNS
Signs announcing political candidates seeking public office, political parties and/or political and
public issues contained on an upcoming ballot.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
Any structure designed for or hosting the operation of a principal use.
PRINCIPAL USE
The primary use or uses operating or existing on a lot such that any such use may function as its
own establishment in contrast with uses which exist only as subordinate or accessory uses to
another use.
PROJECTED SIGN
A sign that is directly affixed to the wall of a building, excluding wall signs, which faces in a
direction perpendicular to the wall to which it is affixed.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 337/411
PSYCHIATRIC OUTPATIENT CLINIC
A premises or part thereof in which mental health evaluation or treatment, including psychiatric,
psychological, and other related services, are provided under medical supervision. It is designed
for children/adolescents with emotional disturbance and adults with mental illness on a planned
and regularly scheduled basis.
REAL ESTATE SIGNS
Signs that provide information or advertising related to the sale of a property on which the sign is
located.
RELIGIOUS USES
A use involving religious exercise where any exercise of religion, whether or not compelled by, or
central to, a system of religious belief takes place, wherein such use constitutes the principal use
or function of the establishment specified. Uses separately defined, including but not limited to day
care, clinics as otherwise defined herein, or any other use, the function of which customarily exists
apart from a religious congregation or regular assembly shall be classified and authorized a
manner consistent with the said use specified.
RESPECTIVE MUNICIPALITY or RESPECTIVE GOVERNING BODY, GOVERNING BODY
The individual governing body or jurisdiction within the Planning Area in which a parcel, parcels, or
landowner are the subject of or party to enforcement proceedings, applications, appeals, or other
proposals.
RETAIL
Any use generally classified as retail by the NAICS, also to include food services.
ROOF SIGN
A sign, attached to a building, which projects more than three feet above the walls of said building,
or which is directly represented upon a roof.
SETBACK
The area of land in which building activity is restricted in accordance with the bulk regulations of
this chapter located within a specified yard, as regulated in the bulk regulations of this chapter and
expressed in number of feet from a specified lot line.
SHED
A building constructed for permitted accessory uses, primarily storage, which does not rest upon a
footer or foundation and which occupies no more than 200 square feet of land area and is no more
than 10 feet in height.
SHOPPING CENTER
A parcel or parcels on which permitted nonresidential uses, including at least one retail or anchor
retail establishment, share parking and access drives, excluding out-parcels bearing a
freestanding unit with independent parking.
SIGN
Any text, display, or illustration which is affixed to, painted on, or represented upon any surface or
building.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals or breasts, including the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the
male or female pubic hair, anus or cleft of the buttocks.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Includes any of the following: The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 338/411
A.
B.
including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; masturbation, actual or simulated; or excretory
functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in the preceding statements.
STEEP SLOPES
Areas of existing topography where, in over a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, or where the
difference in elevation is over 20 feet, the slope equals or exceeds 25% from the top to bottom of
the break in grade.
STORY
That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET
Any corridor, excepting access drives, improved to a mud-free and permanently passable
condition, or for which the governing body holds financial security for the construction of the
aforesaid in accordance with the local subdivision ordinance, in a manner accommodating the
movement of vehicular traffic including cartway of improved area and additional rights-of-way
abutting said cartway; where said right-of-way is dedicated to public use or when private, provides
legal access to abutting lots, easements, or rights-of-way (excepting easements or rights-of-way
which serve or potentially serve no more than one dwelling unit).
STRUCTURE
A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether
installed on, above, or below the surface of the land.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground, which is designed such that it is portable
and of a transient nature.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of North Versailles, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
USE
Any purpose for which a building, structure, or lot is designed or modified including any activity,
operation, or business operating within a building, structure, or on a lot.
WALL SIGN
A sign that is directly affixed to the exterior wall of a principal building such that the sign lies flat
upon the surface from the wall to which it is affixed and faces in the same direction as said wall.
WINDOW SIGNS
Any sign which advertises on-site business activities or sales that is affixed to the interior portion
of a window, the text of which is visible on the exterior of said window.
YARD
Any portion of a lot extending from a lot line to a line parallel or tangent to the wall or walls of the
principal structure, not including an unenclosed porch, closest to the respective lot line, which
bisects the lot in manner where no other portion of the building is traversed.
YARD, FRONT
Any yard which directly abuts a street except an alley; or where rear lots or flag lots exist, that
which most nearly parallels the street through which access is provided, extending from the
walls of the principal structure directly facing said street to the entirety of the property line
which wholly or partially abuts said street.
YARD, REAR
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 339/411
C.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
The yard abutting the lot line or lines most nearly parallel to or opposite from the front yard lot
line or lines except that such lines on corner lots shall be considered side yards.
YARD, SIDE
The yards abutting lot lines that are most nearly perpendicular to the front yard and those
abutting all remaining lot lines, aside from front yard lot lines, on corner lots extending to the
abutting walls of the principal structure.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See 58 P.S. § 601.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article IV. Bulk Standards, Rules, and Regulations
§ 300-400. Interpretation.
Where any provisions of this chapter conflict with other applicable state and federal laws, the
stricter shall apply. In particular, this chapter does not intend to conflict with any of the laws or acts
regarding mining and agriculture as are outlined in Section 603(b) of the MPC.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(b).
This chapter is not intended to annul or supercede any private easements, covenants, or
agreements, except where provisions of this chapter are more restrictive. The zoning officer shall
not be responsible for the enforcement of the aforesaid agreements unless the Planning Area is a
party thereof.
The zoning classification of improved and unimproved rights-of-way within the Planning Area
boundaries shall be considered part of the adjacent zoning district. In cases where these areas
are bordered by more than one district, the abutting zoning shall extend to the centerline of the
subject right-of-way. Thus, any activities or use of existing rights-of-way which become private
property through adverse possession or any other legal claim to said property shall adhere to the
standards of its respective zoning district classification.
Zoning classifications as initially determined follow existing parcel boundaries, as defined by
recorded deeds. However, the revision, through subdivision, or current boundary lines does not
constitute any revision of zoning district boundaries, which shall retain the boundary of the original
lot line, unless an amendment to the Zoning Map and the Zoning Ordinance is approved.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 340/411
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
In cases where the lines of a zoning district, as initially determined by the Zoning Map, cross a
parcel such that the parcel possesses multiple areas of zoning classification, said lines shall be
determined as lines extending from the most adjacent parcel or lot boundary, where the zoning
extends to said boundary, to the next immediate lot or parcel boundary to which the zoning
boundary of the particular district coincides. The aforementioned situations occur, initially, on
through lots where one face of the block on which the through lot fronts possesses one zoning and
the other lies within a different zoning district.
Permitted use interpretation.
The permitted uses defined in this chapter are based upon the North American Industrial
Classification Standard, 2002. Uses are listed by the numerical code, as defined and
presented in the aforesaid national standard. As such, uses listed at particular code levels
shall be inclusive of all specific uses classified as part of the listed code level, unless such
more detailed uses are specifically exempted or restricted.
Where any use specifically defined within this chapter conflicts with the use definitions utilized
by the North American Industrial Classification Code, the use defined in this chapter shall
prevail. Therefore, when uses specifically defined within this chapter separate from or
conflicting with the NAICS Code are presented or specifically restricted, the function and
intent of said uses shall prevail against any such conflicting interpretations as defined in the
NAICS Code.
No portion of this chapter shall be interpreted such that it violates the Federal Fair Housing
Act, the 1988 Fair Housing Amendments Act, and related Housing and Urban Development
regulations. In particular, the term "family" shall apply to unrelated members regardless of
their membership in classes protected by the aforementioned acts and regulations, including
handicap.
§ 300-401. Use performance standards.
The Planning Area desires to permit an adequate range of residential and economic opportunities,
public uses, and services while integrating a range of uses that protects the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community as well as the traditional character of the Planning Area. The following
standards shall constitute uniform performance standards for all uses within the Planning Area and
shall further define the character of the use. Any use which cannot demonstrate compliance with the
following performance standards shall not be deemed as an authorized use.
No use shall, as part of its production process, emit any hazardous materials in any manner.
Storage of hazardous materials shall be within a principal structure.
Storage of hazardous waste shall be within a principal building and shall not constitute a principal
use; whereby said storage shall be temporary, being permanently disposed of off site.
No use shall be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas,
vibration or noise detectable at the property line as to constitute a nuisance or otherwise conflict
with any municipal ordinance.
No establishment, excepting municipal and school district activities, as part of its regular
operations, shall exceed the noise levels as measured at the property lines of the parcel upon
which the establishment is operated in the following manners:
The sound level at any one point in time exceeds 90 decibels.
The sound exceeds any of the established limits in Subsection E(1) by a measured sound
level of 10 dB(A) for a cumulative total of one minute or more out of any ten-minute period.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 341/411
(3)
(4)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
The sound exceeds any 75 decibels continually for a period of five minutes, or a total of five
minutes out of any 10 minutes.
Where stricter noise standards are adopted by local ordinance, the stricter shall prevail.
On-site display of products associated with an authorized establishment shall be limited to
impervious areas improved as sidewalks or paved as parking lots pursuant to the construction
standards of the respective municipality. Said areas specifically designated or intended for the use
of such displays shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the associated establishment.
Storage or display of merchandise accessory to or as part of the principal use of a retail
establishment shall be limited to the gross floor area occupied by the principal establishment and
shall be housed within a fence of at least six feet in height.
§ 300-402. Bulk regulations.
Permitted obstructions in required setbacks: all setbacks.
Chimneys, removable awnings, eaves, gutters, and architectural elements not directly
housing interior living space may project two feet into any setback.
Stairs may project five feet into any given setback; but shall not locate closer than five feet to
any property line.
Pavement, masonry, and other items which are installed at grade level are exempted from the
setback provisions.
Permitted obstructions in side and rear yard setbacks.
Fences in all residential, N, MU, and Traditional Neighborhood Development Districts shall be
permitted up to six feet. No fences shall be constructed of potentially injurious materials such
as barbed wire. Fences on lots with nonconforming structures, which infringe on a front yard
setback, may infringe on the front yard setback up to the building line of the existing structure.
Fences in the GR and M Districts up to eight feet in height are authorized and may be located
within five feet of the adjoining property line, wherein fences exceeding such heights are
authorized subject to all setbacks, buffering, and related standards imposed on principal
structures by this chapter.
Permitted obstructions in front yards.
An unenclosed porch may infringe on a front yard setback by eight feet.
Fences of up to four feet in height which do not interfere with a clear sight triangle of 50 feet.
Permitted excesses of maximum heights. The following may exceed the maximum height
specified by zoning district by the following amounts:
Chimneys, antennas, and lightning rods: six feet.
Decorative structural elements on nonresidential principal structures including or reasonably
commensurate with spires, minarets, or similar extensions of the roof structure which do not
house principal uses.
§ 300-403. Use Table and use categories.
The following categories shall be defined by the tables which respectively follow them, in accordance
with § 300-400C of this chapter. Categories, defined or listed below, which do not rely upon NAICS
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 342/411
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
codes, shall be defined within Article III, Definitions.
Large-scale industrial, warehouse, and service uses.
The following uses constitute nonretail and nonresidential uses which are large-scale in terms
of intensity of land use and intensity of impact on surrounding uses.
Uses.
Code Description
237 Heavy and civil engineering construction
311 Food manufacturing
312 Beverage and tobacco product manufacturing
316 Leather and allied product manufacturing
321 Wood product manufacturing
322 Paper manufacturing
324 Petroleum and coal products manufacturing
325 Chemical manufacturing
326 Plastics and rubber products manufacturing
327 Nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing
331 Primary metal manufacturing
333 Machinery manufacturing
336 Transportation equipment manufacturing
4215 Metal and mineral (except petroleum wholesalers)
4227 Petroleum and petroleum products wholesalers
45431 Fuel dealers
484 Truck transportation
4854 and 4855 School and employee bus transportation, charter bus industry
4859 Other transit and ground passenger transportation
49313 Farm product warehousing and storage
5324 Commercial and industrial equipment rental and leasing
611519 Other technical and trade schools. (Limited to heavy equipment and
truck driver training schools as included in 611519)
8113 Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment (except automotive
and electronic) repair and maintenance
Small-scale industrial, warehouse, and service uses.
The following uses constitute nonretail and nonresidential uses which are comparatively
small-scale in terms of intensity of land use and intensity of impact on surrounding uses.
Uses.
Code Description
233 Building, developing, and general contracting
235 Special trade contractors
313 Textile mills
314 Textile mill products
315 Apparel manufacturing
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 343/411
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Code Description
332 Fabricated metal product manufacturing
334 Computer and electronic product manufacturing
337 Furniture and related product manufacturing
339 Misc. manufacturing
42 Wholesale trade (except 4215, Wholesale metal and mineral [except
petroleum wholesale]; 42252, Livestock wholesale; and 4227, Petroleum
and petroleum product wholesale)
453 Direct selling establishments
4853 Taxi and limousine service
493 Warehousing and storage (except 49313, Farm product warehousing
and storage)
511 Publishing industries
53112 Lessors of nonresidential buildings
5321 Automotive equipment rental and leasing
56172 Janitorial services
56173 Landscaping services
Office, administrative, and service-related industries.
The following uses constitute service and administrative activities, the scale and scope of
which function as office related uses and activities.
Uses.
Code Description
52 Finance and insurance
531 Real estate (except for mobile home rental and leasing under 53112)
533 Lessors of nonfinancial intangible assets (except copyrighted works)
54 Professional, scientific, and technical services
55 Management of companies and enterprises
561 Administrative and support services (except 56173, Landscaping
services)
6211 Offices of physicians
6212 Offices of dentists
6213 Offices of other health practitioners
6216 Home health care services
6243 Vocational rehabilitation services
813 Religious, grantmaking, civic, professional, and similar organizations,
excepting religious uses.
Large-scale retail and service.
The following retail and service-related activities constitute retail-related uses, the scale and
impact of which are large-scale in terms of intensity of land use and intensity of impact on
surrounding uses. Said uses include those listed under Subsection D(2) as well as smallscale
retail and service uses individually exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Uses.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 344/411
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
F.
Code Description
4411 Automobile dealers
4412 Other motor vehicle dealers
447 Gasoline stations
452 General merchandise stores
53112 Lessors of nonresidential buildings (except mobile homes rental or
leasing)
7211 Hotels (except casino hotels) and motels
71312 Amusement arcades
71395 Bowling centers
811192 Car washes
Small-scale retail and service.
The following retail and service-related activities constitute retail-related uses, the scale and
impact of which are small-scale in terms of intensity of land use and intensity of impact on
surrounding uses and which, per establishment, occupy 5,000 or less square feet of gross
floor area.
Uses.
Code Description
323 Printing and related support activities
4413 Automotive parts, accessories, and tire stores
442 Furniture and home furnishings stores
443 Electronics and appliance stores
444 Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers
445 Food and beverage stores
446 Health and personal care stores
448 Clothing and clothing accessory stores
453 Miscellaneous store retailers
454 Non-store retailers (except 4543, Direct selling establishments)
492 Couriers and messengers
5133 Telecommunications (excluding cellular tower or communications towers
as separately regulated in this chapter)
5322 Consumer goods rental
71394 Fitness and recreational sports centers
722 Food services and drinking places
8111 Automotive repair and maintenance (except 811192, Car washes)
8112 Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance
8114 Personal and household goods repair and maintenance
812 Personal and laundry services (except 81221, Funeral homes and
funeral services; and 81222, Cemeteries and crematories)
Neighborhood public and semipublic uses.
The following uses constitute organizations and services of a semipublic or public nature
integrated into traditionally residential neighborhoods, such that said uses provide services
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 345/411
(2)
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
I.
(1)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
and opportunities which enhance the livability and sustainability of the neighborhood while
minimizing nuisances and protecting the character of the area in which they locate.
Uses shall include 81221, Funeral homes and funeral services; religious uses; day-care
centers; adult day-services centers, and local public uses.
General hospitals.
The following constitute health care services rendered in a hospital or hospital-affiliated
setting.
Uses.
Code Description
6211 General medical and surgical hospitals
6219 Other ambulatory health care services
6215 Medical and diagnostic laboratories
62149 Other outpatient care centers
Elderly residential facilities.
The following facilities provide residential care or housing primarily to the elderly as well as
others with similar needs.
Uses shall include long-term-care nursing facilities; personal-care homes; adult training
center; adult day-services center; and 623312, Homes for the elderly.
Psychiatric and drug abuse facilities.
The following uses provide outpatient, residential, or temporary care for clients suffering from
drug or substance addictions or psychiatric conditions.
Uses shall include psychiatric outpatient clinic; mental health partial hospitalization center;
drug and alcohol partial hospitalization center; drug and alcohol outpatient center; drug and
alcohol intensive outpatient center; 6222, Psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals; and
methadone clinics.
Adult uses.
Adult uses rely upon the marketing of certain specified sexual activities or promotion of such
activities. Adult uses are interpreted as they are defined in Article III of this chapter.
Educational services.
These services constitute schools, colleges, continuing education opportunities, etc.
Educational services shall include 61, Educational services (except for 611512, Flight training
schools; and uses comparable to heavy equipment and truck driver training schools as may
be included in 611519, Other technical and trade schools.)
Communications towers.
Essential services.
Essential service building.
Forestry.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 346/411
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Home occupations per § 300-903.
No-impact home-based business.
Single-family.
Duplex.
Multifamily.
Mixed-use building.
Planned residential development.
Traditional neighborhood development.
Mineral removal or mining.
Normal agricultural operations.
Article V. Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 300-500. Establishment and purpose of Districts.
In order to encourage and promote those purposes outlined in Article II of this chapter as well as the
Planning Area's community development objectives, North Versailles Township hereby establishes the
following zoning districts, the purposes of which are hereinafter defined:
N, Neighborhood Use. The Neighborhood Use District aims to maintain and enhance the vitality
and sustainability of the traditional cores of the boroughs. The establishment of this district aims
maintain the stability of residential neighborhoods while permitting businesses which are either
ancillary to or present a low impact on these neighborhoods. Additional forms of office or smallscale
retail are permitted such that they contribute to the economic vitality of the neighborhood
and the entire planning area without negative impact upon the basic residential and small
business environment of the district. Additionally, the residential mix of this district aims to provide
for alternative housing needs, such as those of the elderly, within a pedestrian environment
offering nearby basic services.
MU, Mixed-Use. The Mixed-Use District is established to provide for single-family based
residential uses, residential uses of compatible scale, and retail and office designed to serve local
and regional market demands. The district therefore primarily aims to maintain a neighborhood
scale of development in portions of Route 30 currently bearing a traditional mixed-use scale of
development and to provide a market-based, yet compatible, transition of residences fronting key
north-south collectors of North Versailles.
M, Office and Manufacturing. The Office and Manufacturing District provides for the development
of office and production-oriented industries, along with ancillary retail uses in a park-like setting
with convenient access to arterial corridors. The Office and Manufacturing District also provides
opportunities for the development and redevelopment of smaller tracts of land speculatively
intended to be used as or initially used as industrial sites. The Office and Manufacturing District
aims to promote the development and redevelopment of said properties while protecting and
sustaining the character of adjoining residential uses.
GR, General Retail. The General Commercial District encompasses regional, large-scale retail
centers with convenient access to Route 30 and major arterial interchanges. The district may
include office and health care services of a similar nature.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 347/411
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
R-3, Multifamily Residential. The Multifamily District aims to provide an affordable alternative form
of housing to seniors, younger families, and smaller households in an environment near
commercial and retail conveniences.
R-2, Neighborhood Residential. The district protects the stability and integrity of the Planning
Area's oldest residential neighborhoods, which are primarily situated on relatively small lots near
the traditional main corridors of the Boroughs and specific areas of the Township.
R-1, Low-Density Single-Family Residential. The R-1 District encompasses lands currently
established as suburban residential plans or comparatively larger scale residential lots in areas of
limited environmental constraints. The district encourages infill development and the sustenance
of the low-density residential development existing.
P- Neighborhood Park. The Neighborhood Park District is established to provide for the
recreational needs of the Planning Area's residents. This district is intended to enhance the quality
of life and sense of community by providing passive and active recreational amenities in parks and
general open space.
§ 300-501. General district standards.
The above districts are depicted on the Zoning Map of North Versailles Township, which is
incorporated as part of this chapter and is filed at the Township Office.
All uses and districts standards authorized and instituted in the following tables shall adhere to the
general district standards defined herein. Where any standards conflict due to special provisions
defined or referenced herein, the former shall prevail.
All accessory structures and uses shall comply with § 300-900 of this chapter.
All signage shall comply with § 300-901, Signs, of this chapter.
All lighting specifications and intensities shall comply with § 300-906, Lighting standards, of this
chapter.
All parking specifications and standards shall comply with § 300-902, Parking requirements, of this
chapter.
Nonconforming lots, uses and structures shall be subject to Article X, Nonconforming Structures,
Lots of Record, and Uses, of this chapter.
The placement and screening of buildings and parking shall be subject to § 300-907, Yard and
buffering standards, of this chapter.
All residential districts (R-R, R-1, R-2, and R-3) shall bear up to one principal structure per lot.
Mixed-Use and Neighborhood Use Districts shall bear up to one principal structure per lot.
Single-family and duplex structures in the R-3, Multifamily District, may adhere to the setbacks
established for the R-2 District.
Nonresidential principal or accessory residential structures shall be set back at least 15 feet from
any access drive.
Residential principal or accessory residential structures shall be set back at least 20 feet from any
access drive.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 348/411
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
A.
Nonresidential principal buildings in the Mixed-Use and Neighborhood Use Districts shall adhere
to the standards of § 300-905, Large-scale building standards.
All structures shall adhere to § 300-908, Exterior facade building standards.
Both active and passive recreation, if authorized in the local subdivision ordinance through land
dedication standards, shall be authorized as a use accessory to the particular residential
subdivision or land development for which they were required, subject to the express standards
applied thereto.
§ 300-502. Use Authorization Table.
The Use Authorization Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-503. District Standard Tables.
The District Standard Tables are included as an attachment to this chapter.
Article VI. Planned Residential Development
§ 300-600. Purpose.
The municipality of the Planning Area establishes planned residential development in forms authorized
by district for the following purposes:
To provide an adequate array of housing opportunities and choices for existing and future
residents of the Planning Area; and
To encourage the preservation of wooded hillsides and open space throughout the Planning Area;
and
To facilitate connected open space throughout the Planning Area in a manner consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan; and
To encourage the development of unique nodes of residential and mixed-use development that
are properly integrated into adjacent transportation networks and uses with properly buffering and
separation from traditional neighborhoods and mixed-use development; and
To provide for development and redevelopment in sustainable forms and proportions; and
To further the general and municipal community development objectives upon which this Zoning
Ordinance is based.
§ 300-601. Residential community PRD development standards.
Common open space. Forty percent of the site shall be dedicated as common open space
adhering to the following standards.
Said open space shall be distributed in a manner that provides adequate buffering from
adjacent neighborhoods of differing housing type and design, in a manner in which adjacent
neighborhoods of varied or contrasting character are bordered by open space. Topography,
landscaping, and types of adjacent uses shall determine said adequacy.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 349/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
Five percent of the open space required shall be distributed in central areas of the plan,
directly visible from and faced by housing constructed therein. Such open space shall bear at
least 50 feet of frontage on streets within the planned residential development. The grading of
said open space shall not exceed 8%.
The common open space shall be distributed in such a manner so as to preserve, by private
covenant in favor of the respective municipality in which it is located and by the PRD itself,
wooded hillsides and other valuable natural features within the plan, including jurisdictional
wetlands and floodplains.
Each phase of the PRD shall bear at least a proportional amount of open space or may
include the dedication of all open space required per the tentative approval.
Uses authorized. The following uses are authorized in the residential community PRD.
Single-family.
Duplex.
Townhouse.
Elderly residential facilities.
Neighborhood public and semipublic uses.
The amount of dwelling units permitted per acre shall be calculated as follows:
Forty three thousand five hundred sixty square feet divided by the minimum lot size in square
feet of the respective underlying zoning district shall equal the base density or units per acre.
The following table shall serve to outline the number of units by type permitted per acre for
the gross acreage included in the PRD. Each acre against which dwelling unit types are
calculated shall not be included in the calculation of other types permitted. Therefore, the
multipliers listed times the base density equal the number of units permitted per the
proportional acreage of land applied to that dwelling unit type.
Use or Dwelling Unit Type Multiplier
Single-family 1.2
Duplex 2.4
Townhouse 2.5
Elderly residential facility (number of
residents)
7
One establishment of neighborhood public and semipublic use shall be permitted per 25
dwelling units or for every 60 residents licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare for elderly residential facilities.
Lot standards.
All lots shall bear safe and legal access to a street or access drives.
Maximum building height of any structure is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is less.
Yard setbacks or front yard build-to lines shall be proposed by the developer, wherein
approved lines shall not impede the administration of emergency services.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 350/411
(4)
(5)
E.
F.
G.
A.
Types of units authorized are listed in the table below. The table establishes the distances, in
linear feet, that each such structure or group of units or structures must be set back from
another, by type. General lot design of fee simple building lots shall be capable of
accommodating specific use types for which each is designated, allowing a building footprint
permitting the following setback distances from neighboring structures, as designated.
Use
Singlefamily
Duplex Townhouses
Elderly
Residential
Facility
Neighborhood
Public or
Semipublic
Single-family 20 25 50 100 50
Duplex 25 30 30 75 40
Townhouses 50 30 30 75 40
Elderly
residential
facility
100 75 75 150 40
Neighborhood
public or
semipublic
50 40 40 40 200
Considering elderly residential facilities as one unit by establishment, all types of units shall
be capable of separate fee simple conveyance through placement on fee simple lots or
property interest created as condominiums. Generally lots proposed to bear single-family
residences shall be at least 40 feet in width at the proposed and accepted building line.
Landscaping. At a minimum, townhouse units shall be landscaped around the front of the units
which face the street or access drive bearing one high-level planting per unit or two ornamental
trees per unit; and four low-level plantings per unit. Elderly residential facilities shall provide 30%
of the lot on which they are constructed as landscaped area bearing grass, groundcover, or
decorative stone or mulch. Said area shall include one high-level or two ornamental trees for every
1,500 square feet of landscaped area and one low-level planting for every 300 square feet of said
landscaped area.
Elderly residential and neighborhood public or semipublic establishments shall be housed within
structures adhering to the standards of § 300-905.
Applicability of Zoning Ordinance provisions, subdivision and land development ordinance, and
related ordinances. Unless expressly modified by the standards of this section, all other
requirements of this chapter, the local subdivision and land development ordinance, and local
street, grading, and other land development standards shall apply to developments proposed
under this section. Such ordinance standards may be modified only when the developer
demonstrates that literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed; or that a modification meets or
exceeds standards meeting the purpose or intent of the ordinance in question. The above shall not
withstand all standard post approval requirements instituted by the local subdivision and land
development ordinance, namely the required posting of financial security for streets, public
improvements, and certain private amenities.
§ 300-602. Mixed-use community, PRD development standards.
The land area of residential components that include the uses authorized in the residential
community PRD standards shall be so designated on the plan and subject to and limited to the
standards authorized in the residential community PRD, including open space requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 351/411
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
The commercial component shall be designated on the plan and subject to the specific standards
of this section, the provisions of § 300-603 not withstanding for the residential components.
The maximum building height shall be 65 feet.
All uses expressly authorized as permitted or conditional in the underlying zoning district shall be
authorized as such in the underlying district. Additionally, mixed-use buildings are authorized.
Principal structures shall provide a front yard setback of at least 50 feet.
Unless connected by party walls, structures shall provide for side and rear yard setbacks of at
least 50 feet with one additional foot of setback for each foot in height above two stories. Where
multiple principal structures exist on one lot, this setback shall be enforced between principal
structures as well.
Thirty percent of the land area in the commercial portion shall be dedicated as common open
space. Five percent of the open space required shall be provided in a central area faced by more
than one principal structure and fronting a street. Said space shall be 5% or less in grade and
shall provide for pedestrian usage.
Principal commercial structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from residentially designated
sections of the development.
Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of all parking lots at a rate of one high-level
planting for each 50 linear feet of perimeter, including access drives. Additionally, landscaping
shall be disbursed around visible portions of the principal structure at a rate of one high-level
planting or one ornamental tree and four low-level plantings for each 25 linear feet of the
structure's perimeter.
The residential component of the development, those uses solely authorized in the residential
community PRD, shall comprise at least 20% of the square footage of all uses within the PRD and
no more than 60% of the total square footage.
The proportion of retail, office, and manufacturing/warehouse shall be submitted as proposed and
shall be authorized given the proportion of uses reasonably related to the similar proportion in the
Planning Area at large, determined by the most recent Economic Census and subsequent permit
data. Employment within or regular utilization of ancillary establishment intended primarily for use
by residents of the PRD shall also serve as a finding of fact or justification for approved use
proportions.
All final phases approved shall contain the proportions of commercial development type
commensurate with that approved in the overall or tentative approval. Same shall also include at
least 20% of the land area as residential or may develop all residential in the first final phase
constructed. In lieu of such provisions, a developer may submit covenants in favor of the
municipality, in a form acceptable to the municipality, which restrict future development to those
uses shown on the tentative plan.
Applicability of Zoning Ordinance provisions, subdivision and land development ordinance, and
related ordinances. Unless expressly modified by the standards of this section, all other
requirements of this chapter, the local subdivision and land development ordinance[1], and local
street, grading, and other land development standards shall apply to developments proposed
under this section. Such ordinance standards may be modified only when the developer
demonstrates that literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of the ordinance is observed; or that a modification meets
or exceeds standards meeting the purpose or intent of the ordinance in question. The above shall
not withstand all standard post approval requirements instituted by the local subdivision and land
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 352/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
development ordinance, namely the required posting of financial security for streets, public
improvements, and certain private amenities.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 300-603. Advisory conference.
A developer may request an advisory conference with the Planning Commission prior to application
submission. The developer shall make such request from the Zoning Officer on forms provided by the
municipality at least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission. Said conference and
review shall not constitute acceptance of an application, whether tentative or final.
§ 300-604. Tentative approval application requirements.
At least 30 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission, 15 copies of an
application for tentative approval shall be submitted. The application shall be in sufficient detail for the
Planning Commission to determine compliance with the standards of this article and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
A legal description of the total tract proposed for development, including a statement of present
and proposed ownership.
A written statement demonstrating conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and community
development objectives of this chapter.
A written statement detailing the general character of the development in relation to surrounding
uses and the proportion of use types contained therein. Each use type shall be listed by unit and
square footage. Types shall include those separately authorized as residential or ancillary
commercial in the residential community PRD and as retail, office, or manufacturing/warehouse in
the mixed-use community PRD.
A written statement of the requested modifications to other ordinance provisions otherwise
applicable.
A location map which clearly shows the location and area of the site proposed for development
with relation to all lands, buildings and structures within 200 feet of its boundaries, the location and
distance to existing streets and highways and the names of landowners of adjacent properties.
A development plan prepared at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet showing the
following information:
Existing contours at intervals of five feet; watercourses; floodplains; wetlands; woodlands;
soils; steep slopes, delineating and labeling 25% through 40% slopes and greater than 40%
slopes; and other natural features.
Proposed lot lines and subdivision plat. The plat shall show approximate building footprints
and anticipated square feet, identify the type of use anticipated, and proposed setbacks for
both residential and commercial uses.
Proposed phases of development.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
including maximum heights, types of dwelling units and dwelling unit density.
The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed dedicated or
reserved as common open space.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 353/411
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system of local and collector streets, including
off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas and major points of access from the
planned residential development to public rights-of-way.
The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including its interrelationship with
the vehicular circulation system and open space.
The existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water,
electric, gas and telephone lines.
Subsurface conditions, including mining and overburden.
A preliminary landscaping plan indicating the treatment and materials proposed to be used in
common areas, buffer areas, parking, townhouses, and commercial buildings.
Location of trails for public use and easements or rights-of-way dedicating those trails for
public use.
A preliminary traffic report which details impact on on-site intersections and off-site intersections
substantially impacted by the PRD.
Application forms prepared by the municipality requiring information sufficient to review the
application, provide findings of fact, and determine conformance to the provisions of this section.
Review and application fees required by municipal ordinance or resolution.
Preliminary elevations and architectural renderings of typical structures.
Preliminary reports demonstrating the general basis or nexus of general site design to grading,
erosion, stormwater, and street construction ordinance standards.
In the case of development plans that call for development over a period of years, a schedule for
phasing the development shall be provided. This phasing schedule shall be reviewed annually
with the Planning Commission on the anniversary of tentative approval or as each phase is
completed, whichever occurs first.
§ 300-605. Tentative plan approval process.
The Zoning Officer shall review an application for tentative approval within one week of delivery
and shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies of certify the applicant as complete. Submissions
of deficient items shall be reviewed in the same manner. The Zoning Officer shall, when all
application materials are submitted, certify the application as complete. The date on which
completion is certified shall constitute the official filing date.
The Planning Commission shall review the application at the next regular meeting scheduled 21
days or later from the official filing date.
The governing body shall hold a public hearing on the matter pursuant to public notice within 60
days of the official filing date. The governing body may hold subsequent hearings provided that all
hearings are concluded within 60 days of the initial hearing.
Decision. Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public hearings or 180 days from the
official filing date, whichever is less, the governing body shall, by official written communication,
either grant tentative approval of the development plan, as submitted; grant tentative approval of
the development plan, subject to specified conditions not included in the development plan as
submitted; or deny tentative approval. Failure to act within said period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 354/411
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after
receiving a copy of the official written communication of the governing body, notify the governing
body of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case the governing body shall be
deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan. In the event that the
landowner does not, within said period, notify the governing body of his refusal to accept all said
conditions, tentative approval of the development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as
granted. The decision will be filed with the secretary of the governing body and the applicant. The
decision shall include an approved schedule of final plan application filing which shall not be less
than three months from the tentative approval date.
Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the planned residential
development for recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted, or which has been given
tentative approval with conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and provided that
the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval), shall
not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the municipality pending an
application or applications for final approval, without the consent of the landowner, provided an
application or applications for final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of
years, provided applications are filed, within the periods of time specified in the official written
communication granting tentative approval.
In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and thereafter, but prior to final
approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the
governing body in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file application or applications
for final approval within the required period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative
approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those local
ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and the same
shall be noted on the Zoning Map and in the records of the municipal secretary or clerk of the
municipality.
§ 300-606. Tentative plan approval findings.
Tentative approval shall be approved, denied, or approved with conditions based on the following
findings of fact.
In those respects in which the development plan is or is not consistent with the comprehensive
plan for the development of the municipality;
The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest;
The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the planned residential
development, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common open
space as related to the proposed density and type of residential development;
The physical design of the development plan and the manner in which said design does or does
not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic,
and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment;
The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned residential development to the
neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established;
In the case of a development plan which proposes development over a period of years, the
sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 355/411
G.
H.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
residents of the planned residential development in the integrity of the development plan; and
The mixture of uses and housing choices and commercial establishments and their ability or
inability to meet current and anticipated needs of present and future residents and patrons.
Adherence to all specific performance standards and requirements of this article or lack thereof.
§ 300-607. Final approval application requirements.
Final applications shall include the following.
All final reports demonstrating compliance with local erosion and sedimentation, grading, and
stormwater ordinances in forms required by the Municipal Engineer and the respective
ordinances.
A plan showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of five feet; watercourses; floodplains;
wetlands; woodlands; soils; steep slopes, delineating and labeling 25% through 40% slopes and
greater than 40% slopes; and other natural features.
A plat, in conformance with that required by the local subdivision ordinance[1] showing or denoting
all approved setbacks.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
Plans showing the platted lines along with building footprints and number of stories and gross
square footage related thereto. Said plans shall show all easements and designations of
residential and commercial areas. Single-family homes may show a building envelope or area with
a typical square footage or building footprint anticipated.
All covenants required to demonstrate initial and ongoing compliance with the provisions of this
article. Such covenants shall include but not be limited to the preservation of woodlands, usage of
open space, preservation of natural features, maintenance of buffer areas, signage and lighting,
etc.
Documents establishing a home- or landowners' association and detailing the maintenance of
common open space. Said documents may include condominium declaration statements and
related covenants.
A general plan of signage and lighting, including styles, materials, and colors utilized.
Street cross-sections and construction drawings demonstrating compliance with municipal
standards or approved modifications.
Further reports including geotechnical reports where required to demonstrate safe and stable
construction of principal dwellings, streets, access drives, and parking.
A narrative detailing any modifications from tentative approval.
A finalized phase specific traffic study indicating level of service for all intersections.
Deeds dedicating public land, where required through tentative approval.
Estimates for public improvements and amenities for which bonds are required by the local
subdivision ordinance.
Final landscaping and parking plans including tables demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this article in terms of number and percentage provided.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 356/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 300-608. Final plan approval process.
The Zoning Officer shall review an application for final approval within one week of delivery and
shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies of certify the applicant as complete. Submissions of
deficient items shall be reviewed in the same manner. The Zoning Officer shall, when all
application materials are submitted, certify the application as complete. The date on which
completion is certified shall constitute the official filing date.
Variation from original plan. In the event that the development plan submitted contains variations
from the development plan granted tentative approval, the governing body may refuse to grant
final approval and may, within 45 days of the official filing date of the application for final approval
(provided, however, that should the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the
official filing date, the forty-five-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application has been filed), advise the applicant, in writing, of said refusal, setting forth in said
notice the reasons why one or more of the variations are not in the public interest. In the event of
such refusal, the landowner may either refile the application for final approval without the
variations objected; or file a written request with the local governing body that it hold a public
hearing on the application for final approval. If the landowner wishes to take either alternate
action, he may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or
within 30 additional days, if the time for applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development plan was not in substantial
compliance. If the landowner fails to take either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall
be deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such public hearing shall be held
pursuant to public notice within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the landowner,
and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner described in this article for public hearings on
applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
governing body shall by official written communication either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the development
plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the findings required for
an application for tentative approval set forth in this article. Failure of the governing body to render
a decision on an application for final approval and communicate it to the applicant within the time
and in the manner required by this section shall be deemed an approval of the application for final
approval, as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or
change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner or presentation of communication shall
have like effect.
In the event the application for final approval has been officially filed, together with all drawings,
specifications and other documents in support thereof, and as required by this article and the
official written communication of tentative approval, the municipality shall, within 45 days from the
date of the regular meeting of the local planning commission, whichever first reviews the
application, next following the date the application is filed, grant such development plan final
approval; provided, however, that should the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, the forty-five-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the official filing date.
The developer shall post financial security and shall execute a developer's agreement as required
by the local subdivision ordinance prior to recording of the final plat. The plat shall be recorded
within 90 days of final plan approval. The developer's agreement shall at a minimum, in addition to
that required by the local subdivision ordinance, cite those provisions of the notice of tentative
approval applicable to the respective phase, include a timeline for development proposed by the
developer but not to exceed five years, reference construction inspections and responsibilities,
reference the installation of landscaping and private amenities, and address the recordation of
homeowners' association documents and covenants.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 357/411
E.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
The developer shall be afforded the five-year timeline to commence and complete development as
noted in Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code and otherwise applicable to subdivisions
and land developments. Where the developer notifies the governing body that he has abandoned
the plan or the aforesaid timeline cited in Section 508 expires, the plan shall be deemed
abandoned and no further development or permits for such development shall take place. The
governing body shall amend its ordinance to reclassify the property to a zoning district.
§ 300-609. Modification of planned residential development
provisions.
An applicant for permits which do not conform strictly to the approved plan may request a
modification to the plan by providing all reports and plans required by final approval which are
proposed to be modified. A statement concerning consistency with the comprehensive plan and
community development objectives shall be submitted along with any required fees and forms
provided by the municipality. Upon acceptance, the application shall be afforded the timelines and
process provided for final PRD approval. The governing body, however, shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to public notice prior to voting on the application.
Modification approval shall be provided in a manner that meets all requirements and standards of
this article.
Findings regarding approval shall consider the following:
No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan by the
municipality shall affect the rights of the residents of the planned residential development to
maintain and enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided in this section.
No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan by the
municipality shall be permitted except upon a finding by the governing body or the planning
agency, following a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice called and held in
accordance with the provisions of this article, that the same is consistent with the efficient
development and preservation of the entire planned residential development, does not
adversely affect either the enjoyment of land abutting upon or across the street from the
planned residential development or the public interest, and is not granted solely to confer a
special benefit upon any person.
No part of the approval shall conflict with private covenants that run in favor of residents or
property owners within the entire PRD.
Article VII. Traditional Neighborhood Development
§ 300-700. Purpose.
Traditional neighborhood development or TND is hereby established to achieve the following
objectives and land use goals:
To maintain a healthy economic climate by providing a sufficient and compatible mix of residential
and nonresidential uses.
To provide sustainable residential and business districts within the Planning Area by encouraging
a mix of uses and housing types that fill the needs of a range of age classes, economic classes,
and family types that constitute the Planning Area's present and future residents and business
owners.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 358/411
C.
D.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
To create a sense of place and community identity by encouraging uses in an integrated
pedestrian-scale environment, housed within structures that offer a unique architectural style, yet
one that provides a scale that is integrated with that pedestrian environment.
To encourage and promote infill within the Planning Area's traditional corridors, thus combating the
ill effects of blight within the Planning Area's existing neighborhoods.
§ 300-701. Applicability of other ordinances.
Unless expressly modified by provisions of this article, all municipal ordinances including but not
limited to erosion and sedimentation, grading, street construction standards, and stormwater shall
apply to subdivisions and land developments approved in accordance with this article and
compliance with the aforesaid shall serve as a prerequisite or requirement of traditional
neighborhood development approval.
Only those portions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance specifically referenced
within this article shall apply.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
Where a finally approved traditional neighborhood development is recorded and properly filed with
the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds Office, all portions of the Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Ordinance otherwise applicable to the land shall cease to apply thereto.
§ 300-702. Approval process.
Tentative and final approval shall be required for all TNDs. All application requirements and
submission standards specified for the respective approvals within Article VI of this chapter,
Planned Residential Development, shall represent the minimum requirements herein.
Additionally, all procedural timelines and scheduling duly afforded the applicant by Article VI of this
chapter shall apply to the review, processing, and ultimate action of plan approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of a traditional neighborhood development.
The governing body shall issue findings regarding the tentative approval in accordance with the
findings considered for planned residential development and the following in addition thereto:
Level of integration into adjacent neighborhoods in terms of scale and pedestrian and
vehicular connections.
The reasonable extent to which existing structures are adaptively reutilized.
Modifications may be requested and granted in accordance with the findings and standards
outlined by Article VI, Planned Residential Development.
§ 300-703. Types of traditional neighborhood developments.
This chapter establishes the following types of Traditional Neighborhood Development Districts that
shall be classified as distinct uses authorized by district.
Type I: Mixed-Use.
Type II: Traditional Residential.
Type III: Mobile Home Park.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 359/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
§ 300-704. TND standards.
The following outline the standards by which all proposed TNDs shall be evaluated and also constitute
the regulations to which all future uses and improvements within those approved TNDs must adhere.
Bulk standards and public improvements.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
COMMON OPEN SPACE
Space provided for the use and enjoyment of residents of a plan or patrons and
employees of an establishment, or of the public at large.
MIXED-USE BUILDING
Any structure containing residential dwelling units combined with commercial uses
permitted as of right in the respective zoning district of the Traditional Neighborhood
Development in which it is located, where the commercial component comprises at least
20% of the gross square footage of the structure.
A build-to line shall be established, which shall be between 15 and 30 feet. Unenclosed
porches may invade said line by eight feet. Both the proposed character of the development
and the present character of adjacent neighborhoods shall determine the build-to line. Twenty
percent of the proposed structures are encouraged to deviate from the build-to line by five to
10 feet and may be between 15 feet to 40 feet from the right-of-way line. Namely, the offset of
larger nonresidential structures is encouraged in the aforementioned manner as approved by
the governing body.
All lighting, parking, signage, and accessory structure standards cited in this chapter shall
apply to this article, unless expressly modified herein.
Lighting. Street lighting shall be required within 10 feet of the right-of-way. Covenants in favor
of the respective municipality shall require the maintenance of said lighting. The height of said
lighting shall be limited to 15 feet and shall be approved by Council based on designs
appropriate to a residential and pedestrian scale.
Numbers of units and size of TND development. Each phase of a TND proposed shall contain
at least five dwelling units which may include up to two repaired units as outlined in §§ 300-
704B(5) and 300-704C(4).
Trees. Street trees shall be provided as follows.
One high level planting every 100 feet, alternating every 50 feet on each side of the
street; or one ornamental tree every 50 feet, alternating every 25 feet on each side of the
street.
Trees shall be planted a uniform distance from the right-of-way, ranging from three to 10
feet from the right-of-way line. Covenants in favor of the municipality requiring
maintenance or replacement of said trees shall be recorded.
Sidewalks shall be along all street frontage of the area proposed for development or
redevelopment. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to municipal standards and shall
connect to existing adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian corridors.
Where a tentative plan will result in 15 or more dwelling units or where a combination of
dwelling units and uses results in more than 150 average daily trips, a traffic impact study
compiled and sealed by a registered traffic engineer shall be submitted. Said study shall
confirm or reject the adherence to the following minimum standards. Where proposed
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 360/411
(a)
(b)
(9)
(a)
(b)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(11)
intersections or streets fail to meet minimum requirements, the study shall make
recommendations for improvements that would serve to satisfy the minimum standards of this
chapter. All streets and intersections impacted by the trip generation of the proposed TND
shall demonstrate a minimum level of service of D according to the latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. All proposed
intersections shall demonstrate a minimum service level of C.
Landscaping. In addition to street trees, landscaping shall be provided in the following areas
and according to the following standards:
All common land reserved for townhouse development and nonresidential use shall
provide landscaping at the following rates: one low-level per 1,000 square feet of land
area; and one high-level landscaping for every 7,500 square feet of land area. (Two
ornamental trees may be substituted for a high-level planting.)
Priority of landscaping placement. Landscaping shall be installed between residential and
nonresidential uses; along the perimeter of the TND; and along the building perimeter of
parking lots, nonresidential buildings, and townhouses.
Steep slopes and hazardous development.
No buildings shall be erected within an area of steep slope.
No more than 20% of a steep slope area shall be disturbed through clear cutting or
grading due to the construction of streets, driveways, or access roads.
Common open space requirements.
Twenty percent of the total site area shall be designated as common open space per the
following standards.
Common open space shall be provided as a corridor around the perimeter of the TND
site not fronting on a street. Said corridor shall be at least 20 feet in width and shall
provide a reasonable integration with existing and proposed pedestrian and green space
corridors. This requirement may be waived by the governing body where the TND is
bordered by a public park, natural features such as streams, or where the TND is directly
integrated into a previously approved TND or neighborhood of similar character.
Common open space may be provided as a central plaza, the boundaries of which shall
be defined by landscaping or other amenities as approved by the governing body. The
plaza shall be traversed by a minimum of one sidewalk meeting the minimum standards
of this article. Plazas shall cover a minimum of 3,750 square feet. Plazas shall provide a
central focal point such as landscaping, gazebo, or another amenity as acceptable to the
governing body. The grade of the plaza shall not exceed 5%.
A minimum of 50% of the common open space required shall be maintained as a lawn.
A minimum of 50% of common open space provided shall be less than 15% slope.
All common open space provided shall include covenants which shall be recorded and
effective prior to the issuance of grading or building permits on the site. The respective
municipalities of the Planning Area reserve the right to require dedication of any such
land to the municipality, in which case the fee simple dedication of said land and
acceptance thereof shall take place prior to the issuance of building or grading permits on
the site. Common open space provided around the perimeter of a TND bears a
preservation easement or covenants restricting building or the destruction or natural
features or landscaping thereon; said open space may not guarantee rights of access to
residents or the public at large.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 361/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(f)
(12) Lot and block standards.
Blocks shall be at least 500 feet in length and no more than 1,200 feet in length.
All principal uses shall demonstrate direct legal access to a street.
Through lots shall be avoided.
Lots designed for single-family and duplex structures where the land is held in fee simple
ownership shall adhere to the following standards. Said lots shall provide at least 40 feet
of street frontage and shall provide a minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet.
Flag lots or rear lots are permitted where access is provided by a minimum of a twentyfoot
access easement or parcel strip which shall be no more than 200 feet in length and
shall not count toward the minimum lot area of the parcel(s) to which said strip provides
access. An access easement, as specified herein, may also function as a shared
driveway serving up to two parcels. No more than one flag or rear lot, or one group of two
such lots, shall be permitted per block. In cases where a shared driveway is proposed, a
maintenance agreement which shall run with the land shall be submitted, detailing the
responsibilities of future repair and winter maintenance. Said agreement shall be
recorded with the subdivision plat and shall be signed by the property owners of each lot.
Said lots shall be at least 40 feet wide at the front yard building setback. Said setback
shall be provided along the portion of the lot facing the access point, flag, easement or
shared driveway. Side yard setbacks shall be provided from the flag or easement to the
lots abutting the flag portion of the lot or the easement.
Streets. Proposed streets shall conform to the following standards.
Proposed streets shall be laid out so as to minimize land disturbance and grading
while providing a reasonable extension of the traditional grid street pattern in the
vicinity of the development.
Proposed street classification shall be limited to collector and local streets. For
purposes of this article, said streets shall be defined as follows.
LOCAL STREETS
Streets that serve up 240 average vehicle trips per day.
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS
Serve between 241 and 1,500 average trips per day.
Calculation of trips. The aforesaid trips shall exclude pass through trips. Calculations
shall be determined using the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual published
by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
Table of Street Standards.
Type
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
Minimum
Centerline Radii,
Horizontal Curves
(feet)
Minimum Design
Speeds
(miles per hour)
Minor
collector
28 to 40 24 to 28 10% 200 25
Local 22 to 30 18 to 24 12% 100 15 to 20
The minimum clear sight triangle of any proposed intersection shall be 200 feet,
wherein no plantings or structures greater than 30 inches in height shall be
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 362/411
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[a]
[b]
[12]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[d]
[13]
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
permitted.
Vertical curves shall be provided for all changes in grade exceeding 1%. For each
1% of algebraic difference between tangent grades over 3%, at least 15 feet of
vertical curve length shall be provided. A minimum of 50 feet of vertical curve length
shall be provided.
Intersections between more than two streets are prohibited.
Driveways and access drives shall not enter onto a street within 50 feet of any street
intersection.
Where the approach of any proposed street exceeds 5%, a leveling area at least 50
feet in length as measured from the cartway edge of the adjoining street shall be
provided at a grade of 3%.
Curb radii at proposed intersections shall be between 10 and 20 feet.
Alleys or access drives shall be required where the street frontage of single-family or
duplex residential lots is 40 feet and where businesses or townhouses possess party
walls which effectively prohibit direct access to the rear of the subject unit.
Alley standards.
Alleys shall not provide sole access to any principal use.
Alleys shall possess a minimum cartway of 12 feet with a minimum right-of-way
of 16 feet.
All streets and alleys terminating in a dead end shall provide a hammerhead or culde-
sac in accordance with the following standards.
The length of said streets, as measured from the cartway of the intersecting
street to the center of the cul-de-sac or hammerhead, shall not exceed 720 feet
in length and shall not serve uses generating more than 200 average trips per
day as determined using Trip Generation.
Minimum cul-de-sac radius shall be 40 feet with a cartway of 14 feet
surrounding a landscape island, if provided. Minimum right-of-way required shall
be 45 to 50 feet.
Hammerheads shall provide 50 feet for the long dimension with a twenty-fivefoot
radius between the street and the hammerhead.
Larger minimum standards may be required by the municipal engineer where
commercial vehicles are intended to utilize the hammerhead or cul-de-sac.
Type I: Mixed-Use TND use standards.
Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted within
the TND. Additionally townhouses, as defined and allowed within this article, shall be
permitted.
At least one single-family unit shall be provided for every four units consisting of townhouses
or duplexes.
TNDs proposing more than five dwelling units shall provide nonresidential uses at a minimum
rate of 25% of the square footage calculated by the sum of 1,500 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit
proposed.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 363/411
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(13)
Conversely, in no case shall the gross floor area of principal nonresidential structures
proposed exceed 2,000 square feet of floor area per dwelling unit proposed, excepting nonresidential
structures, any part of which lie within 150 feet of the Route 30 right-of-way on parcels
bearing frontage on said right-of-way.
Existing structures which are adjacent to or within the area of the proposed development may
be incorporated only under the following conditions as part of said development for purposes
of determining the preceding calculations [in Subsection B(1) through (3)]. The subject
structures shall exhibit multiple violations of the Property Maintenance Code enforced by the
municipality, the remedy of which shall exceed $3,000 in cost. The municipal engineer shall
determine said violations and costs. Covenants shall be placed on the aforesaid properties
limiting the use of the property to the uses for which the properties were proposed and
classified as part of the TND.
Maximum density of residential dwelling units: six per acre including areas designated as
open space to serve residential use, as defined and required herein.
Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
Maximum impervious surface coverage: 70%.
All residential dwelling units having or proposing detached or attached garages shall construct
said garages in a manner in which the garage door does not face the front yard.
Townhouse standards.
The fronts of each unit shall be varied as follows. Each unit shall be offset from the
abutting unit by at least one foot or shall provide changes in approved facade, such that
each adjacent unit bears an alternating facade, as approved by the governing body in
accordance with the purposes set forth in this article. Each unit shall bear either a roof
style varying from that of the adjacent unit (including facing the gable, hip, or similar style
of roof in alternating directions, dormers, changes in the pitch of the roof, or similar
variations).
Flat roofs are prohibited.
No more than five adjacent units, sharing party walls, are permitted for each
townhouse development.
Groups of townhouses shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any adjacent
principal structure or group of townhouses.
In cases where single-family or duplex units are proposed on land under fee simple
ownership, only one principal structure shall be permitted on each lot. Said lots shall be
subject to the standards for side and rear yard set setbacks, and maximum lot coverage as
specified in the underlying zoning district.
Maximum height of residential structures: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
Principal structures housing nonresidential uses, in whole or in part, shall adhere to the
following standards.
Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
Impervious surface coverage: 80%.
Building standards shall comply with those cited in the bulk regulations of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 364/411
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(14)
(15)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
The cumulative length of any building facing a front yard shall be limited to 150 feet,
excepting groups of buildings with party walls, and shall adhere to the standards of
§ 300-905.
Maximum height of nonresidential structures: 45 feet or three stories.
Side-yard setback: eight feet per story.
Rear-yard setback: 15 feet per story.
Principal structures housing nonresidential uses, in whole or in part, and separated by party
walls shall adhere to the following standards:
Lot coverage and setbacks cited in § 300-704B(11) shall apply to the entire group of said
structures and the parcel(s) upon which they are constructed as applied to one principal
structure.
No group of said nonresidential structures shall exceed 225 feet in length.
Where flat roofs are provided, the front of the structure shall bear a decorative facade
projecting above the roof.
The facade of each separate unit shall vary in either color or type, pattern, or offset by at
least one foot.
Principal nonresidential structures bearing no party walls and standing independently shall
adhere to the standards of § 300-905, Large-scale building standards, and the length of said
structures directly or most nearly parallel to any public street shall not exceed 225 linear feet
facing each respective street.
Type II: Residential TND use standards.
Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted within
the TND in the manner otherwise authorized. Additionally townhouses as defined and allowed
within this article shall be permitted.
At least one single-family unit shall be provided for every three units consisting of townhouses
or duplexes. Where nonresidential uses are approved and proposed in accordance with this
chapter and noted as such in the underlying zoning district, each 1,500 square feet of the
floor area of said uses shall count as one townhouse unit for purposes of this section's
requirements.
In no case shall the square footage of nonresidential use proposed exceed 750 square feet
per dwelling unit proposed.
Existing structures which are adjacent to or within the area of the proposed development may
be incorporated only under the following conditions as part of said development for purposes
of determining the preceding calculations [in Subsection C(1) through (3)]. The subject
structures shall exhibit multiple violations of the 2000 International Property Maintenance
Code, the remedy of which shall exceed $3,000 in cost. The municipal engineer shall
determine said violations and costs. Covenants shall be placed on the aforesaid properties
limiting the use of the property to the uses for which the properties were proposed and
classified as part of the TND.
Maximum density of residential dwelling units. One per 5,000 square feet of land area,
excepting street and alley rights-of-way.
All residential dwelling units having or proposing detached or attached garages shall construct
said garages in a manner in which the garage door does not face the front yard.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 365/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
Townhouse standards.
The fronts of each unit shall be varied as follows. Each unit shall be offset from the
abutting unit by at least one foot or shall provide changes in approved facade, such that
each adjacent unit bears an alternating facade, as approved by the governing body in
accordance with the purposes set forth in this article. Each unit shall bear either a roof
style varying from that of the adjacent unit (including facing the gable, hip, or similar style
of roof in alternating directions, dormers, changes in the pitch of the roof, or similar
variations).
Flat roofs are prohibited.
No more than five adjacent units, sharing party walls, are permitted for each townhouse
development.
Groups of townhouses shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any adjacent
principal structure or group of townhouses.
In cases where single-family or duplex units are proposed on land under fee simple
ownership of the unit owner, one principal structure shall be permitted on each lot. Said lots
shall be subject to the standards for side and rear yard setbacks, and maximum lot coverage
as specified in the underlying zoning district.
Maximum principal building height: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
All nonresidential uses shall adhere to the same setback and lot coverage standards to which
single-family and duplex uses are limited under the TND II standards.
Type III: Mobile Home Park use standards.
Total density shall be calculated as follows: 70% of the total square feet of site area/5,000
square feet. The preceding notwithstanding, shall be modified to 70% of the total square feet
of site area/4,000 square feet where by covenant the mobile home park is limited to either
occupancy solely by persons aged 62 or older or the mobile home park requires occupancy
by at least one person 55 years of age or older in at least 80% of the units. The preceding
conditions qualify as exemptions for elderly housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act. The
purpose of this provision is to provide for the housing needs of the Planning Area's elderly,
who while desiring to live independently may not possess the ability or desire to maintain a
traditional single-family home.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses are limited to the residential use of mobile homes whereby
only one family occupies each unit.
A build-to line shall be established between 15 and 30 feet from the right-of-way. Unenclosed
porches may invade said build-to line by eight feet.
Side and rear yard setbacks shall be 10 feet and shall be enforced from the mobile home lot
line.
The minimum street frontage of each mobile home lot shall be 40 feet.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures in the Type III TND shall be limited to 144 square
feet and 10 feet in height and shall not be placed in the front yard of the mobile home lot. Said
structures may locate up to five feet from the mobile home lot line.
Article VIII. Conditional Uses
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 366/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
§ 300-800. Purpose.
Several uses as specified in the district regulations of this chapter are deemed conditional uses. Said
uses have been identified as having potential impacts and concerns which are, firstly, beyond those
and greater than those of permitted uses, and, secondly, having impacts which might vary considerably
depending on the character of the facility, structure, or business proposed, and may require special
conditions as recommended by the Planning Commission, and approved by the governing body.
§ 300-801. General standards.
The Planning Commission shall make recommendations and findings of fact based in the following
general and specific criteria, wherein the governing body shall review said finding and conditional use
application and shall issue a decision, which may contain reasonable conditions. Said findings,
conditions, and recommendations shall consider the following.
The maximization of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare through adequate buffering and
building location recognizing the need to adequately provide for a certain use or class of uses.
The safety and requirements of the clients, residents, or patrons of a potential use through the
design of internal pedestrian and vehicular circulation, site ingress and egress, general manner of
operation, signage, lighting, and related improvements.
The site design of the proposed use shall promote the least intrusive options in regards to
signage, vehicular circulation, deliveries, and hours of operation as possible while accommodating
the basic requirements of the use's regular business operations.
The overall costs versus the benefits in regards to public services, tax revenues, and benefits to
the Planning Area's residents as related to reasonable site design or associated modifications
provided by the applicant.
§ 300-802. Application and approval process.
The applicant shall submit the following items, including required filing fees, which shall be
required in order to constitute a complete application.
Where new structures, parking, or landscaping are required or proposed, the applicant shall
submit a mylar and sufficient copies of a plan on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch-sized paper at
a scale necessary to show all required details. Said plan shall be drawn by a registered surveyor
and shall include all details necessary to demonstrate and evaluate compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and the standards and criteria specified in this article.
Where new structures are proposed, building elevations showing building facade treatments.
Conditional uses defined under §§ 300-803 and 300-804 shall submit a community impact
analysis consisting of the following information.
Information concerning the average number of daily vehicle trips estimated to be generated
by such use, with peak-hour vehicle trip ends identified.
Information concerning the estimated amount of tax revenue to be generated by such a use,
broken down by revenue to be paid to the respective municipality, the county, and the local
school district.
Information concerning the estimated cost of public services to be provided to such use,
broken down by cost to be borne by the respective municipalities, the county, and the local
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 367/411
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
school district, including police, transportation, and other public services.
Applicants shall submit a narrative detailing the proposed use including gross floor area,
number of employees, operating hours, and a general synopsis of business or use activities.
Required fee per the governing body's adopted fee schedule.
The applicant shall indicate whether or not the applicant is willing to accept the decision of a
hearing officer if the governing body, by majority vote, accepts the final decision and findings
of a hearing officer in lieu of its own decision and findings, as authorized in Section 913.2 of
the MPC as amended.
Conditional uses applications for planned residential and traditional neighborhood developments
may be submitted simultaneously with the tentative approval application, wherein the conditional
use shall be reviewed based on materials submitted with the tentative application proposal. Where
no proposal is submitted, the applicant shall submit drawings sufficient to demonstrate compliance
with the standards outlined in the respective sections of this article. Such drawings and materials
include, but are not limited to, approximate number and type of units and uses proposed, existing
topography on five-foot intervals, the street network and cartway locations within 500 feet of the
site.
A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer at least 21 days prior to the next
regularly scheduled monthly Planning Commission or Joint Planning Commission meeting.
Filing fees and required copies of applications shall be determined by local governing body
resolution or ordinance.
All conditional uses relating to developments of regional significance and impact shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission for recommendation at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing before the governing body. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing on the
matter. The Zoning Officer shall also submit the application to the local Planning Commission for
their consideration. The local Planning Commission may discuss the matter at a public meeting
and may provide a recommendation to the governing body.
The governing body shall hold a public hearing per public notice within 60 days of the filing of a
complete application. Where a hearing officer has been designated, the officer shall preside over
the hearing.
A decision and accompanying findings of fact shall be issued within 45 days after the conclusion
of the aforesaid hearing. The governing body or hearing officer may attach conditions to any
approval that either finds are necessary to permit the conditional use in a manner consistent with
this chapter and this article in particular. A condition of approval shall include the receipt of the
applicant's signature, indicating acceptance of the findings of fact and conditions, if any, within 30
days of approval, wherein the failure of the applicant to submit the aforesaid acceptance shall be
deemed a denial of the conditional use. A copy of the decision shall be filed at the governing
body's office. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant no later than one day following the date
of the decision.
Where the governing body fails to render the decision within 45 days of the conclusion of the
required public hearing or fails to commence the required hearing within 60 days from the date of
the applicant's request for a hearing or fails to complete the hearing in accordance with Section
908 (1.2) of the Municipalities Planning Code,[1] the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an
extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the
failure of the governing body to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the governing
body shall give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this act. If
the governing body shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 368/411
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(1.2).
§ 300-803. Adult uses.
Adult uses shall not be established or operated within 500 feet of an existing school, public
playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other
actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed adult use. Said
distance shall be measured from the lot line on which the preceding uses and facilities are
situated.
Principal structures housing the adult use shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from the lot line
of any property bearing a residential zoning classification.
The hours of adult uses may be restricted to 8:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. Restricted hours, if
required as a condition of approval, shall be based upon findings of fact and factors relating to the
location of the proposed facility with other businesses, residential areas, and public uses, and
shall not be restricted more than the maximum stated herein.
Application requirements. Applicants shall submit a plan prepared by a registered surveyor at a
scale of at least one inch equals one foot showing the general design of the site including building
location, ingress and egress, parking, and locations of entrances. Applicants shall submit a
narrative detailing the nature of the business proposed and anticipated hours of operation.
Applicants shall submit a community impact statement as outlined in this article.
§ 300-804. Psychiatric and drug abuse facilities.
Psychiatric and drug abuse facilities shall not be established or operated within 500 feet of an
existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church,
meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship within the Planning Area
established prior to the proposed treatment facility. Said distance shall be measured from the lot
line on which the preceding uses and facilities are situated.
Said facilities shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state regulations as instituted by
the Department of Health and the Department of Public Welfare.
Said uses shall be set back at least 50 feet from any lot line.
Applicants shall submit a plan prepared by a registered surveyor at a scale of at least one inch
equals 50 feet showing the general design of the site including building location, ingress and
egress, parking, and locations of entrances. Applicants shall submit a narrative detailing the
nature of the business and its consistency with applicable state requirements. Applicants shall
submit a community impact statement as outlined in this article.
Personnel licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health shall man such uses during all
hours of operation.
§ 300-805. Communications towers.
The applicant shall demonstrate the following, the demonstration of which shall be evaluated by the
Planning Commission and the respective governing body.
Planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing communications towers
considering existing and planned use of those communications towers, and existing
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 369/411
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
communications towers cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at
a reasonable cost;
Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF) interference with other existing or planned
equipment for that communications tower, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost;
Existing or approved communications towers do not have the space on which planned equipment
can be placed so it can function effectively and at least in parity with other similar equipment in
place or planned; or
Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment planned by the applicant on existing and
approved communications towers.
The applicant shall also include a plan to indicate feasibility of locating additional communications
antennas on the proposed communications tower.
Where a communications tower is proposed, the applicant shall similarly demonstrate the
exhaustion or ineffectiveness of other options as well as the need for the tower proposed.
No tower permitted shall exceed 199 feet in height.
Towers shall be set back one foot for every 1 1/2 feet of the height of the tower or within the district
setbacks which would otherwise apply to other principal structures, whichever is greater.
A solid fencing surrounded by low-level landscaping shall screen all other associated structures or
equipment. Said structures shall comply with all standards applying to principal structures within
the district in which said structures are placed.
No tower shall be located closer than one mile to any other existing tower. In cases of
telecommunications, the applicant shall demonstrate that a significant gap exists in the nationwide
cellular network, thus necessitating the erection of an additional tower.
§ 300-806. Neighborhood public and semipublic uses.
Where new construction is proposed, neighborhood public and semipublic uses shall be limited to
a building footprint twice the size of the specified minimum building footprint, per the number of
stories proposed.
While permitting handicap parking and forms of parking or drop-off necessary to the regular
functioning of the use, required parking shall be located in the side or rear yards of the use, unless
the character of an existing property does not permit such an arrangement.
All impervious surfaces shall be set back at least five feet from any property line.
Any parking lot which directly faces an abutting property containing a principal residential use or
which faces a street shall provide a continuous screen of low-level landscaping such that the
headlights of vehicles are not visible through said screening when screening has grown to
maturity.
The hours of neighborhood public and semipublic uses may be restricted to 7:00 a.m. through
10:00 p.m. Restricted hours, if required as a condition of approval, shall be based upon findings of
fact and factors relating to the location of the proposed facility with other businesses, residential
areas, and public uses, and shall not be restricted more than the maximum stated herein.
§ 300-807. Community center.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 370/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
It is the intent of the Planning Area to provide for an adequate range and amount of recreational
and community facilities. The remaining provisions of this article notwithstanding, said facilities
may consist of a combination of the following uses as principal or accessory uses.
61162, Sports and recreation instruction.
71394, Fitness and recreational sports centers.
53112, Lessors of nonresidential buildings (except miniwarehouses), banquet halls only.
7221, Full-service restaurants.
7222, Limited-service eating places.
Any structure housing these facilities shall be located at least 50 feet from the bounding property
lines of all commonly owned properties which constitute a park and zoned Neighborhood Park.
Likewise, impervious surface area for parking and access to said facilities shall be located no
closer than 20 feet to said lines.
Any parking lot or outside storage area which directly faces an abutting property containing a
principal residential use or which faces a street shall provide a continuous screen of low-level
landscaping such that the headlights of vehicles are not visible through said screening when
screening has grown to maturity.
The maximum height of any approved structure shall be two stories or 35 feet.
The maximum building footprint of any approved structure shall be 25,000 square feet.
The maximum building coverage of structures approved to house community center activities in
addition to all other structures located within the bounding property lines of all commonly owned
properties which constitute a park and are zoned Neighborhood Park shall not exceed 20% of said
area. Where said area consists of multiple parcels, covenants shall be recorded stating that either
no further building shall take place or no coverage beyond a percent determined by this section
and governing body shall be constructed. Also, a condition of approval may, if necessary, include
limits on further building and zoning permits issued by the municipality.
Approvals of conditional uses shall include the condition that any change of use of approved
facilities shall require subsequent conditional approvals.
The applicant shall submit a parking plan, to be evaluated in accordance with the parking
standards of this chapter, a general site plan showing the area of the buildings, proposed
landscaping where required by the local subdivision ordinance, and building elevations showing
general schematics and facade materials, and all other requirements.
Approval and findings of fact of the preceding uses and structures shall be based on the following:
The level of community and recreational need filled by the proposed facility versus the impact
of the facility on vehicular circulation, surrounding neighborhoods, and the functionality of the
park in which it is located.
The present character of the surrounding land shall be considered. The grounds shall be
suited for and maintained such that the property provides for passive recreational uses in
addition to the proposed facilities and uses.
The proposed facilities shall promote community activity in a manner that provides a focal
point for cultural and recreational activities for all ages while presenting minimum impacts and
nuisance potential for the Planning Area as a whole as well as adjacent properties.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 371/411
(4)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
The governing body may consider additional uses not cited above based on their adherence
to the aforementioned criteria. The governing body may likewise restrict the above listed uses
based on the preceding criteria.
§ 300-808. Alternative build-to line.
The applicant shall submit scaled drawings, sealed by a Pennsylvania licensed surveyor, depicting
the location of the proposed structure, the subject right-of-way and cartway, and the location of
existing structures sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the criteria listed herein as they relate
to the applicant's request.
The applicant shall submit general information in terms of the height of the proposed structure.
Approval and findings of fact shall be based on the following:
The proposed build-to line shall be consistent with the general character of the block on which
it is proposed.
The build-to line proposed shall vary from that of the most proximate structure only where that
structure's location is found to be out of character with the remaining structures on a block.
The general scale of the structure, in terms of the number of stories proposed, shall be
consistent with that of existing structures on a block.
The local governing body may place conditions requiring landscaping and sidewalk placement
that integrates the development with adjacent uses for the respective purposes of property
value preservation and the facilitation of pedestrian access throughout the subject
neighborhood or business district.
§ 300-809. Drive-through facility.
The drive-through facility shall comply with all standards cited in Article VIII of this chapter.
Minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
The drive-through facility shall contain appropriate buffering in the form of landscaping or
decorative fencing designed to block the effects of headlights and noise generated by associated
vehicle operation.
The facility shall comply with all standards listed in this chapter.
§ 300-810. Large-scale industrial, warehouse, and service uses.
The use shall be conducted on a minimum three-acre lot or parcel.
Principal structures shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from side and rear property lines.
Any storage or display of materials within 100 feet of any property line or in front of the principal
structure shall be screened by an opaque fence such that the materials stored are not visible more
than five feet above said fence. Said fences shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any
property line and shall be classified as a principal structure subject to those requirements as
specified in § 300-907, Yard and buffering standards.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 372/411
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
The use shall meet all performance standards applicable, including but not limited to noise,
lighting, and parking.
No parking of construction equipment, commercial vehicles, loading, or storage of materials shall
be conducted in the front yard of the facility.
§ 300-811. Large-scale retail and service.
A continuous hedgerow or screening of low-level plantings shall be installed around the perimeter
of any parking, sales, or storage lot facing a street, access drive, or side lot line.
The area of impervious surface covered by access drives, loading areas, parking, storage, and
sales lots shall be limited to twice that of the gross square footage of the principal structure or
structures housing the use or establishment.
§ 300-812. Essential services buildings.
The building shall be reasonably necessary for the satisfactory provision of services by the utility
to the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
The design of any building in connection with such facilities must conform to the general character
of the area and not adversely affect the enjoyment of property rights in the zoning district in which
it is located.
The applicant shall demonstrate adequate screening through fencing, landscaping, or a
combination thereof.
§ 300-813. Type I and Type II Traditional Neighborhood
Development.
The proposed site shall contain a minimum of 75,000 square feet of contiguous parcels or parcels
directly fronting an existing street or right-of-way in a parallel manner.
The site shall be located in proximity to an existing street network so that the site may be
integrated into the adjoining network by at least two access points.
Each phase of any such development shall contain a minimum of 30,000 square feet.
§ 300-814. Type III Traditional Neighborhood Development
(Mobile Home Park).
Each tentative TND or phase thereof shall include at least eight mobile homes.
The proposed site shall be comprised of contiguous parcels or parcels.
Where mobile home lots front an existing street, the governing body may require the following
based upon the location of the site and its subsequent impact on adjoining neighborhoods of
differing character and housing type in order to protect the market values and existing
neighborhood character:
Continuous screening provided by a hedgerow or low-level plantings.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 373/411
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
A tree lawn up to 10 feet in width between required sidewalks and/or the subject right-of-way
with high-level plantings every 50 feet or in a manner consistent with adjoining
neighborhoods.
Access to mobile home lots may be restricted to access drives within the mobile home park.
§ 300-815. Planned residential development.
The minimum site area shall consist of 10 contiguous acres.
While planned residential development is intended to provide for the preservation of steep slopes
and wooded hillsides, the site shall demonstrate a reasonable feasibility to construct the units
proposed.
Each phase proposed shall include at least 25% of dwelling units approved.
§ 300-816. Planned residential development, mixed-use.
The minimum site area shall consist of 10 contiguous acres. A minimum of three contiguous acres
within the site shall bear an absence of steep slopes.
Each phase shall contain a minimum of three acres, excluding open space required or approved.
§ 300-817. Mineral removal or mining.
A copy of all site plan information that will be required by the state DEP shall also be submitted as
part of the zoning application.
A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse plan of the area to be excavated shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer.
After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas shall be reclaimed in phases to a
nonhazardous and environmentally sound state permitting some productive or beneficial future
use.
A seventy-five-foot-wide yard covered by natural vegetative ground cover (except at approved
driveway crossings) shall be required along all exterior lot lines that are within 250 feet of an area
of excavation. This yard shall include an earth berm with a minimum average height of six feet and
an average of one high-level planting for each 50 feet of distance along the lot lines.
The area of excavation shall be set back from the exterior property lines of the parcel or parcels
involved by a minimum of 100 feet, including 100 feet from any street.
Reasonable standards encouraging compliance with § 300-401, Use performance standards, shall
be imposed, including but not limited to hours of operation and points of primary access.
Bonding of all local roads within the Planning Area shall be a condition precedent to the
commencement of operations on the site.
§ 300-818. Gas wells.
Application requirements.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 374/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
The applicant shall submit evidence that all required materials have been submitted to the
Department of Environmental Protection.
The applicant shall submit a statement of understanding concerning the standards of this
section and the applicant's plan for compliance, namely in regards to the use of compression
on the site.
The applicant shall submit cross sections of the proposed access where it meets municipal
streets.
The applicant shall submit site distance measurements for the access, whether proposed or
existing.
The applicant shall submit a plan showing the access route (of municipal or state roads) over
which heavy equipment will travel to the site.
The preceding items in Subsection A(1) through (5), along with the required fee, shall constitute
the minimum required to consider the request for conditional use complete.
The applicant shall meet all current minimum driveway site distance standards and shall
demonstrate that the point of access to any municipal street will not cause the erosion of mud or
debris onto said street.
Bonding of all local roads within the Planning Area shall be a condition precedent to the
commencement of operations on the site.
Noise limits shall, to the furthest extent practical in terms of well drilling, and in terms of
compressor use, both short and long term, comply with the performance standards outlined under
§ 300-401.
No gas well shall be located within 300 feet of any existing public building, school, church,
institutional, commercial or residential building.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
No gas well shall be located within 500 feet of a private water well.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
No gas well shall be located which will adversely affect any publicly owned park or places included
in the National Register of Historic Sites unless approved by the governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the park or historic site.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
The applicant shall demonstrate, through compliance with applicable commonwealth regulations,
that the proposed gas well shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any public water supply source,
reservoir or surface water extraction intake point.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed gas well shall not adversely affect any floodprone
or landslide-prone areas within the Township.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
The applicant shall demonstrate that the use of explosives, if proposed, shall not cause injury to
any adjacent structures and shall not substantially diminish underground water resources through
compliance with applicable commonwealth regulations.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
When blasting is performed, the activity shall be monitored by an independent engineering
consultant whose credentials are acceptable to the Township and whose fee is paid by the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 375/411
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
applicant.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
The applicant shall identify the proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized for hauling material and
the estimated number of trips and weights of those trucks. The applicant shall comply with
designated weight limits on Township roads and shall design the hauling routes for the gas well to
minimize the impact on local roads within the Township.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
Portions of the site boundaries where gas wells are located may be required by the Township
Commissioners to be fenced or screened, as necessary, to provide security and protect adjacent
properties.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
Upon approval of an application for conditional use approval and prior to commencing operations,
the applicant shall submit an escrow deposit to the Township in an amount established by the
Board upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer. The escrow deposit shall be
maintained throughout the duration of the gas well operation and shall be used to cover all costs
to the Township for engineering, consultant, legal and inspection fees and other miscellaneous
costs.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
Approval shall expire if work authorized in the application for conditional use approval is not
commenced within 90 days of the date of the Board's approval of the application unless the
applicant submits a written request for an extension to the Board prior to the expiration of the 90
days explaining the reasons for the delay in initiating the work and the Board approves the
request.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
Once work is initiated under an approved application, zoning approval shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of approval by the Board. An application for renewal of zoning approval
shall be submitted at least 90 days prior to the date of expiration of zoning approval and can be
granted by the Zoning Officer upon demonstration by the applicant that all conditions of the
approval and the required federal and commonwealth permits remain in full force and effect and
that the applicant is diligently pursuing the completion of the gas well. Upon expiration or
revocation of conditional use approval for the use, the applicant shall reapply for approval.
[Added 5-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1113]
§ 300-819. Local public use.
Principal structures containing more than 8,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be set back at
least 100 feet from the side and rear property lines.
Parking and access drives shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from side and rear lot lines.
Accessory structures greater than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from side and rear lot lines.
Sufficient mounding and landscaping shall be installed to ensure the shielding of glare and general
vehicular traffic.
§ 300-820. Shared parking.
Parking shall be located within the distances specified elsewhere in this chapter.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 376/411
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
All establishments utilizing the parking area shall demonstrate the right to perpetually utilize said
area through the recordation of easements or covenants that guarantee access. Leases may be
accepted provided that the applicant can demonstrate the feasibility of parking alternatives upon
lease expiration. The occupancy of the respective establishment, in such an instance, shall be
conditioned upon the availability of said parking wherein the applicant shall sign a statement of
understanding verifying said condition.
The timing and character of establishment usage shall provide for the proper amount of spaces
per establishment utilizing the parking at any time of day. The occupancy of the respective
establishment, in such an instance, shall be conditioned upon the operating hours or range of
hours presented wherein the applicant shall sign a statement of understanding verifying said
condition.
Proper signage and pedestrian safety designations and amenities, including sidewalks, shall
provide for safe access from each establishment to the parking area.
§ 300-821. Similar uses not specified.
Similar uses not specified as otherwise defined in this chapter shall be evaluated in accordance
with the general standards set forth in this article.
Said uses shall conform to the general character and purpose of the district in which they are
proposed as well as the character of those uses otherwise authorized therein.
Said uses shall be determined as similar to uses otherwise permitted within the zoning district in
which the use is proposed where:
Uses are generally within the same three-digit NAICS category as a use expressly authorized.
Production, trip generation, pedestrian traffic generated, hours of operation, and display of
products or services shall be reasonably similar to those of uses expressly authorized within
the district where the use is requested.
The use shall not be expressly authorized in any other district or location within the Planning
Area.
Said uses shall be situated such that their proximity to abutting uses; especially dwellings,
churches, and schools, does not compromise the safety and expected use and quiet enjoyment of
their occupants, visitors, members, or students.
§ 300-822. Normal agricultural operations.
Normal agricultural operations shall take place on parcels of 10 acres or greater, wherein
operations on smaller parcels shall be considered a nuisance given the general topography of the
Planning Area which would effectively limit the operation to a concentrated area of the property.
Boarding of horses shall be limited to one horse per every three acres of the parcel.
All principal structures shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.
Greenhouses totaling not more than 5,000 square feet shall be permitted as accessory retail,
where 80% of gross sales are derived from the sales of produce grown on site.
All patron parking shall comply with the provision of § 300-907, Yard and buffering standards.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 377/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
Article IX. Supplemental Regulations
§ 300-900. Accessory structures and uses.
The following standards shall apply to all accessory structures within the Planning Area:
All accessory structures shall, at a minimum, adhere to the building setbacks in the zoning
districts in which they are situated.
Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard.
Accessory structures occupying building footprints less than 800 square feet may locate up
10 feet from the rear property line.
Sheds occupying less than 100 square feet of footprint may locate up five feet from the side
and rear property lines.
The following standards shall apply to all accessory structures located within R-R, R-1, R-2, and P
Districts and shall apply to all parcels of which single-family or duplex structures constitute the
principal use:
Maximum height from average grade of ground: 14 feet.
Maximum square footage of building footprint: 500 square feet or the equivalent square
footage of the principal structure's building footprint, whichever is greater; up to 1,200 square
feet.
Only one accessory structure in addition to one shed as an accessory structure shall be
permitted for each principal use.
Accessory structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which said
structure is an accessory. Accessory structures may be permitted on lots immediately
adjacent to the lot bearing the principal use when a zoning permit is issued conditioned upon
the following statement which shall appear on said permit: "The lot on which the approved
structure is to be constructed, if conveyed to subsequent ownership, shall be conveyed to the
same ownership as the property on which the principal use rests. Where the subject lots are
conveyed to separate ownership, the approved accessory structure shall be demolished or
approved as a principal use by the Zoning Officer in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance."
The following shall constitute accessory uses authorized within R-R, R-1, R-2, and P Districts and
shall apply to all parcels of which single-family or duplex structures constitute the principal use:
The use of no more than one accessory structure to be rented to an individual or individuals
other than the occupant for purposes of storing materials customarily accessory to a
residential use.
Home occupations as authorized in § 300-903.
Breeding and boarding of no more than one litter per year of dogs, cats, or other customary
domestic pets.
Residential storage; garages; pools; decks; similar uses; and shelter for domestic pets and
children's play equipment at a scale commensurate with accessory structures otherwise
regulated within this chapter and intended for private and noncommercial use.
The following standards shall apply to all accessory structures located within N, MU, M, GR, and
R-3 Districts where the parcels of which single-family or duplex structures do not constitute the
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 378/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(7)
A.
principal use.
Maximum height from average grade of ground: 20 feet.
Only one accessory structure and one shed as an accessory structure shall be permitted for
each principal use.
All other structures permitted shall be classified as principal structures wherein the number or
scale of said structures shall be determined to house principal or basic operations related to
an establishment.
Swimming pools as accessory structures.
All swimming pools that serve as an accessory use to a dwelling unit may locate up to 10 feet
from the rear yard or side yard property lines.
No swimming pool shall be permitted in the front yard.
Swimming pools shall abide by all standards, with the exception of those expressly modified
herein.
No-impact home-based businesses are permitted as an accessory residential use in all zoning
districts.
§ 300-901. Signs.
General standards.
The following sign types are permitted:
Wall signs.
Projected signs.
Ground signs.
Changeable copy signs.
Signs authorized in Subsection B.
Signs bearing flashing lighting or digital scrolling or moving text or animation are prohibited.
Signs bearing language or character that reflect traffic signals and emergency and traffic
signage are prohibited.
No sign shall infringe upon the existing site distance of abutting intersections such that the
sign's presence compromises the safety of traffic and pedestrian movement.
No sign shall produce glare.
No sign shall emit more than 0.2 footcandle of light at any property line except where
properties are part of a shopping center.
Calculation of square footage of signs. For purposes of determining signage permitted per the
standards of this section, square footage shall be calculated as follows.
The square footage of wall signs shall include the entire area where illustrations and
lettering is provided on material which is not part of the building's structure and is affixed
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 379/411
(b)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
thereto as signage. Where letters or illustrations are directly affixed to a wall, square
footage shall be calculated through the area within all lines tangent to the edges of said
lettering or illustrations.
For all projected and ground signs, area is calculated for only one face of the sign. The
entire area of a ground or projected sign shall be considered in calculating area
permitted, including monuments to which signs are affixed and decorative features
accompanying said signs.
No sign shall be placed on an automobile, truck or other vehicle if that vehicle is being used
primarily for displaying such sign.
Ground signs shall be set back at least five feet from the adjoining right-of-way.
No sign shall include statements, words or pictures that are considered to be vulgar, obscene
or pornographic.
Exempted signs. The following types of signs are exempted from the calculation of maximum
square footage, number of signs, and setbacks otherwise regulated by this article; and shall not
require a zoning certificate.
Political signs up to eight square feet in Residential, Neighborhood Park, Mixed-Use, and
Neighborhood Use Districts.
Political signs up to 16 square feet in General Retail and Office and Manufacturing Districts.
Address signs and nameplates, up to two square feet for residential principal uses and up to
four square feet for nonresidential principal uses.
Real estate signs up to five square feet per principal residential use of single-family or duplex
and up to 10 square feet per parcel bearing all other uses.
Directional signs up to two square feet per sign with a maximum height of four feet.
Window signs up to 50 cumulative square feet.
Two drive-through menu reader boards per establishment up to 50 square feet and eight feet
in height per board.
Signs in Residential, Neighborhood Use, and Mixed-Use Districts.
Internally illuminated signs are prohibited.
Externally illuminated signs are permitted provided that the cutoff angle of said illumination
does not illuminate space beyond the area of the sign and does not, by the determination of
the Zoning Officer, present a safety hazard to vehicular traffic by distracting drivers.
Residential uses. Where residential use constitutes the principal use of a zoning lot and no
principal nonresidential use exists, the maximum square footage of signage permitted shall be
two square feet. Multifamily uses shall be permitted eight square feet of signage. All ground
signs shall not exceed six feet in height.
Nonresidential uses. Where nonresidential use constitutes the principal use of a zoning lot,
the maximum cumulative square footage of all signage permitted per zoning lot shall equal
one times the linear frontage which said lot bears on a street, excluding alleys; or 100 square
feet, whichever is less. The total amount of signage permitted to face each property line
having frontage shall equal the amount of frontage borne by the respective lot line, on corner
lots. Ground signs shall be limited to 10 square feet and eight feet in height. Projected signs
shall be limited to six square feet of signage. One ground sign and one projected sign are
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 380/411
(5)
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
H.
permitted per zoning lot. Ground signs shall be set back a minimum of eight feet from any
side lot line. Although multiple wall signs are permitted per zoning lot, the maximum square
footage of each wall sign shall be 20 square feet.
Signs on vacant lots, excepting those authorized by Subsection B, are expressly prohibited.
Signs in Office and Manufacturing and General Retail Districts.
Externally and internally illuminated signs are permitted.
The maximum cumulative square footage of all signage permitted per zoning lot shall equal
one times the linear frontage which said lot bears on a street, excluding alleys. The total
amount of signage permitted to face each property line having frontage shall equal the
amount of frontage borne by the respective lot line, on corner lots. Ground signs shall be
limited to 50 square feet of signage and 15 feet in height, excepting shopping centers, and
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the side property line. Projected signs shall be
limited to six square feet of signage per establishment. The maximum square footage of each
wall sign shall be 200 square feet. The preceding regulations shall not withstand regulations
for nonresidential group developments outlined in Subsection C. Additionally, properties
bearing residential uses as principal uses with no principal nonresidential use (excluding
home occupations) shall adhere to the regulations outlined in this Subsection D.
The following standards shall apply to group developments as outlined herein. For purposes of
this section, nonresidential group developments shall include all nonresidential groups that are
located such that multiple principal uses are either accessed from a street by a common entrance
or entrances, located on the same parcel, sharing party walls, or constituting a shopping center.
One ground sign shall be permitted per each side of the nonresidential group development
bordering a street, not including alleys, where the development bears an entrance to said
street.
Shopping centers shall be permitted 150 square feet per ground sign and 25 feet of maximum
height.
Where principal uses bear external walls facing a street, the permitted signage for each
establishment shall be assessed as a proportion of the linear footage of said wall as part of
the total linear footage of the group development facing the respective street, subtracting the
square footage of existing or proposed ground signs.
A property owner or group of owners controlling property on which a nonresidential group
development is situated may submit a sign plan to the Zoning Officer, allotted proportions of
permitted signage to certain tenants and establishments located therein. The Zoning Officer
shall approve said plan where the plan complies with this chapter. The notarized signature of
said owner(s) shall be placed on the plan along with the signature of the Zoning Officer
accepting said plan.
Residential group developments, such as approved subdivisions, planned residential
development, and traditional neighborhood developments, may place an identification sign bearing
the plan's name not to exceed 15 square feet in area and six feet in height.
Temporary signs are permitted once for a new nonresidential establishment for up to 45 days and
shall conform to the height and square footage limitations of the respective district or development
in which said signs are located.
The faces of obsolete signs shall be removed within 30 days after the close of the business or
establishment to which they relate. Where the business to which the structure on which a ground
sign relates closes, rendering said sign obsolete, the face shall be removed with 30 days.
However, the sign structure may remain so long as the owner is actively marketing the sale or
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 381/411
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
A.
B.
lease of the subject space. Once one year has passed since the close of said establishment, and
the owner fails to actively market the space for a period exceeding 30 consecutive days, the
owner shall remove the entire structure of the ground sign.
Changeable copy signs shall be permitted, whether as wall signs or attached to ground signs, at a
rate of one per nonresidential group development or per parcel on which a nonresidential principal
use is situated. The maximum square footage of any such sign as a wall sign shall not exceed 10
square feet. Changeable copy signs attached to freestanding signs shall not stand alone and shall
be attached to a freestanding sign with permanent signage and limited to half the square footage
of said signage.
Balloons, streamers, and banners employed as promotional and advertising tools shall be
prohibited.
§ 300-902. Parking requirements.
The following uses categories shall be interpreted based upon their basic meanings as defined
and employed within the NAICS.
Small-scale retail: one parking space per every 200 feet of gross floor area.
Large-scale retail: one parking space per every 250 feet of gross floor area.
Warehousing and storage, manufacturing, and wholesale: one parking space per employee
on peak shift.
Administrative services and offices: one parking space per every 200 feet of gross floor area.
Miniwarehouses and self-storage units: one parking space per unit.
Elementary and secondary schools: one parking space per every 10 students.
All other education services: one parking space per every six students.
Food services and drinking places: one parking space per every three seats; or per 100
square feet of gross floor area where seating is not provided.
Hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities: one parking space per employee on peak
shift and one parking space per every three beds.
Child day-care services: one parking space per employee and one parking space per every
five students in the total enrollment capacity.
Hotels and motels: one per employee and one per guest room.
Personal care services and funeral homes: one parking space for every 150 square feet of
area designated for use by customers or the public.
Residential: two parking spaces per dwelling unit. Garages, where an improved access to the
garage is provided, shall fulfill the requirement of parking spaces equal to the amount of
vehicles for which the garage is designed to accommodate.
The preceding parking requirements notwithstanding, any use which provides for public assembly
including but not limited to churches, assembly halls, auditoriums, and theaters shall provide one
parking space per every four seats or per every four persons of the total capacity of said space, as
determined by the Municipal Engineer utilizing the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code
and other applicable standards, whichever is less.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 382/411
C.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
Parking requirements shall be provided for each principal use per the above standards and
classifications, notwithstanding conditional uses authorized for shared parking.
Dimensional and access standards for nonresidential, multifamily uses, and townhouse uses.
Stall size. All parking spaces shall be no less than nine feet in width by 18 feet in length.
Parallel spaces shall be no less than eight feet in width and 23 feet in length.
Aisle width. Aisle widths for parking spaces shall be in accordance with the chart below.
Where a parking lot serves less than 30 spaces, aisle widths for two- and one-way parking
accessing ninety-degree spaces shall be reduced to 20 and 10 feet, respectively. Only oneway
traffic is permitted for any parking space at an angle less than 90°.
Parking Space Angle
Aisle Width
(feet)
30° 12
45° 14
60° 18
75° 22
90° 22 (two-way traffic)
12 (one-way traffic)
Access drives which do not serve as aisles for parking spaces shall provide the following lane
widths:
Ten feet per lane where total parking spaces accessed by use of said drive is less than
30.
Twelve feet per lane where total parking spaces accessed by use of said drive is 30 or
more.
Parking spaces, other than parallel parking spaces, shall not be oriented such that vehicles
are forced to exit or back out directly into a street.
Parking lots shall, at a minimum, provide a dust-free surface, as determined by the Borough
Engineer.
The entrance width of all parking lots and access drives to abutting streets shall not exceed
28 feet.
The grade of parking lots shall be between 1% and 5%, and shall be designed according to
provide proper stormwater drainage.
All parking spaces shall be delineated in the parking lot by a minimum of three-inch-wide line
striping.
Parking lots serving a principal use shall be located within 300 feet of an entrance to said use.
Residential standards for single-family and duplex units. Residential driveways serving singlefamily
and duplex structures are exempt from all other provisions of this section and are subject
only to the following standards:
Driveways shall be maintained in a mud-free condition.
A maximum street opening of 24 feet is permitted for each driveway.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 383/411
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
A.
(1)
B.
A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided on the property through a driveway,
garage, carport, or a combination thereof.
Parking lots within 150 feet of a single-family or duplex structure may provide for the required
two-space-per-unit parking where a recorded easement or covenant that guarantees usage of
the lot by the subject property owner for purposes of parking at least two vehicles.
Residential standards for multifamily and townhouse developments. Driveways and parking lots
shall be subject to all standards in the preceding sections with the following modifications:
Driveways provided specifically for individual dwelling units shall fulfill parking requirements
where driveways are capable of providing a minimum of two parking spaces, generally
consistent with the minimum dimensions as specified in this section. Garage shall fulfill the
same.
The maximum street opening of driveways servicing individual dwelling units shall be 24 feet.
Commercial vehicles.
The parking of commercial vehicles shall be expressly prohibited within all residential districts
except where used on a temporary basis for construction activities on the site or parcel on
which they are parked or stored.
The parking or storage of commercial vehicles and equipment shall occur only in approved
spaces. Said spaces shall be designed in a ratio of the vehicle to the space similar to that of
the minimum required parking space dimensions to a vehicle classified or equipment under
one ton.
Vehicle and equipment sales. The storage or display of vehicles and equipment for sale shall be
subject to the parking and design standards of this section including aisle widths, parking space
dimensions, and permitted access to streets; and shall generally be considered parking lots.
§ 300-903. Home occupations.
Home occupations involving the following uses shall be permitted.
Code Description
5411 Legal services
5412 Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll services
53121 Offices of real estate agents and brokers
6211 Offices of physicians
6212 Offices of dentists
6213 Offices of other health practitioners
6244 Child day-care services*
8121 Personal care services
* Child day-care services as home occupations shall be limited to the provision of said
services to equal to or less than three children, unrelated to the operator, at any given
time.
Home occupations shall abide by the following standards and restrictions.
Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., daily.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 384/411
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
B.
Only one additional employee, who does not reside within the household or dwelling unit
operating the home occupation, shall be permitted to work on the site of the occupation at any
given time.
At least two additional parking spaces, in general conformance with the parking requirements
of this chapter, shall be required. Parking shall be determined by the Zoning Officer in a
manner consistent with the parking requirements applicable to the use proposed.
Other types of offices providing services generally consistent with those of offices listed in the
preceding table shall be permitted. Said offices shall generally include forms of consulting and
professional services, the impact and scope of which is similar to that of those listed in the
preceding table.
Home occupations shall not be permitted in association with dwelling units in multifamily
structures.
No home occupation shall operate without an occupancy permit.
No more than one home occupation shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
§ 300-904. Transient retail businesses.
Transient retail businesses, for purposes of this section, shall be defined as businesses of a retail
nature which operate within the Planning Area, at one or multiple locations, for a period of 90 days or
less throughout a calendar year. Transient businesses may operate with a zoning permit as approved
by the Zoning Officer, absent other requirement of this chapter as may apply to permanent businesses
and in accordance with the following standards:
Said business shall be retail in nature and shall reflect retail uses otherwise permitted by right
within the district in which it functions.
Any temporary structures such as tents associated with said business shall adhere to the setback
requirements of principal structures in the district in which they operate.
The operation of the business shall not impede the flow of traffic in the area in which it operates;
nor shall said operation and associated structures impede the site distance of adjacent
intersections.
Said businesses shall not operate within any right-of-way.
§ 300-905. Large-scale building standards.
Purpose. The Township desires to accommodate an adequate mixture of business, industry, and
residential and public uses while maintaining a scale which is in conformance with current community
character. Therefore, the following provisions shall be instituted in applicable zoning districts.
Large-scale buildings shall be defined as any building that bears more than 90 feet of building
length that directly faces any street including the cumulative effect of buildings with party walls
(except for townhouses).
Offsets in the footprint of the building, along any wall facing a street, shall be provided according
to the following standards.
Said wall shall not have a surface longer than 50 feet without a break.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 385/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
If only one break is provided, said break shall be offset by at least 10 feet and shall comprise
at least 1/4 of the length of said wall.
If more than one break is provided, the setback shall be a minimum of four feet and the length
of the wall which accompanies the setback should not be less than 10% nor more than 25%
of the total length of the applicable wall.
Recesses may be a minimum of one foot where the type of building facade differs from that of
the adjacent portions of the wall.
§ 300-906. Lighting standards.
Lighting in all districts shall be designed so as not to produce glare.
Lighting shall produce no more than 0.2 footcandle at any property line unless the adjoining
property is under common ownership or is part of a shopping center.
No lighting shall be designed so as to emit colors, flashing, or animated effects so as to distract
the motoring public and thus present nuisance to public safety.
Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be underground.
Lighting in residential districts, Neighborhood Use District, and Mixed-Use District.
Maximum height of lighting, whether freestanding or mounted to a wall or building, shall be 15
feet. Lighted wall signs shall be subject to the aforesaid.
Lighting on properties where single-family or duplex residential use constitutes the principal
use shall not exceed two footcandles at any location.
Lighting in the General Retail and Office and Manufacturing Districts.
Maximum height of pole lighting shall be 25 feet.
All lighting shall include a cutoff angle of at least 60° to avoid glare.
§ 300-907. Yard and buffering standards.
Multifamily and townhouse structures shall be set back at least 60 feet from any property line
adjoining a property in an R-R, R-1, or R-2 District that is either vacant, or that bears single-family
or duplex as a principal use.
All other nonresidential principal structures shall be set back at least 80 feet from any property line
adjoining a property in an R-R, R-1, or R-2 District that is either vacant, or that bears single-family
or duplex as a principal use.
Parking and access drives associated with the above uses shall be set back at least 40 feet from
the aforesaid property lines.
Lighting installed within the aforesaid yards or setbacks shall adhere to standards for single-family
or duplex residential uses otherwise specified in § 300-906, Lighting standards.
Notwithstanding side and rear yard setbacks otherwise required in the respective zoning district,
the setbacks or buffer areas required in this section may be reduced through the granting of a
conditional use where the following are demonstrated:
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 386/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Changes in topography and existing vegetation that provide a visual buffer or screening to the
adjacent property.
A mixture of high- and low-level plantings and/or mounding that provides an effective visual
buffer or screening to the adjacent property.
The arrangement of lighting within the setback area otherwise required shall be designed in a
manner such that it is screened from the adjacent property.
§ 300-908. Exterior facade building standards.
Exposed exterior walls of structures shall be composed of brick, stone, stucco, fireproof precast
stucco, glass, metal or marble, or with wood that is treated, finished with stain, paint, or a similar
finish.
The walls of nonresidential structures which are two stories or less and which face a rear yard
may contain exposed concrete block. Additionally, the walls of foundations facing a rear yard on
any single-family or duplex structure may contain exposed concrete block.
The governing body, upon recommendation by the Municipal Engineer, may approve alternative
materials as a conditional use if and only if such material is determined to be equal or superior in
quality and aesthetic character compared to approved materials.
An addition to an existing structure which is nonconforming with respect to this section may be
constructed in conformance with the materials of original construction of the existing portion of the
structure so long as the footprint of said addition does not exceed that of the nonconforming
structure.
It is the intent of this chapter to treat mobile homes, modular homes, and all preconstructed homes
equally with traditionally constructed homes. As such, all preconstructed homes shall be placed on
foundations that shall adhere to the requirements of this section. Mobile homes in mobile home
parks, meeting the standards of this chapter, shall be placed on approved concrete pads and shall
maintain skirting around their perimeters.
Article X. Nonconforming Structures, Lots of Record, and
Uses
§ 300-1000. Purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the eventual removal or reconfiguration of nonconforming
uses and structures while at the same time protecting the rights of property owners to utilize the
current economic use and character of their property, as it was situated and utilized prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
§ 300-1001. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures.
Property owners may request the registration of uses or structures that do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer, upon such request, shall issue or deny the issuance of
such registrations based upon the provisions of this section and evidence provided by the applicants
for said registration.
§ 300-1002. Nonconforming lots of record.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 387/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(1)
(a)
(2)
A.
Where lots of record exist at the time of adoption of this chapter, the following shall apply. Where
adjacent nonconforming lots of record under common ownership exist at the time of adoption of this
chapter, said lots shall be considered as one zoning lot, regardless of the transferring of one or more of
said lots to subsequent or varying ownership. Therefore, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider no
hardship which has a basis in the configuration of one of said lots. The Zoning Officer shall approve
the construction of principal or accessory structures and uses on nonconforming lots of record where
setbacks, lot coverage, uses, and all remaining requirements conform to this chapter.
§ 300-1003. Nonconforming structures.
Owners of said structures shall have the right to repair, improve, or expand nonconforming
structures only to the extent that the nonconformity is not increased.
Where a nonconforming residential structure, whether principal or accessory, is demolished,
whether by intent of the owner or by damage or destruction, said structure may be reconstructed
within the same dimensions or altered dimensions, which do not increase any nonconformity or
noncompliance with this chapter, within one year of the date of said demolition.
Where a nonresidential structure, whether principal or accessory, is demolished by act of God,
fire, or accidental damage, said structure may be reconstructed within the same dimensions within
one year of the date of said demolition.
Where a nonresidential structure, whether principal or accessory, is voluntarily demolished,
subsequent structures shall be reconstructed in accordance with this chapter.
Nonconforming signs, unless demolished by act of God or accidentally, shall be reconstructed in a
manner meeting the provisions of this chapter. Demolition, for purposes of this section, shall not
include replacement of the sign's face.
Parking lots, accessory to nonresidential uses, which are nonconforming with respect to
impervious surface coverage, setbacks, and number of spaces required shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter upon one or more of the following circumstances:
Voluntarily demolition and subsequent reconstruction of the principal structure(s);
Addition to the principal structure which requires reconfiguration or elimination of some or all
of the parking lot area;
Any change or expansion of the principal use which requires additional parking spaces in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 300-1004. Nonconforming uses of structures or land.
Nonconforming uses shall bear the following rights and limitations:
Nonconforming uses shall have the right to expand to parts of the structure out of which said
uses operate that were expressly designed to accommodate said use.
Nonconforming uses shall be entitled to reasonable expansion necessary for said use to
continue in operation. Said expansion shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception wherein the applicant shall demonstrate the following:
The expansion of the use is commensurate with changes in production processes,
storage, or business operations which typify the principal use of the establishment.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 388/411
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
(1)
B.
The expansion is necessary to maintain the economic viability of the subject
establishment.
The expansion represents the minimum impact to neighborhood character necessary to
accommodate the reasonable expansion.
In no case shall an expansion cumulatively exceed an additional 40% of the site or area
currently occupied by the establishment or use since the adoption of this chapter.
Nonconforming uses shall lose their status when said use ceases to operate for more than 12
consecutive months and where the structure and business are not actively marketing for sale
for a period of more than 12 consecutive months. In said cases, the Zoning Officer shall not
register said uses as nonconforming uses.
Where the structure in which a nonconforming use operates is completely demolished or
destroyed and where a total loss of the ability to repair said structure occurs, the structure and
land upon which said structures was situated shall lose its nonconforming use status. The
phrase "completely demolished" shall be defined as a total loss of the structure's value and
the inability to repair the structure without rebuilding substantial structural portions of the
structure, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
Change of nonconforming use. A property owner may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
change in nonconforming use, where a similar use is proposed. The Board shall evaluate the
application in terms of the level of impact on surrounding properties, wherein the applicant shall
demonstrate that the use proposed is generally within the same three-digit NAICS classification or
bears similar operational practices. The Board may attach any conditions as necessary to ensure
that the level of impact does not exceed that of the existing nonconforming use.
Article XI. Administrative Regulations
§ 300-1100. Purpose.
The Township expressly adopts and institutes the powers of administration and enforcement as
granted by the Municipalities Planning Code, as enacted and amended. Therefore, this chapter adopts
by reference and fully recognizes all requirements and rights cited in the Municipalities Planning Code
regarding timelines, courses of action, rights of landowners, and duties and functions of the entities
cited herein with the following specific requirements defined. The provisions of this chapter shall be
binding upon the municipality.
§ 300-1101. Zoning Officer's duties, general administration, and
enforcement remedies.
The governing body in the Planning Area shall appoint a Zoning Officer whose duty is to enforce
this chapter through the citation of violations of which the Officer has discovered or been notified;
and to review and issue the required zoning permits based on the requirements of this chapter.
A zoning permit shall be required for all proposed principal structures and proposed additions to
principal structures, including co-locations on telecommunications towers, within the Planning
Area. The permit application shall include the following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 389/411
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
A copy of a survey of the parcel on which the structure is proposed, denoting the location of
the proposed structure and the distances from the abutting lot lines from which the structure is
proposed. The survey shall also delineate existing principal and accessory structures located
on the same parcel. The delineation of the required structures may be applied by the
applicant and need not be drawn by a registered surveyor. However, the adherence to the
aforementioned dimensions and delineations as presented by the applicant, once approved
by the Zoning Officer, shall constitute a condition of approval.
Drawings adequate to show the height of the structure.
Where the construction of the proposed structures constitutes a land development, as defined
by the local ordinance, the applicant shall submit necessary evidence demonstrating the
adherence of the proposed activity to the land development as approved.
A brief description of the proposed use of the structure.
A zoning permit shall be required for all proposed accessory buildings or structures or additions
thereto within the Planning Area. The permit application shall include the following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
A copy of a survey of the parcel on which the structure is proposed, denoting the location of
the proposed structure and the distances from the abutting lot lines from which the structure is
proposed. The survey shall also delineate existing principal and accessory structures located
on the same parcel. The delineation of the required structures may be applied by the
applicant and need not be drawn by a registered surveyor. However, the adherence to the
aforementioned dimensions and delineations as presented by the applicant, once approved
by the Zoning Officer, shall constitute a condition of approval.
Drawings adequate to show the height of the building.
Where the construction of the proposed structures constitutes a land development, as defined
by local ordinance, the applicant shall submit necessary evidence demonstrating the
adherence of the proposed activity to the land development as approved.
A brief description of the proposed use of the structure.
A zoning permit shall be required for a home occupation as defined in this chapter. The permit
application shall include the following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
A sufficient description of the use, the square footage to be occupied by the use, the number
of employees who do not reside within the principal residence, the average number of daily
customers and trips expected and the number of parking spaces provided.
A zoning permit for nonresidential occupancy shall be required when a change of the principal use
or tenancy of a property is proposed, where a nonresidential principal use is proposed, and for all
nonresidential accessory uses excluding storage. The permit application shall include the
following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
A sufficient description of the use, the square footage to be occupied by the use including
storage and nonstorage areas, and the number of parking spaces provided.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 390/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
[1]
I.
A zoning permit shall be required for forestry activities, which shall be treated as a use permitted
and defined herein. A condition of approval of forestry permits shall be interpreted to include
compliance with the permit as determined by intermittent inspections and a final inspection
conducted by the Zoning Officer. Failure to comply with submitted and approved plans, as well as
the requirements of the Conservation District, shall result in the issuance of an enforcement notice
and the suspension of forestry activity.
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
A survey of the property. The applicant shall delineate areas where forestry activities are
proposed, access to said areas, and sedimentation controls.
Evidence of review, comments, and concurrence from the Allegheny County Conservation
District.
A zoning permit shall be issued for all wall, projected, and ground signs placed on properties
containing nonresidential uses and associated with a nonresidential use (including home
occupations); and shall be required for signs placed on all vacant properties in the N and M
Districts. Permits shall not be required for the replacement of a sign face where the association of
the sign is already associated with a nonresidential use and the square footage does not change.
The permit application shall include the following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner, and of the applicant if
different from the landowner.
A copy of a survey of the parcel on which a ground sign is proposed, denoting the location of
the proposed sign and the distances from the abutting lot lines from which the structure is
proposed. The survey shall also delineate the locations of other ground signs on the same
property. The delineation of the required structures may be applied by the applicant and need
not be drawn by a registered surveyor. However, the adherence to the aforementioned
dimensions and delineations as presented by the applicant, once approved by the Zoning
Officer, shall constitute a condition of approval.
The square footage of signage, itemized by each sign type, existing on a property, or
associated with a particular establishment, which currently exists.
The square footage and height of the proposed sign.
Details of any proposed illumination of the sign.
A zoning permit shall be required for transient retail businesses. Said permit shall be effective for
30 consecutive days. Applicants may reapply to have the permit reissued thereafter. The permit
application shall include the following:
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the landowner or owners on which the
business proposes to operate.
Name, address, signature, and contact information of the operator of the transient retail
business.
A description of the business.
The fee as required by the Planning Area's fee schedule.
The preceding zoning permit requirements shall not be construed as building permits as regulated
and defined by Act 45, the Uniform Construction Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 391/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
J.
K.
A.
B.
Where a violation of this chapter has been discovered or reported, the Zoning Officer, after
inspecting and confirming the nature and existing of said violation(s), shall issue an enforcement
notice which shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred,
to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record. In any appeal of an
enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board the governing body shall have the responsibility
of presenting its evidence first. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the governing body if the
Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends
to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation with a description of the requirements that have not been met, citing in
each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.
The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed, which shall be 30 days from the issuance of the notice.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed reasonable period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions as described in
§ 300-1101A.
Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the governing body, pay a judgment of
not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a
municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the governing body may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines
that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation
by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to the governing body.
§ 300-1102. Zoning Hearing Board, procedures, and
proceedings.
Removal of members. Any board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the governing body appointing
said member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing within the aforementioned time period.
The board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such
and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 392/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the board. The board shall also
appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf where the
parties agree to waive further action by the board.
Board proceedings.
The Zoning Officer shall accept complete applications and shall provide them to the Zoning
Hearing Board within five working days of receipt.
The Board shall advertise each hearing stating the purpose thereof, the location of the subject
property when applicable, the name of the applicant, a brief description of the appeal, and the
date, time, and location scheduled. Advertisements shall occur in accordance with public
notice. Where the hearing relates to property, said property shall be posted with the aforesaid
information no later than one week prior to the scheduled hearing. The Zoning Officer shall
notify the applicant and the respective governing body of the date, time, and purpose of the
respective hearing.
The first hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall be commenced
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning Hearing
Board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the
presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives
at least seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons
opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the
application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's
case-in-chief. And applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete
his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal
number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written
consent or consent on the record by the applicant and municipality, be granted additional
hearings to complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct the hearings or the Zoning Hearing Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where
no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however,
the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the respective governing
body, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Zoning
Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
The chairman or acting chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
Parties to every hearing shall be the governing bodies of the Planning Area, the applicant(s),
and any effected party that enters a verbal or written appearance or statement at the hearing.
The Zoning Hearing Board may require attendees to enter a written appearance as a
condition of being a party.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
evidence may be excluded.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 393/411
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1)
D.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep a stenographic record of each hearing.
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice
and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the
parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the
site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his
representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45
days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of the MPC or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of
the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his
report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no
later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Excepting validity challenges, where
the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection or fails to commence or complete the required hearing as provided herein, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant
has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet
or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Zoning Hearing Board shall give public
notice of said decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision
in the same manner as provided in Subsection C(1) of this section. If the Zoning Hearing
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection
shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date.
To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board
not later than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide by mail or
otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined, or may choose to mail a complete copy of the
decision.
The Zoning Officer shall keep written files or meeting transcripts, evidence presented,
correspondence, applications, names and addresses of parties, evidence of delivery by
certified mail of notice and decisions to all applicable parties, and other files which shall
remain the property of the respective governing body.
Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive power to hear appeals for dimensional
and use variances from the provisions of this chapter.
The landowner shall submit an application to the Zoning Officer including a survey showing
existing structures and the location and detail of the proposed activity or structure for which
the applicant requires a variance; the required fee for a variance as outlined in the fee
schedule of the governing body and a completed application with all required contact
information as well as additional information, if any, required by the Board.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 394/411
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
E.
The Board shall grant a variance only when findings of fact are supported by all of the
following where relevant in a given case and therefore constitute an unnecessary hardship
inflicted by the Zoning Ordinance.
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical property
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances
or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property.
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief
and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this article and the zoning ordinance.
Special exception. The Board is authorized to consider special exceptions.
Expansions and changes of nonconforming uses shall be evaluated as per the following
standards cited in Article X and the general standards cited in this section.
The landowner shall submit an application to the Zoning Officer including a survey showing
existing structures and the location and detail of the proposed activity or structure for which
the applicant requires the special exception, including representations of parking and
circulation; the required fee for the special exception fee as outlined in the schedule of the
governing body, and a completed application with all required contact information as well as
additional information, if any, required by the Board.
Special exceptions for nonconforming uses shall be evaluated by the following criteria at a
minimum.
The impact of any proposed use on the neighborhood of which it is a part compared with
the impact of the existing nonconforming use. A proposed use shall not present a greater
adverse impact as compared with the existing use.
The impact of an expansion of the nonconforming use and the manner in which the
expansion changes or redefines the impact of the current nonconforming use.
The extent to which a proposed expansion changes the scale of use such that the use
itself may be changed such that it does not present an adverse impact on the
neighborhood and district in which it is located. The expansion shall be considered a
natural outgrowth necessary to the economic vitality and sustainability of the current
nonconforming use.
The consistency of any proposed expansion with the current character of a neighborhood
or district.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 395/411
(e)
(4)
(5)
[1]
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
H.
The change in parking required and traffic circulation associated with any proposed
expansion or change in use.
In granting any special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this article and the
zoning ordinance.
Proposed additions shall conform dimensionally and otherwise to the standards of the present
ordinance, or shall otherwise require a dimensional variance.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear appeals from the
determination of the Zoning Officer in matters concerning the denial of a permit, a cease-anddesist
order, and all other matters outlined in Section 909.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code[1]
as amended. The aggrieved party shall make application to the Zoning Officer for the appeal of
the disputed decision. The application shall include the fee as defined in the governing body's
adopted fee schedule, name and contract information, copies of the permit application, and any
additional details relating to the denial or order issued.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
The Zoning Hearing Board recognizes its jurisdiction as defined above and as additionally defined
within Section 909.1 of the MPC, as amended, including the challenge of this chapter's validity
within 30 days after its initial adoption based on procedural defects associated with the adoption
process.
Validity challenges.
Where a landowner desires to challenge the validity of the ordinance in regards to the
application of the ordinance to a property within the Planning Area either under his ownership
or other than his own, the landowner shall submit an application for a validity challenge to the
Zoning Officer. The application shall include the section of ordinance of which validity is
challenged, the property to which the challenge relates, the landowner's basis for challenge,
and proposals by the landowner concerning amendments that would cure the alleged defect.
Additionally, the required fee shall be submitted in accordance with the municipality's fee
schedule.
Upon acceptance, the Zoning Officer shall forward the application to the Zoning Hearing
Board for consideration within five business days of receipt.
The Board shall conduct a hearing pursuant to public notice within 60 days of the application
submission. The Board shall issue a decision within 45 days of the close of the last hearing
on the application.
The Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be based on the following:
The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and
other public service facilities;
If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 396/411
(e)
(5)
(6)
I.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(e)
(1)
(2)
A.
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
The impact of the proposal on land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
If the Board fails to act on the landowner's request within the time limits referred to in § 300-
1002H(2), a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing. The request shall also be deemed denied when the Board fails to act on
the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and Board.
Where the Zoning Hearing Board rules in favor of the landowner, the Board shall draft
proposed amendments to the ordinance which the Board, in its decision, believes will cure the
validity challenge and associated defects. Said amendments shall be forwarded to the
Township.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear any variance or special exception with regard to Article XII,
Floodplain Regulations.
§ 300-1103. Planning Commission and governing body.
The municipality shall create and maintain a local Planning Commission or planning committee in
accordance with Article II of the MPC. This chapter thereby establishes said commissions to
include a minimum of three members on each separate commission and confers upon each all
functions referenced in this chapter; wherein additional numbers and functions may be designated
or established by local ordinance.
This chapter recognizes the North Versailles Township Planning Commission as the planning
agency charged with those municipal issues and municipal comprehensive plan
recommendations including but not limited to:
Housing and economic development planning;
Transportation planning;
Recreation and open space planning;
Natural resources;
And all functions delegated the Commission by the ordinance including but not limited to
review and recommendation to the local governing bodies regarding:
Review of curative amendments.
Changes of zoning classification.
Textual ordinance amendments.
All conditional uses proposed within 500 feet of or on a parcel immediately adjacent
to the municipal boundary of an adjoining municipality within the Planning Area.
The governing body within the Planning Area shall appoint three members to the
Commission, wherein at least two shall be citizen planners. The governing body shall appoint
members to initial terms of two, three, and four years wherein all subsequent appointments
shall be for a four-year period such that no more than three reappointments or expirations in
the Planning Commission occur in any given year.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 397/411
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
(1)
D.
The Planning Commission shall keep written records of its actions and recommendations to
the governing body within the Planning Area. The Commission shall annually elect from its
membership one chair and vice chair, and one secretary.
The Zoning Officer shall accept applications cited as PRDs, conditional uses, or TNDs and shall
forward the applications to the Planning Commission for consideration at their next regularly
scheduled meeting when complete applications are received within 21 calendar days prior to said
meeting.
The Planning Commission shall consider applications for zoning changes of properties and shall
adhere to the following requirements.
A landowner or holder of equitable title to a parcel or parcels within the Planning Area may
request a change of zoning classification for said parcel(s) or portion thereof. The applicant
shall submit the fee required by the respective municipality along with the amount of copies
required by local resolution and shall include the deeds to all properties, a metes and bounds
description of the area proposed to be reclassified if said area represents a portion of the
parcel(s) owned, proof of equitable title where applicable, and a statement detailing the
conformance of the request to the East Allegheny Joint Comprehensive Plan's goals and
objectives. The landowner shall file an application with the municipality, wherein the
municipality shall forward a copy thereof to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to
holding a public hearing. The governing body shall follow the procedures set forth in
Subsection F in addition to those outlined herein.
The Zoning Officer shall forward a copy of the application and request to the Allegheny
County Economic Development and shall allow 30 days for comment. A copy shall be
submitted to the local Planning Commission. Any associated fees shall be assessed to the
applicant per the ordinances of the municipality.
The Zoning Officer shall schedule a public hearing in the municipality in which the change is
proposed, advertised according to public notice, 30 days or more after the submission to
County Planning Agency.
The Zoning Officer shall mail correspondence stating the date, time, and purpose of the public
hearing to all property owners of record within the Planning Area, as identified in the tax
records, within 200 feet of the lot lines of the subject parcel or parcels.
The Zoning Officer shall post the subject property or properties at points noticeable to the
general public and/or affected property owners where the parcel does not border a public
street.
The Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the full Council, which after
holding a public hearing or hearings pursuant to public notice may approve or deny the
request. The request, if approved, shall not become an effective amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance and Map until the governing body of the Planning Area adopts an ordinance
instituting said amendment as approved.
Curative amendments.
Where a landowner desires to challenge the validity of the ordinance in regards to the
regulations involving the use of his property, the landowner shall submit an application for a
curative amendment to the Zoning Officer. The application shall include a description of the
activity or structure proposed in lieu of that permitted by thereon by the ordinance. A survey of
the subject property showing existing structures thereon shall be submitted. The application
shall also include a proposed amendment that the landowner presents as a cure for the
perceived defect in the ordinance. Additionally, the required fee shall be submitted in
accordance with the local municipality's fee schedule.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 398/411
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
[1]
(a)
(1)
E.
Upon acceptance, the Zoning Officer shall forward the application to the planning commission
for consideration at their next regularly scheduled meeting or, if accepted later than 21 days
prior thereto, at the following regularly scheduled meeting.
The governing body shall conduct a hearing pursuant to public notice within 60 days of the
application submission. The respective governing body shall issue a decision within 45 days
of the close of the last hearing on the application that may include acceptance, denial, or
modified acceptance of the curative amendment. An acceptance or modified approval shall
not become effective, however, until it is formally adopted by all three governing bodies within
the Planning Area.
The decision shall be based on the following:
The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and
other public service facilities;
If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
The impact of the proposal on land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
Where the respective governing body decides to amend the ordinance, the procedures of
Subsection F and those otherwise outlined in the Municipalities Planning Code shall apply.
If the governing body fails to act on the landowner's request within the time limits referred to
in Subsection D(3) a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after
the close of the last hearing. The request shall also be deemed denied when:
The governing body notifies the landowner that it will not adopt the curative amendment.
The governing body adopts another curative amendment which is unacceptable to the
landowner.
The governing body fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing
on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and
governing body.
Municipal curative amendments. Where the Township determines that the zoning ordinance or any
portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
Declare by formal action that this chapter or portions thereof substantively invalid and
propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such invalidity.
Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal, the governing body of the
Planning Area shall by resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the zoning ordinance which may include:
References to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity;
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 399/411
[2]
[3]
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
C.
Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
The Township's Planning Area shall begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment
to the zoning ordinance to correct the declared invalidity as per the resolution.
Within nine months from the date of the declaration and proposal, the respective governing
bodies shall enact the amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of, its zoning ordinance
pursuant to the procedures required by Subsection F of this chapter and the Municipalities
Planning Code for ordinance amendments, in order to cure the declared invalidity of the
zoning ordinance.
The Township's Planning Area may not again utilize the above procedures and associated
protections offered by the Municipalities Planning Code for a period of 36 months following the
enactment of the curative amendment.
Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall include the time
and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to a place within
the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined
without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The respective
governing body shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper
of general circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior
to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall include either the full
text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
at the time the public notice is published.
An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law library or
other county office designated by Allegheny County.
In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or amendment
before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the respective governing body, a brief
summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments. No amendments shall become effective until the governing body within the
Planning Area adopt the same.
Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official ordinance books by
reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
§ 300-1104. Finances.
All fees shall be determined by local ordinance or resolution in consideration of and pursuant to
the following provisions.
The payment of the Zoning Officer or Officers, charged with the enforcement and administration of
this chapter, shall be determined by the governing body of the Planning Area. Said payment may
be determined by cooperative agreement that specifies contributions and designates one
governing body as the agency responsible for payment of the Zoning Officer or Officers.
The respective governing body shall determine and prescribe a reasonable fee for Joint Zoning
Hearing Board hearings regarding appeals associated with land or uses within the municipality.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 400/411
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
The respective governing body shall provide payment to the Zoning Hearing Board members in
the amount of $25 per hearing as well as for the stenographer required at the necessary hearing
or hearings regarding appeals associated with land or uses within that municipality. The aforesaid
shall not preclude the right of the municipalities within the Planning Area to execute a cooperative
agreement wherein one such body may administer and receive fees for hearings.
The respective governing body shall appropriate funds for the Zoning Hearing Board's utilization of
a solicitor, as stipulated in the Municipalities Planning Code, or other expert witnesses. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall contract with and fix the payment of their solicitor and experts provided that
the amounts expended do not exceed the monies appropriated by the municipality for cases
involving land or uses within said municipality.
The governing body shall provide payment to the Planning Commission members in the amount of
$25 for each application considered per public meeting applications or actions associated with
land or uses within the municipality.
The municipality shall bear the responsibility for providing legal defenses or counseling
necessitated or required by this chapter as a result of challenges, proposals, requests, filings, or
applications involving proposals, uses, or land within the municipality.
Article XII. Floodplain Regulations
§ 300-1200. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the protection of health and
safety, to prevent the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and
unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax
base by:
Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other
existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood
heights, velocities and frequencies.
Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas
subject to flooding.
Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in floodprone areas to be
protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.
Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes
because of flood hazards.
§ 300-1201. Applicability.
These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Planning Area and shown as
being located within the boundaries of the designated floodplain districts which shall be
considered to be a part of the official Zoning Map.
There is hereby established and approved a map as part of the official Zoning Map of the Planning
Area, which is incorporated and made part of this chapter as an overlay district, modifying the
provisions of the underlying districts. Said map shall be referred to as the Floodplain Overlay Map,
as amended. Said map shall include the Floodway, Floodfringe, and General Floodplain Districts,
the delineation of which is defined herein.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 401/411
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 300-1202. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions
of this article and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of this article.
§ 300-1203. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside
the floodplain districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the article of the Township, or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision.
§ 300-1204. Basis of districts.
The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Flood Insurance
Study for the governing body prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration dated August 15,
1979, effective February 15, 1980, as amended.
The FW (Floodway District) is delineated for purposes of this article using the criteria that a certain
area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one-hundred-year flood
more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this area are defined in the Floodway Data
Table contained in the Flood Insurance Study as prepared by FEMA and shown on the recorded
FIRM. Where no floodway has been delineated in the FIS, such information contained in any other
available federal, state or other acceptable source should be used.
The FF (Floodfringe District) shall be that area of the one-hundred-year floodplain not included in
the floodway. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-year
flood elevations contained in the flood profiles provided in the FIS. Where elevation information is
not provided in the FIS, such information provided in any other available federal, state or other
acceptable source should be used.
The General Floodplain District (FA) shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood
profiles or elevations have been provided. They are shown on the maps accompanying the FIS
prepared by FIA. Where the specific one-hundred-year flood elevation cannot be determined for
this area using other sources of data such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Floodplain
Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey, Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant
for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance
with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the governing body.
§ 300-1205. District standards.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 402/411
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
F.
G.
A.
(1)
B.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor which is not elevated to at least
1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be floodproofed in a completely or
essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained
in the publication entitled "Floodproofing Regulations" published by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by the
Township where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies
conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission or
other qualified agency or individual documents the notification for such change. However, prior to
any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the Floodplain
Districts shall be made by the Zoning Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of
any of the districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the necessary determination. The
person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so
desires.
Within any identified floodplain district, fully enclosed spaces below the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be prohibited.
All uses, activities and development occurring with any Floodplain District shall be undertaken only
in strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all other applicable codes and
ordinances such as the Uniform Construction Code, and the local Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.[1] In addition, all such uses, activities and development shall be
undertaken only in compliance with federal or state law including Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Subdivision and Land Development.
Under no circumstance shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of
the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or
system.
Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, etc., within the Planning
Area, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety,
Obstructions and Storm Water Management Division. Further, notification of the proposal by the
Township shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall
be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and the Department of Community And
Economic Development.
§ 300-1206. Floodway District.
Floodway District (FW). In the Floodway District, no development shall be permitted except where
any rise in flood heights caused by the proposed development will be fully offset by accompanying
improvements which have been approved by all appropriate local and/or state authorities as
required above.
Permitted uses.
Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds,
golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding trails, wildlife
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 403/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges, and hunting
and fishing areas, not including buildings related thereto.
Special exceptions.
Essential services.
Essential service building.
Water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc., as an
accessory to any principal use permitted within the underlying district.
Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials where permitted within the underlying district.
Within any identified floodplain district, fully enclosed spaces below the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be prohibited.
§ 300-1207. Flood-Fringe District (FF).
In the Flood-Fringe District, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with
the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 300-1208. General Floodplain District (FA).
In the General Floodplain Conservation District, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted
in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such uses, activities
and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related
provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 300-1209. Special exception and variances, additional criteria.
In passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this chapter and the
following:
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments. No special exception or variance shall be granted for any proposed use,
development, or activity that will cause any increase in flood levels in the Floodway District.
The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent
disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owners.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 404/411
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
A.
B.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for the area.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood of ordinary and emergency vehicles.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise; and sediment transport of the floodwaters
expected at the site.
The Zoning Hearing Board may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining
to any request for a special exception or variance to any engineer or other qualified person or
agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and
velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters.
Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the Zoning Hearing Board has
determined that the granting of such will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited increases in
flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c) extraordinary public expense, (d) create
nuisances, (e) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or
ordinances.
In considering the presence of a hardship on a subject property, extraordinary justification shall be
required for properties over 1 1/2 acres.
§ 300-1210. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings
or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, filling,
grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to
partial or complete inundation;
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
Those floodplain districts specifically designated in this chapter as being inundated primarily by
the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified as Floodway District (FW), Flood-
Fringe District (FF), and General Floodplain District (FA).
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance).
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or expansion to a structure existing at the time of this
chapter's enactment, the costs of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the existing
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 405/411
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
A.
B.
C.
D.
structure.
§ 300-1211. Hazardous materials.
Uses concerning hazardous materials. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic
Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which will be
used for the production or storage of any of the following materials or substances, or which will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or other
comparable volume, or any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the following materials or
substances on the premises shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all
other applicable provisions:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in this section shall be prohibited.
Within any general floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A above
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements involved, no variance shall be
granted for any of the other requirements of this section.
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 406/411
Article XIII. Repealer
§ 300-1301. Effect on prior legislation.
The adoption of this chapter expressly repeals all the zoning ordinances of the Township, including the
amendments thereof.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT. Derivation Table
In order to assist Code users in the transition to the new Code's organization, the Derivation Table
indicates where chapters and articles of the 1987 Code have been included in the 2013 Code, or the
reason for exclusion.
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1987 Code of Ordinances to 2013
Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1987 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Township Officials
§ 101, Meetings Repealed 9-20-2012
§ 102, Auditor Ch. 4
§ 103, Compensation of Township
Commissioners
Ch. 10, Art. I
§ 104, Treasurer Ch. 58
Part 2, Authorities
A. (Reserved) Omitted
B. North Versailles Township Sanitary Authority Ch. 7, Art. I
Part 3, Agencies, Boards, Commissions
A. Emergency Management Board Ch. 15
B. Planning Commission Ch. 44
C. Police Review Board Ch. 48, Art. II
Part 4, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 20
Part 5, Employee Pensions; Retirement
A. Social Security Ch. 36, Art. I
B. Municipal Employees Retirement System Repealed by Ord. No. 978 (Ord. No. 1048);
see now Ch. 36, Art. III
Part 6, Police Force; Pensions
A. Police Force Ch. 48, Art. I
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 407/411
Chapter/Title From 1987 Code Location in 2013 Code
B. Police Pension Plan Repealed by Ord. No. 997; see now Ch. 36,
Art. II
Part 7, Fire Insurance Proceeds Ch. 170, Art. I
Part 8, Drug and Alcohol Policy Pursuant to
Uniform Commercial Drivers License Act
Ch. 40, Art. I
Part 9, Municipal Claim Collection Superseded by Ord. No. 1055; see now Ch.
200, Art. I
Ch. 2, Animals
Part 1, Dogs Running at Large Ch. 92, Art. I
Part 2, Animal Noise Disturbances Ch. 92, Art. II
Part 3, Requirement for Keeping Certain Animals Ch. 92, Art. III
Part 4, Requirements for Maintaining Pigeons Ch. 92, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Bicycles (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 4, Buildings
Part 1, Real Estate Occupancy Ch. 228, Art. I
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1, Building Code Superseded by Ord. No. 1015; see now Ch.
120
Part 2, Fire Prevention Code Superseded by Ord. No. 1015; see now Ch.
120
Part 3, Plumbing Code Superseded by Ord. No. 1015; see now Ch.
120
Part 4, Existing Structures Code Superseded by Ord. No. 1015; see now Ch.
120
Part 5, Communications Apparatus Ch. 116
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Curfew Ch. 130
Part 2, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 210, Art. II
Part 3, Firearms Ch. 140
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Part 1, False Alarms Ch. 210, Art. I
Part 2, Open Burning Superseded by Ord. No. 1045; see now Ch.
100
Part 3, Fire Alarm Systems Ch. 145, Art. I
Ch. 8, Flood Plain Regulations Ch. 154
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating
Part 1, General Regulations Ch. 160
Part 2, Underground Mining Ch. 191, Art. I
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Alarm Systems Ch. 85
Part 2, Garbage Accumulation
A, Dumping on Private Property Ch. 222, Art. II
B, Dumping in Waterways Ch. 222, Art. III
Part 3, Growth of Weeds and Vegetation Ch. 222, Art. I
Part 4, Storage of Unused Personal Property Ch. 222, Art. IV
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 408/411
Chapter/Title From 1987 Code Location in 2013 Code
Part 5, Hazardous Materials Cleanup Ch. 165, Art. I
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Tenant Registration Ch. 232, Art. I
Ch. 12, Libraries
Part 1, Public Library Ch. 25
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General Business
Regulations
Part 1, Cable Television Ch. 106
Part 2, Junk Yards Ch. 179
Part 3, Mechanical Amusement Devices Repealed by Ord. No. 971; see now Ch. 88
Part 4, Pornography Ch. 75, Art. I
Part 5, Transient Retail Merchants Ch. 215
Part 6, Amusement Operations Ch. 110
Part 7, Flea Markets Ch. 149
Part 8, Adult Dancing Establishments Ch. 75, Art. II
Ch. 14, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
Part 1, Mobile Home Parks Ch. 196
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 282
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, General Regulations Ch. 206
Ch. 17, Planned Residential Development
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Connections; Use Regulations Superseded by Ord. No. 1012; see now Ch.
238, Art. V
Part 2, Rates and Charges Ch. 238, Art. I
Part 3, Waste Pretreatment Standards Superseded by Ord. No. 989; see now Ch.
238, Art. IV
Part 4, ALCOSAN Pretreatment Standards Ch. 238, Art. II
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards REP
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Ch. 250, Art. I
Part 2, North Versailles Township Recycling
Ordinance
Ch. 250, Art. II
Part 3, Garbage and Sanitation Fees Ch. 250, Art. III
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Street Openings Ch. 260, Art. III
Part 2, Street Obstructions Ch. 260, Art. II
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development
Part 1, Subdivision Repealed by Ord. No. 1039; see now Ch. 265
Part 2, Municipal Improvements Ch. 260, Art. I
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Discounts and Penalties on Real Estate Tax Ch. 270, Art. V
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 409/411
Chapter/Title From 1987 Code Location in 2013 Code
Part 2, Earned Income Tax Ch. 270, Art. II
Part 3, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 270, Art. IV
Part 4, Mercantile Tax Ch. 270, Art. III
Part 5, Occupational Privilege Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 1021; see now Ch. 270,
Art. X
Part 6, Real Estate Transfer Tax Ch. 270, Art. I
Part 7, Waste Tax Ch. 270, Art. VI
Part 8, Tax Assessment Limitation Program Ch. 270, Art. VII
Ch. 25, Trees
Part 1, Planting and Maintenance of Trees Ch. 276
Ch. 26, Water (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 27, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No. 1040; see now Ch. 300
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory (Reserved) Omitted
B. Bond Issues and Loans NI
C. Franchises and Services NI
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affair NI
E. Plan Approval (Reserved) Omitted
F. Public Property NI
G. Sewers NI
H. Streets and Sidewalks NI
I. Water NI
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances (Reserved) Omitted
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of North Versailles adopted since
the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion.
[Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
material (NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord. No.
1070, adopted 10-18-2012.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1071 10-18-2012 Police Pension Plan Amendment NCM
Ord. No. 1072 12-20-2012 Pawnbrokers and Secondhand
Dealers
Ch. 208
Ord. No. 1073 12-20-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1074 1-17-2013 Sewer Rates NCM
Ord. No. 1075 1-17-2013 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1076 1-31-2013 Compensation Ch. 58
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 410/411
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1078 3-7-2013 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1079 4-25-2013 Pawnbrokers and Secondhand
Dealers Amendment
Ch. 208
Ord. No. 1080 4-25-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 1081 5-16-2013 Sewers and Sewage Disposal: Oil
and Grease
Ch. 238, Art. VI
Ord. No. 1082 7-18-2013 Board of Commissioners: Health
Care Benefits Repealer
Ch. 10, Art. II
Ord. No. 1083 7-18-2013 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
1109
Ord. No. 1084 7-18-2013 Construction Codes, Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 120
Ord. No. 1085 10-23-2013 General Obligation Note NCM
Ord. No. 1086 12-19-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1087 12-19-2013 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1088 12-19-2013 Roads: Weight Limits Ch. 235, Art. I
Ord. No. 1089 7-17-2014 Taxation: Discounts and Penalties
on Real Estate Tax Amendment
Ch. 270, Art. V
Ord. No. 1090 8-21-2014 Fire Protection Policy Ch. 21
Ord. No. 1091 9-18-2014 Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 154
Ord. No. 1092 12-18-2014 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1093 12-18-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1094 1-15-2015 NCM NCM
Ord. No. 1095 1-15-2015 Zoning Amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
1109
Ord. No. 1096 2-19-2015 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 260
Ord. No. 1097 9-17-2015 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 260
Ord. No. 1098 9-17-2015 Adoption of Standardized Codes NCM
Ord. No. 1099 9-17-2015 International Property
Maintenance Code
NCM
Ord. No. 1100 12-17-2015 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1101 12-17-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1102 2-18-2016 Intergovernmental Agreement NCM
Ord. No. 1103 7-21-2016 Animals: Dogs Amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No. 1104 8-18-2016 Temporary Taxation Exemption NCM
Ord. No. 1105 12-15-2016 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1106 12-15-2016 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 1107 3-16-2017 Lease Rental Debt NCM
Ord. No. 1108 8-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 282
Ord. No. 1109 8-17-2017 Zoning Ch. 300
Ord. No. 1110 10-19-2017 Property Maintenance: Storage
Containers
Ch. 222, Art. V
8/17/2020 Township of North Versailles, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/NO2601?guid=NO2601&children=true 411/411
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No. 1111 12-21-2017 Appropriation NCM 3
Ord. No. 1112 12-21-2017 Tax Rate NCM 3
Ord. No. 1113 5-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300 3
Ord. No. 1114 10-18-2018 Cable Television
Amendment
Ch. 106 3
Ord. No. 1115 11-15-2018 Stormwater Management Ch. 255 3
Ord. No. 1116 11-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 282 3
Ord. No. 1117 12-20-2018 Appropriation NCM 3
Ord. No. 1118 12-20-2018 Tax Rate NCM 3
Ord. No. 1119 5-16-2019 Lease NCM 3
Ord. No. 1120 9-19-2019 Police Pension Plan See Ch. 36 3
Ord. No. 1121 10-17-2019 Non-Uniformed Pension
Plan
See Ch. 36 3
Ord. No. 1122 10-17-2019 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Connections;
Use Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 238, Art. V 3