TABLE OF CONTENTS



PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
1.	General Provisions	1:1
Article I	Violation s and Pen alties
Article II	Adoption of Code
7.	Authorities, Municipal	7: 1
Article I	Carlisle  Suburban   Authority Article II	LeTort  Regional  Authority
15.	Fire Company	15:1
Article I	J unior  Firefighter s
16.	Fire Police	16:1
2 1.	Manager	21 :1
26.	Pensions and Retirement.	26: 1
31.	Planning Commission	31: 1
35.	Police	35:1
Article 1	Police   Department Articl e II	Mutual  Aid
41.	Recreation Advisory Board  ....................... .................................................... ................ 41: l
45.	Salaries and Compensation	45: 1
Article 1	Board of Supervisors
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
66.	Alarms	66: 1
70.	Animals	70: 1
76.	Brush, Grass and Weeds	76: 1
80.	Building  Construction ....................................................................................................   80:l
86.	Buildings, Numbering of	86:1
92.	Burning, Outdoor	92: 1
95.	Construction Codes, Uniform	95: 1
98.	Curfew	98: 1
102.	Disorderly Conduct.	102:1
106.	Drug Paraphernalia  ........................ ..............................................................................   l06: 1
xv	01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE
109.	Fireworks ............................................................................. ........................................ ·109:1
112.	Floodplain Managem ent	112:1
117.	Insurance	117:1
Article I	Fire  Loss Claims
120.	Junkyards	120:1
126.	Loitering	126:1
134.	Nuisances	134:1
137.	Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers	137:1
140.	Park s and Recreation Areas	140:1
146.	Peddling and Soliciting	146:1
152.	Real Estate Sales	152:1
Article I	Noti fication  of  Streetlighting  Assessment
156.	Rental Property Registry	156:1
164.	Sewers and Water	164:1
170.	Solid Waste and Recycling	170:1
175.	Stormwater  Management  ................................................................................... ..........  175:l
180.	Subdivision and Land Development... ......................................................................... 180:l
186.	Taxat ion	186:1
 
Article I Article  I! Art icle lll Article I V Article V Article VI
 
Earned Income Tax Per Capita Tax Local Services Tax Amusement Tax Realty Transfer Tax I ncome Tax Officer
 
196.	Vehicles and Traffic	196:1
204.	Zoning	204: 1
APPENDIX DISPOSITION LIST INDEX








XVl	01-01-2014
 
Chapter 1

GENERAL  PROVISIONS

 
ARTICLE I
Violations and Penalties

§ 1-1. Title.
§ 1-2. Authority .
§ 1-3. Purposes and background.
§ 1-4. Definitions.
§ 1-5. Amendment and modification.
 
§ 1-6. Enforcement procedure, form and service of civil enforcement notice.
§ 1-7. Violation of ordinances and penalties.
§ 1-8. Relationship to other ordinances.


ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
 

[HISTORY: Adopted  by the Board  of Supervisors  of the Township  of North  Middleton
as indicated in article histories . Amendments noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
Violations and Penalties [Adopted 10-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]

§ 1-1. Title. [Amended 5-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-41

This article shall  be known  as the "Omnibus Criminal  and Civil Procedure Enforcement
Ordinance."


§ 1-2. Authority.

This article is enacted pursuant  to Article XVI of the  Second Class Township  Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66601.


§ 1-3. Purposes and background.

A.	The Board recognizes the recent amendments to the Second Class Township Code• which establish maximum fines  for  violations  of  ordinances  and  which  establish  consistent method s of enforcing Township ordinances.

B.	The Board recognizes that there are existing ordinances of this Township which are civil in  nature  but  which  provide  for criminal  or quasi-criminal  penalties  for violations, and the  Board intends to cause  said  ordinances  to  be  modified  and  amended  in order  to comply  with  amendments  to  the  Second  Class  Township  Code,  53  P.S.  § 66601,  as amended.





I. Editor's  ote: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.


1:I	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 1-3                                            NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                             § 1-6

C.	The Board recognizes  that  the  amendments  to  the  Second  Class Township  Code  are relevant to Township ordinances and the Board intends that this article shall establish new  procedures for enforcement  of Township ordinances and establish new penalties  for violation  of Township ordinances.

D.	The Board recognizes that this article ha s no effect upon any Zoning, Land Development or	Subdivision   Ordinance   which   are    regulated   entirely   by    the    Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.


§ 1-4. Definitions.

As used in this article, the following terms sha ll have the meaning s indicated:

CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDING - Civil litigation commenced by the Township
before an issuing authority to enforce a violation of any ordinance.

CIVIL ENFORCEMENT NOTICE - A written notice sent by the initiating official to any person, corporation, partner ship in violation of any ordinance.

INITIATING OFFICIAL - The person authorized by the Board to initiate proceedings for the violation of ordinances. The initiating official may be, but need not be, the Zoning Officer , the Code Enforcement Officer or a police officer of the North Middleton Township Police Departm ent. In addition , staff employees and agents of the Township may be designated , from time to time, by resolution of the Board, to act as the "Initiating Official."

ISSUING AUTHORITY - A Magisterial District Judge or other public official having the power and authority of a Magisterial District Judge.


§ 1-5. Amendment and modification.

All ordinances heretofore enacted shall be and are hereby modified and amended to provide for civil fines, judgm ents or penalties in accordance with the provisions the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601, as amended, and this article. All ordinances heretofore enacted shall be and are hereby modified and amended to provide for the initiation of a civil enforcement proceeding as the means of enforcing violations of any Township ordinance in accordance with the provisions of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601, as amended, and thi s article. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent North Middleton Township from pursuing actions at law or in equity to enforce ordinances.


§ 1-6. Enforcement procedure, form and service of civil enforcement notice.

A.	If it appears to the initiating official that a violation of any municipal ordinance has occurred, the initiating officia l shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending a civil enforcement notice as provided in this article.

B.	The civil enforcement notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the owner of record of the property or par cel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has  filed a written request  to receive civil enforcement notices regarding the property or parcel,  or to any other person requested  in writing by the owner of record.  In the event



1:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 1-6	GENERAL PROVISIONS	§ 1-7

the mail is returned  or not accepted,  the civil enforcement notice sha ll be hand delivered to the property owner or posted on the property or parcel in violation of any ordinance.

C.	The Board of Supervisors may, and is hereby empowered , to establish a form document entitled "Civil Enforcement Notice," which form may be amended from time to time by resolution at the discretion of the Board. The civil enforcement notice shall contain such information as is deemed appropriate by the Board, in its  sole discretion,  but  at  a minimum the following information shall be set forth:

(1)	The name, address  and phone  number, if  known  and applicable,  of the owner  or
record owner and other person against whom the Township intends to take action.

(2)	The location of the property, including street address, if any, the deed reference and the tax parcel number of the property, if any, and the date and time of violation.

(3)	The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been
met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions  of the ordinance.

(4)	The date before which  the steps for compliance  must  be commenced  and the date
before which the steps must be completed.

(5)	A statement that the applicable provisions of the ordinance are available for review at the Township offices.

(6)	That the failure to comply with the notice within the times specified will result  in the commencement of a civil enforcement  proceeding  before  the  appropriate issuing authority for the purpose of imposing fines,  including  the  imposition  of filing fees, other court costs, and  reasonable  attorney  fees  incurred  by  the Township.

D.	All civil proceedings for enforcement of ordinances shall be commenced in the name of North Midd leton Township at the office of the issuing authority having juri sdiction over the area of North Middleton Township.


§ 1-7. Violation of ordinances and penalties.

A.	Ordinances to be criminally enforced . All ordinances heretofore or hereinafter  enact ed which regulate building, housing, property maintenance,  health,  fire,  public  safety, parking, solicitation, curfew, water, air or noise pollution shall be enforced criminally, as summary offenses, under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, with offenders subject to fines of not more than $1,000, plu s all court costs, and  imprisonment,  all pursuant to the purpose and mandate of Act  No.  172of1996.  [Amended 5-21-1997  by Ord. No. 97_42)

B.	Ordinances to be civilly enforced. All ordinances heretofore or hereinaft er enacted which do not fall within the definition of those defined and referred to in § 1-7A above shall be civilly  enforced  in  accordance  with  the provisions of this  article. Offenders  under  these


2.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


1:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 1-7	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 1-8

ordinances shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including the reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by North  Middleton  Township. [Amended 5-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-43]

C.	Imposition of judgment. No judgment shall commence or be imposed , levied or payable until  the date of the determination of a  violation by an issuing authority.  If the violator neither  pays nor timely appea ls the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgm ent pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedur e.

D.	Continu ing violation. Each day that a v iolation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the issuing authority, after determining that there has been a viola tion, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person , partnership , or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no violat ion, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one violation until the fifth day following the date of the determinati on of a violation by the issuing authority, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.

E.	General fund. All judgment s, costs  and  reasonable  attorneys'  fees  collected  for  the violation of this article shall be paid over to the North Middleton Township general fund.

F.	Attorneys' fees. Where attorneys' fees are sought to be collected or are incurred as a result of a civil enforcement proceeding or other action initiated by North Middleton Township, said attorneys' fees shall be at such rate as set by Board of Supervisors at the reorganization meeting for all work in connection with the civil enforcement proceeding or other action initiated , all ba sed upon the time expended by the Township Solicitor or other attorney designated by the Board to enforce Township ordinances. The Board may, from time to time, amend the hourly rate for attorneys' fees by resolution, all at the discretion of the Board.4


§ 1-8. Relationship to other ordinances.

A	Those parts of existing ordinances which provide for criminal fines and other criminal penalties in contravention to the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601 et seq., or any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby repealed and the applicable provisions of this article are substituted  therein in order to provide lawful civil penalties.

B.	Those ordinances which contain criminal fines and other criminal pena lties author ized by other enabling legislation permitting such criminal pena lties shall be unaffected by this article and shall remain in full force and effect.











3.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code {see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).

4.	Ed itor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


1:4	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 1-8	GENERAL  PROVISIONS

ARTICLE II
Adoption  of Code


[An ordinance adopting the Code of the Township of North Middleton and making certain substantive changes to existing ordinances of the Township is presently proposed before the Board of Supervisors. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as Article IIof this chapter.]






















































1:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 7

AUTHORITIES,  MUNICIPAL

 
ARTICLE I
Carlisle Suburban Authority
 
ARTICLE II
LeTort Regional Authority
 

 
§ 7-1. Intention to organize authority.
§ 7-2. Articles of Incorporation .
 
§ 7-3. Intention to organize authority.
§ 7-4. Articles of Incorporation.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
Carlisle Suburban Authority
[Adopted 5-3-1979 as Ch. I, Part 3A, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances)

§ 7-1. Intention to organize authority.

The Board of Township Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania , hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an Author ity under the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P. L. 382, as amended and supplemented (the "Act"),1 for the purposes of exercising any and all powers conferred by said Act.


§ 7-2. Articles of Incorporation .

The Chairman of the Board of Township Supervisors and the Secretary-Treasurer of the Township hereby  are authorized  and directed to execute, in beha lf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form.2


ARTICLE II
LeTort Regional Authority
[Adopted 5-3-1979 as Cb. I, Part 3B, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances]

§ 7-3. Intention to organize authority.

The Board of Supervisors of this  Township hereby signifies its intention  and desire to organize for the purpose of flood control and recreat ion related to LeTort Spring Run, an Authority joint ly wit h the Borough of Carlisle and County of Cumberland, all situated in




I.	Editor's Note :The Municipalit y Authorities Act of  1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (Jun e
19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipali ty Authorities Act, SJ Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 ct seq.

2.	Ed itor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation of t he Carlisle Suburban Authority, as amended 8-15-1978 by Ord. No.
78-5, 7-3-1980 by Ord. No . 80-9 and S-1-1986 by Ord. No. 86-2, are on file in the Township offices.


7:1	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 7-3                                                NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                                § 7-4

Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, under the Pennsylvania Act of May 2, 1945, P. L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and supplemented (Act).3


§ 7-4. Articles of Incorporation.

The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Secretary, respectively, of this Township hereby are authorized , empowered and directed to execute, in behalf of this Township, Articles of Incorporation for such Authority in substantially the following form.4















































3.	Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (June
19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.CS.A.§ 5601 et seq.

4.	Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation of th e LeTort Regional Authority, as amended 5-20-1980 by Ord. No.
80-4, arc on file in the Township offices.


7:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 15 FIRE COMPANY
 

ARTICLE I
Junior Firefighters
 

§ 15-2. Authorization.
 

§ 15-1. Title.

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
Junior  Firefighters
[Adopted 8-6-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2]

§ 15-1. Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Junior Firefighters  Ordinance."


§ 15-2. Authorization.

All junior firefighters of North Middleton Township, who are bona fide and card-carrying members of the North Middleton Township Fire Department, are authorized to engage in all activities and functions of the North Middleton Township Fire Company, as permitted by all applicable child labor laws, including all authorized and sanctioned fund-raising activities and, further, said junior firefighters shall be entitled to receive all benefits afforded to all duly authorized and card-carrying members of the North Middleton Township Fire Company, including, but not necessarily being limited to, coverage under  the  then-exi sting  North Middleton Township  workers'  compensation policy.























15:l	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 16

FIRE POLICE

 
§ 16-1. Purpose.
§ 16-2. Manager's authority.
 
§ 16-3. Authority limited to nonemergency deployment.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 9-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04. Amendments  noted where applicable.]


§ 16-1. Purpose. 1

The Special Fire Police are regulated by state law of the Commonwealth of Permsylvania as set forth in 35 Pa.C.S .A. § 7431 et seq.  which  provides  for  both  emergency  and nonemergency deployment of a fire company's fae police. The provisions of that law require deployment for nonemergency functions to be based upon a formal  request  from  the governing body of the municipality wherein the event is held. Because the  Board  of Supervisors does not meet on a weekly basis, it is the intention of the Board of Supervisors of North Midd leton Township to delegate such authority to request nonemergency deployment of the Nort h Middleton Township  Special Fire Police to the Township Manager.


§ 16-2. Manager's authority.

The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township hereby delegate and authorize the acting Manager of North Middleton Township to request deployment of the North Middleton Township Fire Police in nonemergency situations. Such request shall be subject to review by the Board of Supervisors as well as all actions taken by the Manager pursuant to this authority. Notification to the  Board of Supervisors shall be given at the next regularly scheduled public meeting.


§ 16-3. Authority limited to nonemergency deployment.

The Manager's authorit y shall be limited to nonemergency deployments which arise from time to time on an ad hoc ba sis. This delegation of authority to the Township Manager does not remove the authority of the Board of Supervisors to, likewise,  request  non emergency deployment , but is merely a delegation of authority in the event it is inconvenient, untimely or the Board of Supervisors is unable to make such request due to their limited meeting times and dates.










1.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. 11).


16: I	01 -01 -2014
 
Chapter 21 MANAGER
 

§ 21-1.	Title.
§ 21-2.	Creation of office.
§ 21-3.	Appointment authorized.
§ 21-4.	Qualifications.
§ 21-5.	Compensation.
§ 21-6.	Bond.
 

§ 21-7.	Delegation of nonlegislative
powers and duties.
§ 21-8.	Duties of Township Manager.
§ 21-9.	Compatible offices.
§ 21-10. Support by Secretary and Township  employees.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-4; amended in its entirety 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02. Subsequent amendments  noted where applicable.]


§ 21-1. Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Manager Ordinance."


§ 21-2. Creation of office.

The Office of Township Manager is hereby created. Said Office may be filled by the Board of Supervisors by a majority vote. The creation of this Office does not create any right or vested interest in any person appointed to the Office, and the Board of Supervisors is not required to fill the Office if vaca nt. The Office of Township Manager is created subj ect to the right of the Board of Supervisors to abolish sa id Office at any time by ordinance.


§ 21-3. Appointment authorized.

The Board of Supervisors shall appoint, by a majority vote of its members, one person to fill the Office of Township Manager , said appointment to be  made annually. In the case of a vacancy, the Board of Supervisors shall fill said Office by a majority vote of its members. The Township Manager shall be subject to removal by the Board of Supervisors by a majority vote with cause.


§ 21-4. Qualifications.

The Township Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of said individual's executive and administrative abilities with consideration being given  for training  and/or experience in municipal management as determined by the Board of Supervisors. It is preferred that the Township Manager be a resident of the Township at the time of appointment or shortly thereafter. The Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, require that the Township Manager reside a reasonable distance from the North Middleton Township Municipal Building.



21:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 21-5                                          NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                           § 21-8

§ 21-5. Compensation.

The compensation of the Township Manager shall be set annually by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and shall be paid out of the general fund of the Township.


§ 21-6. Bond.

The Township Manager prior to commencement  of duties shall give a bond with a corporate or other sufficient surety as approved by the Board of Supervisors, in the sum of $100,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of this Office. The premium for said bond shall be paid for by the Township.


§ 21-7. Delegation of nonlegislative powers and duties.

The Board of Supervisors may delegate, subject to recall, any of its nonlegislative powers and
duties to the Township Manager.


§ 21-8. Duties of Township Manager.

Subject to recall by ordinance, the duties and powers of the Township Manager shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to, the following:

A.    Perform duties required under Township Code and other state laws and regulation s.

B.	Attend all regular Township meetings and special meetings where required by the Board
of Supervisors.

C.	Attend meetings of board s, commissions, agencies and committees of and pertaining to the  Township and/or adjacent municipalities where affecting the Township, as required and determined by the Board of Supervisors.

D.	Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township, carrying out  and implementing ordinances of the Township with respect to management thereof. Manager shall   supervise and be responsible for  the  activit ies  of  all  municipal  departments, employees  and independent  contractors,  except the Police Department  and except where such  supervision  and responsibilities  are in conflict  with  the Township  Code or  other laws.

E.	Manager shall be responsible to the  Board  of  Supervisors  for  carrying  out   and implementing all policies and  programs  established  by  the  Board,  unless  otherwise provided by the Board.

F.	Manager may recommend for appointment, suspen sion and/or removal of Township employees and appointed administrative officers except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.

G.	Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning policy formulation.






21 :2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 21-8	MANAGER	§ 21-8

H.		Prepare and submit the annual budget to the Board of Supervisors no later than November 1, together with recommended tax rates and such explanatory comment as deemed desirable.

I.	Administer approved budget.

J.	Report regularly and at least monthly concerning the conduct of Township affairs and submit annually with the budget , no later than November 1, a general report on the status of the Township projects, programs , agencies, committees, commissions, authorities and intergovernmental agreements and relationships.

K.	Cooperate with new s media concerning release of information on conduct of Township affairs concerning policies and program s and activit ies approved by the Board of Supervisors, except confidential matters relating to personnel, real  or personal property purchases, contracts of employment and other similar  matters in a stage of negotiations, prior to acceptance and/or approval of the Board.

L.	Supervise and be responsible for enforcement of Jaws and ordinances and regulation s relating thereto, and in said capacity to be responsible for and direct the activities of the Secretary, Treasurer,  Code Enforcement Officer(s), Zoning Officer(s),  Building Permit Officer(s) and similar or related offices in accordance wit h law and ordinance.

M.	Prepare agenda  for  the Board  of  Supervisor meetings,  making  said agenda  available to
tbe press and public where requested.

N.	Coordinate the projects and activities of and facilitate communication of, between and among Township municipal authorities, Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board , Recrea tion Board a nd other  agencies and committees to the extent consistent with and ordinance.

0. Prepare specifications for advertisement and do other acts necessary for implementation of contracts for Township matt ers, subject to the approval and action of the Board of Supervisors.

P.	Perform such functions as are required under lease agreement, lease back, managem ent agreement or any other with authorities with respect to operation of sewage and water and other improvement s or for other purposes as authorized under state law, including, as determined by motion of the Board of Supervisors, operation, maintenance and administration of water and sewer  systems, and  including preparation  of agenda  for Author ity meetings, and where required preparation and submission of annual budget to the   Ca rlisle Suburban Authority together with such  explanatory  comment  deemed desirable, and to administer the approved budget.

Q.	Recommend to the Board of Supervisors a qualified person to act as Manager and to exercise the duties of Manager during temporary absence or disability of Manager , and to instruct and ensure adequate training and orientation of said temporary Manager.

R.	Ensure compliance with federal, state and loca l laws and regulations with respect to occupational safety and hazards.





2 1:3	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 21-8                                          NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 21-10

S.	He/she shall be the purchasing officer of the Town ship and shall purcha se, in accordance with the provisions of the Township Code, all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards , departments and other offices of the Town ship. He shall  keep  an account of all purcha ses and shall from time to time, or when directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. He/she shall also issue  rules  and regulation s, subject to the approval of the Board, governing the   requisition  and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.

T.	All complaints regardin g services or personnel of the Township shall be referred to the Office of the Mana ger. He, or an officer designated by him, shall investigate and resolve such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to the Board of Supervisors.

U.	Prepare for and provide data and support for judicial and quasi-judicial proceeding s.

V.	Perform such other duties as directed by the Board of Supervisors.


§ 21-9. Compatible offices.

The Office of Township Manager shall not be deemed incompatible with the Office of Township Secretary, Township Treasurer or any other Township office or employment, except that of Township Supervisor.


§ 21-10. Support by Secretary and Township employees.

The Township Secretary and all Township employees shall provide to the Township Manager such administrative and other  support  as is required for the proper perform ance in execution of the duties of the Office of Township Manager.






























21:4	01 -01 -2014
 
Chapter  26 PENSIONS AND RETIREME NT




[Currently effective pension provisions are on file in the Township offices.]






















































26: 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 31 PLANNING COMMISSION
 

§ 31-1. Establishment.
§ 31-2. Composition; terms of office.
 

§ 31-3.  Powers and duties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 5-3-1979 as Ch. I, Part 4, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances; amended  in its  entirety  at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General  Provisions,  Art.  II).  Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL  REFERENCES

Subdivision and land development -See Ch. 180.                    Zoning -Sec Ch. 204.


§ 31-1. Establishment.

A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby  created  and established for North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201,  of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as established  by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.1


§ 31-2. Composition; terms of office.

The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be appointed  for terms of office of four years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of office for three of the original members shall be fixed  at one yea r, two years and three years, respective ly, and the terms of office for two of the original  members shall be fixed at four yea rs, to be established on a series of overlapping terms with one term expiring each year, except for one year in which two terms shall expire.


§ 31-3. Powers and duties.

The Planning Commission shall have all the power s and duties conferred and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.











I.  Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § I 0201.


31 :1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 35

POLICE

 
ARTICLE I
Police Department
 
§ 35-5. Rules, regulations and personnel policy manual.
 

 
§ 35-1. Title.
§ 35-2. Establishment of Department.
§ 35-3. Composition.
§ 35-4. Probation.
 

ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid

§ 35-6. Agreement authorized.
§ 35-7. Terms of agreement.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENEHAL REFERENCES

 
Alarms -See Ch. 66.
Disorderly cond u ct -See Ch. 102.
 
Loitering -Sec Ch. 126.
N uisances -See Ch. 134.


ARTICLE I
Police Department
[Adopted 5-7-1981 by Ord. No. 81-2)
 

§ 35-1. Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Police Department  Ordinance."


§ 35-2. Establishment of Department.

There is hereby established a Police Department for North Middleton Township. The appointment of policemen by the Board of Supervisors shall be subject  to  any applicable lawful provisions.


§ 35-3. Composition.

The Police Department of North Middleton Township shall be composed of the followi ng classifications: Chief of Police, Captain, Sergeant, Corporal and patrolman. The number of individuals to serve in each capacity shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors, with the exception of the classification of Chief of Police, to which only one individual shall be appointed. The Board of Supervisors shall also have the power to appoint part-time policemen as are deemed appropriate.





35: 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 35-4                                           NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                           § 35-7

§ 35-4. Probation .

All regular and part-time policem en shall be appointed to an initial probati onary period of six months, during which period they shall be subject to discharge for any reason and shall have no benefits other than wages and  those required  by law or given at  the sole discretion  of Nort h Middleton Towns hip. Hereafter , members of the North Middleton Township Police Department shall serve at  the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors, subject to all applicable provision s of the law.


§ 35-5. Rules, regulations and personnel policy manual.

The Boa rd of Supervisors of North Middleton Township shall, from time to time as deemed appropriate, formulate rules, regulations and personnel policy manuals to ensure the proper functioning of the North Middleton Township Police Department.


ARTICLE II
Mutual Aid
[Adopted 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]

§ 35-6. Agreement authorized.

North Middleton Township is hereby authorized to enter into a mutual aid agreement which will evidence its intent to participate with the County of Cumberland, Office of the District Attorney, Office of the Sheriff and other area municipa lities in intermunic.ipal police activities designed to provide mutual aid and cooperative law enforcement efforts.


§ 35-7. Terms of agreement.

Term  of  the  agreement   shall  commence  upon   execution  of  the  agreement  and  may  be
terminated at any time upon 30 days' prior notice by North Middleton Township.

























35:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 41

RECREATION  ADVISORY BOARD

 
§ 41-1. Establishment of Board.
§ 41-2.  Membership; appointment; term; organization and conduct.
§ 41-3. Recreation and Parks Directors.
 
§ 41-4.  Compensation; expenses of
members .
§ 41-5. Powers and duties; member
responsibilities .
§ 41-6. Recreation escrow account.
 

[HISTORY:  Adopted  by the Board  of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5. Amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Parks and recreation areas -See Ch. 140.


§ 41-1. Establishment of Board.

A Nort h Middleton Township  Recreation  Advisory Board  is hereby established  pursuant  to the authority granted to townships by the Pennsylvania  Second Class Township Code (53 P.S.
§ 67201 et seq.).


§ 41-2. Membership; appointment; term; organization and conduct.

A.	There shall be five members of the North Middleton Township  Recreation  Advisory Board appointed by the Board of Supervisors from time to time. The  term  of  each member shall be for a period of five years or until a successor is appointed. The terms of each member shall be staggered, and the terms of  no  more  than  two  member s  shall expire  annually.

B.	Recreation Advisory Board members shall be residents of North Middleton Township.

C.	The organizat ion of the Board and the conduct of the Board's bu siness shall be governed by the Second Class Township Code.

D.	The  Recreation  Advisory  Board  will  elect  from  its membership  a  Chairperson,  Vice Chair and Secretary, on an annual basis.


§ 41-3. Recreation and Parks Directors.

Recreation/Parks Directors are directly responsible to the Board of Supervisors and its designee(s). Both the Recreation and Parks Directors are required to attend the monthly Recreation Advisory Board meetings to report monthly activities and any other business.





41:I	01 • 01 - 2014
 
§ 41-4	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 41-5

§ 41-4.  Compensation; expenses of members.

A.	Recreation Advisory Board member s shall serve without compensation.

B.	Member s  may  be  reimbur sed  for  expenses  incurred  in  perform ance  of  their  duties.
Expenses would include seminars, conferences, mileage to and from seminars, and meal expenditures. All expenses must be preapproved by the Board of Supervisors or its designee and the Recreation Advisory Board. Receipts must  be  submitted  to  the Township in order for the expenses to be reimbur sed.


§ 41-5.  Powers and duties; member responsibilities.

A.	The North Middleton Township Recreation Advisory Board shall be an advisory body to the Board of Supervisors. The Board shall also have the authority to implement programs and  policies as approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following power s and duties in the fulfillment of its advisory role:

(1)	Identification of the open space, recreation , park and trail needs of the Township;

(2)	Plannin g  and  supervision   of  recreation   programs  approved   by  the  Board  of
Supervisors through the Township Recreation and Parks Directors;

(3)	Assist in recommendation s for plans , programs,  physical  facilities  and improvement s, and polici es pertaining to the provision  of  recreation, park, and open space services;

(4)	Provision of advice to the Board of Supervisors in the acquisition and development of park s, recreation areas, and trails consistent with Township  Comprehensive Plan;

(5)	Preparation and presentation of an annual report on the Recreation  Advisory Board's activities , the adequacy  and effectiveness of the existing park, recreation and facilities, and its projected budget requirem ents; and

(6)	Execution of those tasks and activities as requested by the Board of Supervisors or
designee.

B.	Advisory Board member requirement s: attend 75% of the monthly Board meeting s; assist with and attend a minimum of two Recreation Advisory Board  sponsored  activities; review all meeting documents, including the agenda, minutes and any other documents prior to the meeting; be prepared to discuss  and  make  any  needed  recommendations based upon the meeting packets; encourage participation  in grant  researching, writing, and submittals along with subcommittee work on park development.

C.	New program suggestions shall be brought before the Recreation Advisory Board and presented to the Board of Supervisors for final approval prior to implement ation.

D.	Existing programs , public information , pamphlet s, advertising, etc., will be coordinated
with Township staff prior to implementing, and/or dispersing to the public.





41:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 41-6	RECREATION ADVTSORY BOARD	§ 41-6

§ 41-6. Recreation escrow account.

A.	Establi shment of recrea tion escrow account. The Township Treasurer shall establish a separate account for the deposit of any and a ll monies collected by the Township as a fee in lieu of dedication of lands by developers. The account shall be an interest-bearing account maintained in a financia l institution insured by the Federa l Deposit Insurance Corpora tion or similar federa lly sponsored agency

B.	Monies collected by fund-raising activities which are specifically designated for recreational, trail and/or park purposes shall be deposited in the general fund  in a specifically designated escrow account. The Recreation Advisory Board can recommend allocation of funds to the Board of Supervisors.

C.	Record of recreation escrow account. The Township Treasurer shall maintain detailed records of  the source and amount of each deposit into the  account and the amount of interest earned upon the deposit while the monies are retained in the account. The Recreation Director will present  the financial reports  to the Recreation  Advisory  Board on a quarterly basis.

D.	Expenditures from  recreation escrow account. The Recreation Advisory Board shall recommend to the Board of Supervisors through the Recreation Director, allocations of recreation funds. Thi s is consistent with the Second Class Township Code. Unless otherwise direct ed by the Board of Supervisors, the money first deposited into the account shall be the money first withdr awn from the account for any pa rk, trail and/or recreation purposes.


































41:3	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
 
 
Chapter 45

SALARIES AND COMPENSATION

 
ARTICLE  1
Board of Supervisors

§ 45-1.  Compensation of Supervisors.
 
§ 45-2. Compensation of Supervisors limited.
§ 45-3. Payment of compensation.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors  of the Township  of North Middleton as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]


GENERAL REFERENCES

Pensions and retirement -See Ch. 26.


ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 85-5; amended in its entirety 3-17-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-2)

§ 45-1. Compensation of Supervisors.

Each Supervisor of North Middleton Township elected or appointed to  office on  or  after Novem ber 8, 2005, shall receive compensat ion for attending duly advertised general or special public meetings of the Board of Supervisors and in all other respects discharging the duties of Supervisors, all at an annual rate of compensation of $3,250 per year.


§ 45-2. Compensation of Supervisors limited.

No supervisors sha ll receive annual compensation under this article in excess of the annual statutory limits set by the General Assemb ly in Act No. 60 of 19951 for Supervisors  of township s withi n the appropriate population category, same specifica lly not to exceed $3,250 per year. The limitations on compensation as set forth in Act No. 60 of 1995 and this article shall not negate or in any way affect each Supervisor's duty or obligation to attend uncompensated meetings or to otherwise discharge the duties of a Supervisor.


§ 45-3. Payment of compensation.

Such compensation for all Supervisors shall be paid in monthly installment s.







I.    Editor's No te: See 53 P.S. §65606.


45: 1	01 - OJ - 2014
 
Chapter 66 ALARMS
 

§ 66-1. Definitions.
§ 66-2. Notification by subscriber.
§ 66-3. False alarms.
§ 66-4. Central Receiving Station: response to alarm.
 

§ 66-5. Obligation and duty of subscriber.
§ 66-6. Liability of North Middleton
Township.
§ 66-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
6-2-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3. Amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Fire company- See Ch. 15.                                                     Police -See Ch. 35.


§ 66-1. Definitions.

The following  words  and terms  when used  in this chapter shall have, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning given to them  in this section:

ALARM - A communication to an emergency service indicating that a crime, fire or other emergency service has occurred or is occurring.

ALARM DEVICE - A mechanical or electrical device designed to automatically transmit
an alarm by wire, telephone, radio, audio or other means:

A.   Directly  to the  county communications  or Pennsylvania  State Police or a designated
alarm company.

B.	To a person who is instructed to notify the Police or Fire Department or other agencies of the alarm.

CENTRAL RECEIVING STATION - The alarm console or control panel installed in a designated alarm company, Police Department , Fire Department or County Communications for the purpose of giving visual and/or audio response to alarm devices.

COMMUNICATIONS - Act of or system of transmitting information.

DIRECT ALARM DEVICE - An alarm device, other than a telephone dialer alarm device, designed to transmit an alarm directly to the Police Department , Fire Department or County Communications.

EMERGENCY SERVICE(S) The Fire and Police Departments  of North  Middleton Township and those service departments from outside the Township such as ambulance and medic unit personnel , providing such services as agents of the Township.




66:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 66-1                                          NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 66-2

FALSE ALARM - An alarm to which an emergency service responds resulting from the activation of an alarm device when a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by an emergency service has not, in fact, occurred.

FIRE DEPARTMENT - The North Middleton Township Fire Department composed of the chartered fire company within the confines of North Middleton Township or similarly chartered companies outside the environs of the North Middleton Township which respond as agents of the North Middleton Township Fire Department.

INDIRECT ALARM DEVICE - An alarm device designed to transmit an alarm to a person
who is instructed to notify the Police, Fire Department or County Control of the alarm.

INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM - A false alarm resulting from the intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual under circumstances where that individual has no reasonable basis to believe that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by an emergency service has occurred or is occurring.

NATURAL DISASTER - An unanticipated grave natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character, the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided by the exercise of due care and foresight. The term natural disaster shall include, but not be limited to, hurricane , tornado, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, snowstorm , drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe.

NOTIFICATION - The required alarm device information which a subscriber must furnish to the Police Department to receive the Police Department's monitoring services for an alarm device should be submitted in writing.'

PERSON - An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association or other similar entity.

POLICE DEPARTMENT - The North Middleton Township Police Department.

SUBSCRIBER - A person whose alarm device terminates in the alarm central receiving station.

TELEPHONE DIALER ALARM DEVICE - An alarm device designed to automatically transmit a recorded message over regular telephone lines directly to the designated alarm company.

YEAR or CURRENT YEAR - The twelve-month period commencing January 1 and ending
December  31.


§ 66-2. Notification by subscriber.

A	It shall be unlawful for any person to put an alarm device into operation or to allow an alarm device to be put into operation without first providing notification to the Police Department. Said notification should be written and shall be provided by the person or his/her authorized agent whose premises are to be served by the alarm device.



I. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


66:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 66-2	ALARMS	§ 66-4

B.	The person  filing the notification  shall be responsible  to pay any and all charges required to   be  paid  pursuant  to  this  chapter  or  by  subsequent  resolution  of  the  Board  of Supervisors of North Middleton Township.

C.	In order to make notification, a person must:

(1)	Complete the alarm notification form provided by the Police Department.

(2)	Sign a disclaimer form.

D.	Address and telephone changes:

(1)	Permanent address or telephone changes of individuals to be contacted in the event of an emergency must be directed in writing to the Chief of Police, North Middleton Township Municipa l Building, 2051 Spring Road, Carlisle, PA 17013. [Amended 1-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]

(2)  Temporary address or telephone changes of individuals to be contacted in the event of an emergency shall be furnished by the subscriber to the police officer in charge by contacting said officer at 243-7910. (A temporary change is one which does not exceed seven days in duration. All other changes shall be deemed to be permanent for purposes of this chapter.)


§ 66-3.  False alarms.

A.	It shall be unlawful  to cause an intentional false alarm.

B.	Where an alarm device is activated and no emergency or natural disaster exists to warrant such activation, a false alarm charge shall be made by North Middleton Township. Said false alarm charge(s) shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.

C.	When it is determined that a false alarm  charge  is  due  from  the  subscriber,  said subscriber will be notified by the Police Department of said false alarm on which a false alarm charge is due and the amount thereof.

D.	Such notice of false alarm charges shall be in writing  and mailed to the subscriber or his
or her authorized agent by regular mail.

E.	A false alarm charge shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice of assessment  of the false alarm charge.


§ 66-4. Central Receiving Station: response to alarm.

A.	An alarm, whether it is through an alann device, telephone dialer alarm device or an indirect alarm device, which is transmitted from the Central Receiving Station to the Cumberland County Communications Center or the Pennsylvania State Police Substation, for transmittal to the North Middleton Township Police or Fire Department, shall result in the dispatch and responding of the necessary emergency equipment to determine the actuality of the alarm.



66:3	01-01-2014
 
§ 66-4	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 66-7

B.	Whether the alarm is actual or false in nature requires the subscriber or his designee to physically respond to the scene of the alarm.

C.	Any emergency service which responds to an alarm shall keep and record a log or report of a ll alarm respon ses. The log of the emergency service shall state the name of the subscriber, the source of the alarm, the date and time of the alarm and the type of alarm, whether real, false, intentional or otherwise.


§ 66-5. Obligation and duty of subscriber.

A.	Any subscriber or his designated  agent shall respond  to the source of the alarm whether or not the alarm is actual or false and shall remain at  the  source of  the alarm  until directed to leave by the responding department s or until contacting the Central Receiving Station.

B.	Failure of the subscriber or his designated agent to respond to the source of the alarm or to  leave the source of the alarm without the approva l of the responding department or without   contacting  the  Centra l  Receiving  Station  shall  constitute  a  violation  of  this chapter.


§ 66-6. Liability of North Middleton Township.

A.	The assumption of any obligation, duty or requirement  by the Fire Department  or by the Police Department as ma ndated by this chapter shall not  constitute acceptance by North Middleton Township  of  any  liability  in  connect ion  with  monitoring  or  responding  to alarms within Nort h Middleton Township.

B.	North  Middleton  Township,   its  officers,  representatives  and  employees,   shall  not  be liable for and will be held harmless  for any  Loss  or  injur y  to  person  or  property occasioned by any failure to strictly comply with the requirement s of this chapter.


§ 66-7. Violations  and penalties;  enforcement.

A.		Any individual, establishment , partnership, corporation, entity or concern who or which violates or  permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Penn sylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be gu ilty of a summary offense and shall be punis hable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In defau lt of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall a lso constitute a separate offense.2

B.	The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township shall, by resolution,  set  forth and  create additional charges for responding  to false alarms and for subscriber failure to respond  to the alarm source.


2.	Edito r's Note : A mended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


66:4	01-01-2014
 
§ 66-7	ALARMS	§ 66-7

C.	A person that owns, uses or possesses an alarm device or automatic dialing device may not, after causing or permitting three false alarms to occur in a consecutive twelve-month period , cause or permit a subsequent false alarm to occu r in the same consecutive twelve-month period. A person that violates this Subsection C commits a  summary offense and shall, upon convict ion, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A.  § 7511.   [Added 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]

D.	Enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Police Department.






















































66:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 

Chapter  70 ANIMALS
 

§ 70-1. Short title.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
§ 70-3. Conduct, activities and conditions constituting  violations.
 

§ 70-4. Exemptions .
§ 70-5. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Bpard of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 7-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-7; amended in its entirety 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



GENE RAL R EFERENCES

 
N uisances -Sec Ch. 134.
Parks and recreation areas -Sec Ch. 140.
 
Zoning -Sec Ch. 204.
 


§ 70-1. Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Domestic and Nondomes ticated Animal Ordinance."


§ 70-2. Definitions .

The following terms  shall be construed in this chapter to have the following meanings, except
in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:

OWNER - Any person having a right of property in any domestic or nondomesticated animal, or having custody or control of any such anima l, or any person who permits a domestic or nondom esticated animal (other than wildlife in its natural habitat) to remain on or around his or her property.

RUNNING AT LARGE - Being upon any public highway , street , alley, park or any other public land or upon property of another per son other than the owner and not being accompanied by nor under the control of the owner.


§ 70-3. Conduct, activities and conditions constituting violations .

The following activities or conditions are hereby declared to be unlawful:

A.	No owner of any dog, domestic or nondomesticated animal shall allow or permit such animal to make loud or harsh noises, on a continuous ba sis, to the extent that it shall disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of other persons. Each  day's violation of the provision s of this sub section shall constitute a separate offense.





70:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 70-3                                           NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                           § 70-5

B.	No owner of any  dog, domestic or nondomesticated  animal shall suffer or permit  such animal to run at large in North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania. Each  day's  violation  of  the  provisions  of  this  subsection  shall  constitute  a  separate offense.

C.	No owner of any dog, domestic or nondomesticated animal shall allow such animal to defecate or urinate upon  any public  sidewalk,  walkway or property of any other person. Each day's violation of  the  provisions  of  this  subsection  shall  constitute  a  separate offense.

D.	Keeping of more than six domesticated animals.


§ 70-4. Exemptions .

The provi sions of this chapter shall not apply to the owner of any  domestic  or nondomesticated animal whose business or livelihood depends primarily on the possession of said domestic or nondomesticated animal.


§ 70-5. Violations and penalties. 1

A.	Any person who violates any provi sion of § 70-3A of this chapter shall be given notice thereof , either in writing or orally, by the North Middleton Township Police Department or other North Middleton Township employees. Any person who shall violate§ 70-3A of this chapter after receiving one warning of such violation shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summary enforcement proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including rea sonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgm ent shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment , the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.

B.	Any person who violates any provision of § 70-3B of this chapter shall be given notice thereof, either in writing or orally, by the North Middleton Township Police Department or other North Middleton Township employees. Any person who shall violate§ 70-3B of this chapter after receiving one warning of such violation shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summary enforcement proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including rea sonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment  pursuant  to the applicable Ru les of Criminal Procedure. Each day a violation


I.   Editor 's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I ,General Provisions, Art. II).


70:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 70-5	ANIMALS	§ 70-5

exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriat e officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction , to enforce compliance herewith.

C.	Any person who v iolates any provision of § 70-3C of thls chapter shall be given notice thereof , either in writing or orally, by the North Middleton Township Police Department or other Nor th Middleton Township  employees. The notice shall request the said person to remove or to cause to be removed said excrement from any public sidewalk, walkway or property of any other person. Any person who shall violate § 70-3C of this chapter after receiving one warning of such violation shall, or any person  who  refuses, upon proper notice, to remove or cause to be  removed  said  excrement  from  any  public sidewa lk, walkway or property of any other person, shall, upon being  found  liable therefor in a summary  enforcement  proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure by the Townshlp before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plu s all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pay s nor timely appeals the judgment , the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Crimina l Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance  herewith.

D.	Any per son who  violates any provision of § 70-3D of thls chapter shall be given notice thereof, either in writing or orally, by the North Middleton Townshlp Police Department or other North Middleton Township employees. Any person who shall violate § 70-3D of this chapter after receiving notice and 10 days to abate such violation shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summary enforcement  proceeding  commenced  under  the Pennsy lvania Ru les of Criminal Procedure by the Township before a Magisteria l District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plu s all court costs, including  reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of  thls  chapter.  No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the jud gment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the  applicable Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each  day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Townshlp are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,  including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.

















70:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 76

BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS

 
§ 76-1. Definitions.
§ 76-2. Vegetation over eight inches high constitutes nuisance.
§ 76-3.  Unlawful to permit vegetation to exceed eight inches in height.
§ 76-4.  Responsibility  for cutting vegetation.
 
§ 76-5. Notice of violation.
§ 76-6. Township may cut vegetation upon failure to comply with notice.
§ 76-7.  Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 5-3-1979 as Ch. X, Part 1, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances; amended in its entirety 8-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-2. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable .]



GENERAL  REFERENCES

Nuisa nces -See Ch. 134.


§ 76-1. Definitions.

The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

PERSON - Any natural person, firm, partner ship, corporation or municipal corporation or
body.

VEGETATION - Includes, but is not limited to, grass, weed s, vines and similar growths, jimson , burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur and chicory. Vegetation may be considered a nuisance if it throws off any unpleasant or noxious odors, conceals any filthy deposit, produce s pollen or is not planted for some useful, ornamental or agricultural purpose.


§ 76-2. Vegetation over eight inches high constitutes nuisance. 1

Vegetation growing to a height exceeding eight inches on any lot or tract of ground in the Township located in the Low/Medium Density Residential Zone (R-1), the Medium/High Density Residential Zone (R-2) or any improved lot is hereby declared to be a nuisance .


§ 76-3. Unlawful to permit vegetation to exceed eight inches in height. 2

It shall be unlawfu l for any person owning, leasing or having a present interest in any real
estate located in the Low/Medium Density Residential Zone (R-1), the Medium/High Density


I. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).

2.	Editor's Note: Ame nded at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provision s, Art. II).


76:1	01-01 -2014
 
§ 76-3                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                        § 76-7

Residential Zone (R-2) or any residentially or commercially improved lot that does not comply in North Middleton Township to permit vegetation as defined in§ 76-1 of this chapter to grow to a height exceeding eight inches, with the exception of real estate used for and/or actively being farmed.


§ 76-4. Responsibility for cutting vegetation. 3

All vegetation on any pr emises located in the Low/Medium Density Residential Zone (R-1), the Medium/High Density Residential Zone (R-2) or any resident ially or commercially improved lot which does not comply with § 76-3 shall be cut by the owner, lessee, or person having a present interest in the real estate. Failure to comply herewith shall constitute  a violation of this chapter.


§ 76-5. Notice of violation.

A.	The Township may, in addition to taking other action for violations  of  this  chapter, require vegetation growing in violation hereof to be cut within 10 days after notification by the Township, said notice to be given by personal service or by mail upon the owner, lessee, or person having a present interest or upon an adult person  in  charge  of  any building  on the premises or at the residence of such person.

B.	The notice shall direct and require such person to trim or cut such  vegetation.  Where notice cannot be served in the above manner, notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in at least one conspicuou s place on the premises at least 10 days prior to taking further action.


§ 76-6. Township may cut vegetation upon failure to comply with notice.

If vegetation in violation of this chapter remains uncut 10 days after service of notice, then the vegetation may be cut by or under the direction of the Board of Supervisors and the costs thereof, together with 10% additional , may be collected by the Township from such defaulting property owner, lessee, or person having a present interest by an action of assumpsit or a municipal lien, provided that such costs may be in addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter.


§ 76-7. Violations and penalties. 4

Any  person who  violates  or  permits a  violation  of this chapter  shall, upon  conviction  in a summa ry  proceeding  brought  before  a  Magisterial  District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules  of Criminal  Procedure,  be gui lty of a summary  offense and  shall be punishab le by a fine of not  more than  $1,000, plu s costs of prosecution.  In defau lt  of payment  thereof, the defendant  may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion  thereof  that  such  violation  continues  or  is permitted  to  continue shall  constitute  a



3.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adopt ion of Code (see Ch . I, General Provisions, Art. II).

4.	Editor's No te: Amended at t ime of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


76:2	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 76-7	BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS	§ 76-7

separate  offense,  and  each  section  of  this  chapter  that  is  violated  shall  also  constitute  a
separate offense.



























































l

76:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 80

BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 80-1.    eserved)	§ 80-2. Additions, insertions and changes. [HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
4-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Uniform construction codes -See Cb. 95. Flood plain management -See Cb. 112. Sewers and water -See Cb. 164.
 
Subdivision and land development -See Cb. 180.
Zoning -See Cb. 204.
 


§ 80-1. (Reserved) 1


§ 80-2. Additions, insertions and changes. 2     (Amended 6-20-2002;  1-16-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-23]

The following sections are hereby revised as follows: ·

Section 104.3 ORGANIZATION:

The  Board   of   Supervisors   shall  appoint   such   number   of  officers,  technical   assistants,
inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary  for the administration of this code.

Section 108.1.1 OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED:

At the time of filing an application for a  permit ,  the  applicant  shall  present  to  the  Code Official evidence that  he  has  obtained · all  necessary  permits,  licenses,  approvals  and/or variances as may be required by the "laws  of  the  municipality  and  the  commonwealth. Individuals, agencies, board s and  commissions  issuing  aforesaid  permits,  licenses,  approvals and/or  variances  shall  include  but  riot  be  limited  to:  Carlisle  Suburban  Authority,  Department of Lalyor  and Industry, the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board, Board  of  Appeals,  the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief, the State Police Fire Marshal, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic   Development.   Nothing   herein   shall  render  the  official  or  township   responsible  for




1.	Editor's Note: For mer§ 80-1, Adoption of Building Code, was superseded 6-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5. For current
provisions on construction codes, see Cb. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.

2.	Editor's Note: This section was revised to delete certain specific additions and changes to tbe BOCA National Building Code, Twelfth Edition, 1993, which was adopted as the Building Code of the Township of North Middleton . The deleted provisions were superseded 6-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5, which ordinance provides for the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code. (Se.e Cb. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.) The remaining changes to the 1993 BOCA Code were deemed by the Township to remain in effect.

3.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Cb. l, General Provision s, Art. II).


80:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 80-2                                           NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                            § 80-2

ensuring that such evidence is accurate as has been obtained, nor shall the official's  issuance of a permit  constitute such a representation.

SECTION 116.3 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION

In the event of a violation of any provision of this ordinance, regardless of whether a notice of violation or stop-work order under Section 116.2 has been served, issued, drafted, or contemplated , and regardless of whether the said section has been followed in any way by the township or Code Official, and regardless of whether any notice or order which may have been issued and served has been complied with, the township may  proceed against the violator in criminal proceedings and/or in civil proceedings, as it deems best, and shall have the benefit of all remedies provided by law. The Code Official is empowered to institute such actions and prosecutions , but nothing herein is intended to preclude other officials or persons, including the Supervisors, from cnmmencing or ordering commencement of legal action. In the event of disagreement as to the advisability of a prosecution or other suit's being initiated or continued, the Supervisors' decision shall be final.

As noted above, nothing in Section 117.2 shall constitute a prerequisite to criminal or civil action.

SECTION 116.4 VIOLATION PENALTIES

Any person, including a corporation, who shall violate any provision of this ordinance or shall fail to comply with arty requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, repair, or demolish a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Basic Building Code, shall be gullty of a summary offense, and shall, upon conviction  in a summary  proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania  Rules  of  Criminal Procedure,  be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fme of not more than
$1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In  default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or ·is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.

SECTION 117.2 UNLAWFUL  CONTINUANCE:

Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fme of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.

SECTION 121.4.4 ENFORCEMENT OF DECISION.

The Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board. SECTION  121.4.S FEES.




80:2	01 - 0 l - 2014
 
§ 80-2                                     BUILDING CONSTRUCTION                                        § 80-2

At the time of application for the hearing the appellant shall escrow $150 to cover the costs of the hearing, with the balance to be refunded to or paid by the applicant. Said _costs for the hearing shall include but not be limited by legal fees, recording secretary, and advertising costs.



























































80:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 86 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING  OF

§ 86-1. Identification numbers required.          § 86-2. Violations and penalties.

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 98-5; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Subdivision and land development -See Ch. 180.                 Zoning -See Ch. 204.


§ 86-1. Identification numbers required.

All residential houses, places of business, and other such buildings being located in North Middleton Township shall be conspicuously numbered for identification purposes. Conspicuous numbering shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, illuminated or reflective numbers placed in such a location (all being in conformity to the ordinances, rules and regulations of North Middleton Township) as to be visible from a public roadway. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters, a minimum of four inches high, with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch, and of contrasting color. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.


§ 86-2. Violations and penalties.

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial  District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense  and  shall  be punishable  by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution . In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall  constitute  a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall  also  constitute  a separate  offense.
















86:l	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 92 BURNING, OUTDOOR
 

§ 92-1. Short title.
§ 92-2. Definitions.
§ 92-3. Fires prohibited on public property;  exceptions.
 

§ 92-4. Restrictions on fires on private property.
§ 92-5. Temporary restrictions.
§ 92-6. Violations and penalties.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 10-18-1994 by Ord. No. 94-4; amended in its entirety 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02. Subsequent amendments  noted where applicable.]



GEN EllAL REFER ENCES

 
Junkyar ds -See Ch. 120.
N uisances -See Ch . 134.
Outdoor wood -fired boilers -See Ch. 137.
 
Parks and recreat ion areas -See Ch. 140.
Solid waste and recycling -Sec Ch. 170.
 


§ 92-1. Short title.

This  chapter  shall  be known  and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Outdoor
Burning Ordinance."


§ 92-2. Definitions .

The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different or contrary meaning:

MATERIAL - Material permitted to be bu rned outdoors will exclude all municipa l waste materials and recyclable materials and solid waste as set forth in Chapter 170 of the North Middleton Township Code, which are required to be properly disposed of under local, state, and federal solid waste management and recycling regulations.

PERSON - Any natural person or persons, partnership, associat ion, corporation, firm,
fictitious name or any other individual or bu siness entity or their agents.
PROHIBITED MATERIALS - All those items set forth in § 92-4A. RECREATIONAL/CEREMONIAL FIRES - Any fire held on private property when
contained in man-made brick or stone fire pits or other commercially made chimineas, fireplaces, fire rings, etc., which are customarily  associated  with  outdoor  living and  patio areas and which are modest in size and are being utilized  for the purposes of ceremony or recreation and not merely for burning or disposal of prohibited materials .

SMOLDERING - The same meaning as "burning," and any smoldering shall be deemed a
burning .



92:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 92-3                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                        § 92-4

§ 92-3. Fires prohibited on public property; exceptions.

No person shall set, cause to be set, maintain or permit to be maintained any fire of any kind, including the burning of any prohibited material, upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public grounds in North Middleton Township, unless specifically authorized by the Board of Supervisors or its appointed agent, or, in the case of the municipal parks,  in  appliances designed for the preparation of food.


§ 92-4. Restrictions on fires on private property .

No person shall cause or permit to be caused any outdoor or open burning  of  any kind , including the burning of prohibited material, upon any private property owned or occupied in North Midd leton Township, except under the following conditions:

A.	No outdoor or open burning of  any materials, including but  not  limited  to municipal waste material, recyclable material, or solid waste, as regulated by local, state, or federal solid waste management and recycling control procedures, hazardou s waste materials or scrap lumber shall be permitted.

B.	No outdoor and open burning shall be permitted within 50 feet of any building, whether or  not owned by any person setting the fire and whether or not occupied, nor within 40 feet of  any property  line, excepting only recreational/ceremonial  fires and fires set solely for cooking.

C.	All burning must take place in fireplaces, noncombu stible containers or incinerators, or appliances designed to prepare foods.

D.	All fires shall be maintained and kept under the supervision of an adult person actually at
the scene of the fire at all times.

E.	All fires mu st be entirely extingu ished and not permitted to burn or smolder.

F.	Exceptions. The requirements of Subsections C through E do not apply where the open burning operations do not create a nuisanc e or safety hazard as may be determined by Township official or Police Department and result from:

(1)	A fire set to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), or other appropriate state or federal agency, and set by or under the supervision of a public officer.

(2)	Any fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in firefighting when approved
by the DEP or other appropriate state or federa l agency.

(3)	A fire set for the prevention and control of disease or pests, when approved by the DEP, or other appropriate state or federal agency.

(4)	A fire set  in conjunction with the production of agricultural  commodities  in their
unmanufactured  state on the premises of the farm operation.

(5)	Recreational/cer emonia l fires subject to the conditions contained herein.

(6)	A fire set solely for cooking food subject to the other restriction s contained herein.


92:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 92-4                                         BURNING , OUTDOOR                                         § 92-6

(7)	A fire set in order to clear land, provided that the proper authorities are notified of
the controlled bum.

(8)	Any  fire allowed  pursuant  to  Chapter  137, Outdoor  Wood-Fired  Boilers,  as set forth within this Code.

G.	All burning tha t pertains to Subsection F(l) through (5) and (7) of this section, the person or persons responsible for the burning shall contact the Township Zoning Officer and county control prior to the start of the burning. The person or persons responsible for the  burning shall state the date and time of the start of the burning and the projected length of the time of the burning period .


§ 92-5. Temporary  restrictions.

The Board of Supervisors, by resolution, when it is deemed to be in the interest of public health and safety, ma y impose a temporary partial or full ban on burning, including but not limited to the following: open burning, burning in receptacles, campfires, charcoal grilles, exterior fireplaces, agricultural purposes and for the purpose of clearing land. Such a ban shall be reviewed from time to time and lifted w hen the condition(s) resulting in the imposing of the ban no longer exist. In addition, the Board of Supervisors, by resolution, may delegate to the Township Fire Chief or to the Township Manager the authority to impose a temporary part ial or full ban on burning , as well as the lifting thereof, ba sed upon the criteria and under the circumstances set forth herein. The imposition by the Township Fire Chief or Township Manager of a partial or full ban on burning , as well as the lifting thereof, is to be ratified and confirmed by the Board of Supervisors, by resolution, at the next regu larly scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors followi ng the action taken by the Township Fire Marshal or Township Manager.


§ 92-6. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Crim inal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishab le by a fme of not more than  $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceed ing 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation  continues or is permitt ed to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapt er that is violated shall  also  constitute  a separate offense.











1.   Editor's Note: Amend ed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , Gen eral Provisions, Art. II).


92:3	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
 
 
Chapter  95 CONSTRUCTION  CODES, UNIFORM
 

§ 95-1. Administration and enforcement.
§ 95-2. Adoption of standards.
§ 95-3.  Process for administration and enforcement.
 

§ 95-4.  Board of Appeals.
§ 95-5. Effect on other ordinances.
§ 95-6. Fees.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
6-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Building construction -See Ch. 80.
Floodplain management -See Ch. 112.
 
Subdivision and land development -See Ch. 180.
Zoning -See Ch. 204.
 


§ 95-1. Administration and enforcement.

North Middleton Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.  §§  7210.101  through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regu lations.


§ 95-2. Adoption of standards.

The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal  building code of North Middleton Township.


§ 95-3. Process for administration and enforcement.

Administration and enforcement of the code within North Middleton Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township from time to time by resolution:

A.   By  the  designation  of  an  employee  of North  Middleton  Township  to  serve  as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of North Middleton Township;

B.	By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf of Nort h Middleton Township;

C.	By  agreement  with  one  or  more  other  municipalities  for  the joint  administration  and
enforcement of this Act• through an intermunicipal agreement;




I. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.


95:1	01 • 01 • 2014
 
§ 95-3                                           NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                           § 95-6

D.	By entering into a  contract  with  another  municipality  for  the  administration  and enforcement of this Act on behalf of North Middleton Township;

E.	By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylva nia Department of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneou s use structures.


§ 95-4. Board of Appeals.

A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions  of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint  action of the participating municipalities.


§ 95-5. Effect on other ordinances.

A.	All buildin g code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by North Middleton Township on or before July l , 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirement s of the code shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.

B.	All buildin g code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.

C.	All  relevant  ordinances,   regulations  and  policies  of  North  Middleton  Township  not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.


§ 95-6. Fees.

Fees assessable by North Middleton Township for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter shall be established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution or ordinance from time to time.


















95:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 98

CURFEW

 
§ 98-1. Short title.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
§ 98-3. Unlawful conduct of minors; exceptions.
 
§ 98-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.
§ 98-5.  Unlawful conduct of owners or operators  of establishments.
§ 98-6. Violations and penalties.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 2-5-1981 by Ord. No. 81-1. Amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL  REFERENC ES

Disorderly conduct -See Ch. 102.                                         Loitering -See Ch. 126.


§ 98-1. Short title.

This  chapter  shall  be  known  and  may  be  cited  as the  "North  Middleton  Township  Curfew
Ordinance."


§ 98-2. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

ESTABLISHMENT - Any privately owned place of business carried on for a profit or any
pla ce of amu sement or entertainment to which the public is invited.

KNOWINGLY - Includes actual knowledge and knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's lega l custody.

MINOR - Any person under the age of 18 years.

OFFICIAL TOWNSHIP TIME - Eastern standard time and Eastern daylight saving time when the commonwealth adopts or uses such time.

OPERATOR - Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing , or condu cting any establishment; and whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the  term "operator" as applied to associations or partnerships shall include  the members or partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.

PARENT - Any person having legal custody of a minor under the following circumstances: as a natural or adoptive parent; as a legal guardian; as a person who stands in loco parentis; or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.

PUBLIC PLACE - Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground , public building, parking lot, vacant lot or other place open to the public.



98: 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 98-2	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 98-4

REMAIN - To be on, in or about or to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.


§ 98-3. Unlawful conduct of minors; exceptions.

A.	It shall be unlawfu l for any minor to remain in or upon any public  place  or  any establishment between  the  hours  of  11:00  p.m.  and  5:00  a.m. of  the  following  day, official Township time.

B.	The provi sions of th is section shall not apply under the following conditions: (1)	When the minor is accompanied by a parent.
(2)	When  the minor is upon an  errand  or  legitimate purpose or bu siness directed by
such minor's parent.

(3)	When the minor is engaged in lawful employment.

(4)	When the minor is attending or going directly to or returning from a ju venile activity of a cha ritable, educational, religious, social, or civic activity supervised by at least one adult and with the express verbal or writt en consent of the parent.

(5)	When the minor is in the company of any adult over the age of 18 with the express verbal or written consent of the parent.

(6)	When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States  Constitu tion and the Constitu tion of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.

(7)	When the minor  is excused by reason of the action of the Board  of Supervisors of North Midd leton Tow nship . The Board of Supervisors may, by written declaration upon application or upon the Boa rd's own decision by motion and  resolution, declare special events, programs, or functions by  properly  organized  and supervised orga nizations advancing legitimate recrea tion, charitable, educational, religious, social or civic, or organizations advancing recreation, character development, or tra ining in  the aforementioned areas, and promoting the building of good citizenship in young people, and the attendance and movement directly to and from such events by minors, exemp t from the provisions of this chapter.

C.	Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.


§ 98-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.

A.	It shall  be  unlawful  for  any parent  knowingly  to allow or permit  or,  having reason  to know, to allow or permit any minor to remain in or upon any  public place  or  any establishment between the hours set forth in this chapter.

B.	The provisions of this section shall not apply where the minor's activity is excepted under the provisions of § 98-3B of this chapter.

C.	Each violation of the prov isions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.




98:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 98-5                                                         CURFEW                                                         § 98-6

§ 98-5. Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments .

A.	It shall be unlawful for any operator of any establislunent or his or her agents or employees knowingly to allow or permit or, having reason to know, to allow or permit any minor to remain upon the premises of such establishment between the hours set forth in this chapter.

B.	The provisions of this section shall not apply where the minor's activity is excepted under
§ 98-3B of this chapter.

C.	Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate violation.


§ 98-6. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brou ght before a Magisteria l District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and  shall be punishab le by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute  a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall  also  constitute  a separate  offense.


































I.  Editor's Note : Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


98:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 






























































)
 
Chapter 102 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
 

§ 102-1. Title.
§ 102-2. Conduct, activities and conditions constituting disorderly conduct.
 

§ 102-3. Police officer a member of the public.
§ 102-4.  Violations and penalties.
 

[IDSTORY:  Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 82-6. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Curfew -See Ch. 98.
Loitering -See Ch. 126.
 

Nuisances -Sec Ch. 134.
Solid wast e -See Ch. 170.
 


§ 102-1. Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Disorderly Conduct Ordinance."


§ 102-2. Conduct, activities and conditions constituting disorderly conduct.

A person is guilty of disorderly conduct under this chapter if:

A.	That person, whil.e on or in a public sidewalk, street, alley, park, square or common, or while on private property near to a public sidewalk, street, alley, park, square or common, without license or invitation from the owner to be there, within  North Middleton Township, willfu lly makes or causes to be made, including but not limited to making by the use of a radio, phonograph, tape pla yer or other electric or electronic device, whether operated manually or by remote control, any loud, boisterous  and unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable publ ic nearby, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public is annoyed.

B.	That person, while on or in a public sidewalk,  street, alley, park, square or common,  or while on privat e property near  to  a  public  sidewalk,  street,  alley,  park,  square  or common, without license or invitation  from  the  owner  to  be  there,  within  North Middleton Township, willfully makes or causes to be made, including but not limited to making by the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle,  motor-driven  cycle,  motorized pedalcycle,  minibike,  dirt-bike ,  snowmobiles   or   any  mechanized   vehicle,  whether operated manuall y or by remote control, any loud and unseemly noise or disturbance to the  annoyance of the  peaceable  public  nearby, whereby  the public  peace  is broken  or disturbed  or the traveling public is annoyed.

C.	That person,  while on or in a public sidewalk,  street, alley, park,  square or common,  or while on private property near to  a  public  sidewalk,  street,  alley,  park,  square  or common,   without   license  or  invitation  from  the  owner  to  be  there,  within  North



102:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 102-2                                        NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                        § 102-4

Middleton Township, uses obscene language or makes obscene gestures toward  a member of the public , with intent to cause public annoyance, or recklessly creating a risk of the same.

D.	That person, who  drops,  places  or  deposits  upon  any  public  sidewalk,  street,  alley, avenue, park, square or common or upon private  property  within  North  Middleton Township,  without  license  or  invitation  from  the  owner  any  wastepaper ,  sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass, metal, cardboard, refu se, rubbish or any  dangerou s or detrimental substance.


§ 102-3. Police officer a member of the public.

For purpo ses of the provisions of this chapter respecting the public as to whom annoyance may be caused or peace may be broken or disturbed , a police officer  shall qualify  as a member of such public and may testify as such for either prosecution or defense, where he or she was a seeing or hearing witness to the alleged offense.


§ 102-4. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permit s a  violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brou ght before a Magisterial District Judge  under  the  Penn sylvania Rules of Crimina l Procedure , be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. [n default  of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each sect ion of this chapter that is violated shall  also  constitute  a separate offense.


























I.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I ,General Provision s, Art. II).


102:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 106

DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

 
§ 106-1. Short title.
§ 106-2. Definitions.
 
§ 106-3. Prohibited conduct.
§ 106-4. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 8-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-13. Amendments noted where applicable.]


§ 106-1. Short title.

Tills chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Controlled Substance  Paraphernalia Prohibition  Ordinance of North Middleton Townshlp."


§ 106-2. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - All equipment, products and materia ls of any kind whlch are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act of April 14, 1972, P.S. 233, No. 64 (35 P.S. § 780- 101 et seq.). The term "drug parapherna lia" includes, but is not limited to, the following:

A.	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting , propagating , cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

B.	Kits  used,   intended   for   use,   or   designed   for  use  in  manufacturing ,  compounding, converting, producing,  proces sing, or preparing controlled substances;

C.	Isomerization  devices  used,  intended  for use,  or designed  for  use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

D.	Testing  equipment  used, intended  for  use, or designed  for  use  in  identifying  or m
analyzing the strength, effectiveness  or purity of controlled substances;

E.	Scales and balances used,  intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled  substances;

F.	Diluent s and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol , mannite, dextrose and lactose, used , intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

G.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs
and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refilling, marihuana.


106:1	01-01 - 2014
 
§ l 06-2	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 106-3

H.	Blenders,   bowls,   containers,   spoons  and  mixing  devices  used,  intended   for  use,  or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

I.	Capsules , balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for
use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances ;

J.	Containers  and  other  objects  used,  intended  for use, or  designed  for  u se in  storing  or concea ling controlled substances;

K.	Hypodermic  syringes,  needles  and  other  objects  used,  intended  for use, or  designed for
use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the body;

L.	Objects  used,  intended  for u se,  or designed  for use in ingesting,  inhaling,  or otherwise
introducing marihuana , hashish, or hash ish oil into the human body, such as:

(1)	Metal,  wooden,  acrylic,  glass,  stone,  plastic,  or  ceramic  pipes  with  or  without
screens, permanent  screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowl s;

(2)	Water pipes;

(3)	Carburetion tubes and devices;

(4)	Smoking and carburetion  masks;

(5)	Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold  burning materia l, such  as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand ;

(6)	Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;

(7)	Chamber pipes;

(8)	Carburetor pipes;

(9)	Electric pipes;

(10)	Air-driven pipes;

(11)	Chillums;

(12)	Bongs; and

(13)	Ice pipes or chillers.




§ 106-3. Prohibited conduct.

A	It is a violation of this chapter for any person, other than a licensed pharmacist, physician , dentist , hospital personnel or medical personnel, all of whom are operating within the norma l course of their profession, to offer for sale, to deliver by sale or gift, or to manufacture with intent to deliver by sale or gift, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably shou ld know, that said drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,  convert , produce,



106:2	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 106-3                                           DRUG PARAPHER NALIA                                            § 106-4

process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.

B.	It is a violation of this chapter for any person, other than a licensed pharmacist, physician , dentist, hospital personnel or medical personnel, all of whom are operating withi n the normal course of their profession, to place in any newspaper , magazine, handbill, or other publication of general circulation in North Middleton Township any advertisement, knowing, or under circum stances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for u se as drug paraphernalia.


§ 106-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11 ]

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summar y enforcement proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of Crimina l Procedure by the Township before a Magisteria l District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plu s all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determina tion of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the ju dgment, the Township  may  enforce the judgment  pu rsuant  to the applicable Rules of Crimina l Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, includin g injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.































I. Editor's Note: Amended at tim e of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art . ti).


106:3	01 -0 1 -2014
 
 
 
Chapter 109

FIREWORKS

 
§ 109-1. Definitions.
§ 109-2. Permit required for display.
§ 109-3. Safety requirements for displays.
§ 109-4. Application for permit.
 
§ 109-5. Use for agricultural purposes.
§ 109-6. Permits to be nontransferable.
§ 109-7. Bond requirements.
§ 109-8. Application for continuance.
§ 109-9. Violations and penalties .
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Disorderly conduct -See Ch. 102.


§ 109-1. Definitions.

As u sed in this chapter , the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: CONSUME R FIREWORKS - Mean and include:
A.	Any combustible or explosive composition or  any  substance  or  combination  of substances  intended  to produce visible and/or audible effects by combu stion, and which is suitable for use by the public, that complies with the construction, performance, composition and labeling requirements promulga ted by the Consumer Products Safety Commission in 16 CFR or any successor regulation and which complies with the provisions for "consumer  fireworks" as defined in the American Pyrotechnics Association (APA) Standard 87-1, or any successor standard.

B.	The term does not include devices listed as "ground and hand-held sparkling devices," "novelties" and "toy caps" in APA Standard 87-1, the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times throughou t this commonwealth.

DISPLAY FIREWORKS - Defmed as provided in 27 CFR § 555.11.


§ 109-2. Permit required for display.

It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms, or corporations, amusement parks, fair associations or other organizations or groups of individual s or entities to have or hold public displays of consumer fireworks and display fireworks within the limits of the Township of North Middleton, unless a permit is first granted  by  the Board  of  Supervisors  of  said Town ship.






109:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 109-3                                        NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 109-8

§ 109-3. Safety requirements for displays.

Every such display within the limits of North Middleton Township shall be handled by a competent operator, and the display shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, after proper  inspection and shall not be hazardou s to property or endanger any person or persons.


§ 109-4. Application for permit.

Application for permits shall be in writing to the Township Manager at  least  30  days  in advance of the date of display , setting forth the proposed location of the display, the character thereof, name and address of the operator, and the name and address of the owner or owners of the grounds on which the display is to be held, with the consent of such owner or owners in writing attached. All applicants shall pay the Township Treasurer the sum of $20 before issuance of a permit and provide proof of the required bond.


§ 109-5. Use for agricultural purposes.

The Board of Supervisors, under reasonab le rules and regulations, may grant permits for the u se of suitable fireworks for agricultura l purposes in connection with the raising of crops and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage. Such permit s shall only be good for the calendar year issued . After such permit has been granted, sales, possession and use of fireworks of the type and for the purpose mentioned in the permit shall be lawful for that purpose only.


§ 109-6. Permits to be nontransferable .

If and after a permit has been granted by the Township Board of Supervisors or designee, possession, sale, use and distribution of consumer fireworks and display fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted shall be transferab le.


§ 109-7. Bond requirements.

The Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton shall require the permittee or licensee to obtain a bond in an amount no less than $1,000,000 for the payment  of damages caused to any per son or  persons, and to any property by reason of the licensed display and arising from any acts of the  licensee, or  the licensee's agents, employees  or  subcontractors . The bond shall be filed with the Township Manager before any permit for a supervised public display is delivered.


§ 109-8. Application for continuance.

If by reason of unfavorable weather the display for which a permit has been granted does not take place at the time authorized, the person to whom such permit was issued must app ly to the Township Board of Supervisors within 24 hours, setting forth under oath the fact that such display was not made, the reason, and request for a continuance of  such permit for a specifically designated  day,  no later than one week after the day fixed originally  in said


109:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 109-8                                                    FIREWORKS                                                       § 109-9

permit. Upon  rece1vmg such application for a continuance, the Township Board of Supervisors, if it believes the facts stated therein are true, shall extend the provisions of the permit to the day fixed in the application, no later than one week after the original day designated in the permit. Such extension of time shall be granted without the payment of any additional fee and without requiring any bond other than the one given for original permit. The provisions of the original bond shall extend to and cover all damages which may be caused by reason of said display taking place at such extended dated in the same maimer and to the same extent as if such display had taken place at the date originally fixed in the permit.


§ 109-9.  Violations  and penalties. 1

Any person, copartnership, association or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or in the case of individuals, the member s of a partnership or corporation.










































l. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


109:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 112

FLOODPLAIN  MANAGEMENT

 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions

§ 112-1.  Intent.
§ 112-2.  Applicability.
§ 112-3.		Abrogation and greater restrictions.
§ 112-4.		Warning and disclaimer of liability.


ARTICLE II
Administration

§ 112-5.	Building permits required .
§ 112-6.   Issuance of building permit.
§ 112-7.   Application procedures and
requirements .
§ 112-8.  Review by County
Conservation District.
§ 112-9.  Review of application by others.
§ 112-10. Changes.
§ 112-11. Placards.
§ 112-12. Start of construction.
§ 112-13. Inspection and revocation.
§ 112-14. Fees.
§ 112-15. Enforcement; violations and
penalties.
§ 112-16. Appeals.


ARTICLE III
Identification  of Floodplain  Areas

§ 112-17. Identification.
§ 112-18. Description of floodplain areas.
§ 112-19. Changes in identification of
area.
 
§ 112-20. Boundary disputes.


ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions

§ 112-21. General.
§ 112-22. Special requirements for FW
and FA areas.
§ 112-23. Elevation and tloodproofing requirements .
§ 112-24. Design and construction
standards.
§ 112-25. Uniform Construction Code
coordination.
§ 112-26. Development which may endanger human life.
§ 112-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.


ARTICLE V
Activities  Requiring Special Permits

§ 112-28. General.


ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas

§ 112-29. Existing structures.
§ 112-30. Improvements.


ARTICLE VII
Variances

§ 112-31. General.
§ 112-32. Variance procedures and conditions.






112:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-3

 
ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
 
§ 112-34. Definitions.
 

§ 112-33. Interpretation.

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township  of North Middleton 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-7; amended in its entirety 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02. Subsequent amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
U niform construction codes -See Ch. 95.
Stormwater management -Sec Ch . 175.
 
Subdivision and land development. -Sec Ch. 180. Zoning -See Ch. 204.


ARTICLE I
General  Provisions
 

§ 112-1. Intent.

The intent of this chapter is to:

A.	Promote the genera l health, welfare, and safety of the community.

B.	Encourage  the  utilization  of  appropriate  construct ion  practices  in  order  to  prevent  or minimize flood damage in the future.

C.	Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.

D.	Reduce  financial  burdens  imposed  on  the  community,  its  governmental  units, and  its resident s, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.

E.	Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.


§ 112-2. Applicability.

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cau se to be undertaken , any construction or development regulated by Township ordinance anywhere within North Middleton Township unless a building permit has been obtained from the Building Permit Officer.

B.	A  building  permit   shall  not  be  required   for  minor  repairs  to  existing  building s  or structures .


§ 112-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This chapter supersedes any other conflict ing provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However , any other ordinance provision s shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.



112:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-4	FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT	§ 112-6

§ 112-4. Warning and disclaimer of liability.

A.	The degree of flood protection sought by  the provi sions of this  chapter  is considered reasonable  for  regulat ory  purposes  and  is based  on  acceptable engineering  methods  of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights may be increa sed by man-made or natural causes,  such as ice jams  and bridge openings restricted  by debris. This chapter does not imply that area s outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within su ch areas will be free from flooding or flood damages .

B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of North Midd leton Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapt er or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.


ARTICLE II
Administration

§ 112-5. Building permits required.

Buildin g  permits   shall  be  required  before  any  construction  or  development  regulated  by
Township ordinance is und ertaken within any area of North Middleton Township.


§ 112-6. Issuance of building permit.

A.	The Building Permit Officer shall issue a building permit only after it  has  been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken w ill be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordin ances.

B.	Prior to the issu ance of any zoning permit, the Building Permit Officer shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permit s required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act  1937-394, as  amended);  and  the  U.S.  Clean  Water  Act,  Section  404,  33  U.S.C.
§ 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.

C.	In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development/building permit, the Development/Building Permit Officer shall review the history of repairs to the subject bu ilding, so that any repetitive loss issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.

D.	No encroachment , alterat ion, or improvement of any kind  shall  be  made  to  any watercour se until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been  notified by Nort h Middleton Township and until all required permits or approvals have  been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

E.	In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Pennsylvania Department of Commun ity and Economic Development, shall be notified by North Middleton Township prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercour se.



112:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-7	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-7

§ 112-7. Application procedures and requirements.

A.	Application for such a building  permit shall be made, in writing, to the Building Permit Officer on forms supplied by North Middleton Township. Such application shall contain the following:

(l)	Name and address of applicant.

(2)	Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction  is to occur.

(3)	Name and address of contractor.

(4)	Site location, including address.

(5)	Listing of other permits required.

(6)	Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market  value of the building before the flood damage occurred.

(7)	A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction,
as well as any existing buildings or structures.

B.	If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area , applicants for building permits shall provid e all the necessary information in sufficient deta il and clarity to enable the Building Permit Officer to determine that:

(l)	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes  and ordinances;

(2)	All utilities  and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system s are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

(3)	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

C.	Applicant s shall file the following minimum information plus any other pe1tinent information as may be required by the Buildin g Permit Officer to make the above determination:

(1)	A completed building permit application form.

(2)	A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being
equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:

(a)	North arrow, scale, and date;

(b)	Topographic  contour lines;

(c)	All  property  and  lot  lines,  including  dimensions , and  the  size  of  the  site expressed  in acres or square feet;





112:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 112-7	


(d)	FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT	§ 112-10

The location  of all existing and proposed  buildings,  structures, and other
		improvements, including  the locat ion of any existing or proposed  subdivision
and land development;
	(e)	The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
	(t)	The  location  of  any  existing  bodies  of  water  or  watercourses,  identified floodplain  areas,  and,  if  available,  information  pertaining  to the  floodway,
		and the flow of water, including direction and velocities.

(3)	Plans  of  all  proposed   buildings,   structures  and  other  improvements,  drawn  at suitable scale showing the following:

(a)	The proposed  lowest  floor  elevation  of any proposed  building  based  upon
North American Vertical Datum of 1988;

(b)	The elevation of the one-hundred-year  flood ;

(c)	If available,   information   concerning   flood   depths,   pressures,   velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a one-hundred-year flood;

(d)	Detailed  information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures; and

(e)	Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended , and Sections 1612.5.1, 104.7 and 109.3 of the 2003 IBC and Sections R106.l.3  and Rl04.7 of the 2003 IRC.


§ 112-8.  Review by County  Conservation District.

A copy of a ll application s and plans for any proposed construct ion or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approva l shall be submitted by  the Building Permit Officer to the County Conservat ion District for review and comment prior  to  the issuance of a buildin g permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Building Permit Officer for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.


§ 112-9. Review of application by others.

A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be  considered for approval may  be submitted by  the Building Permit Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.


§ 112-10. Changes.

After the issuance of a building permit by the Bu ilding Permit Officer, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted  with  the  applicat ion  without  the  written  consent  and  approva l  of  the  Building




112:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-10                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 112-13

Permit  Officer. Requests  for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted  by
the applicant to Building Permit Officer for consideration.


§ 112-11. Placards.

In addition to the buildin g permit, the Building Permit Officer  shall issue a placard  which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the building permit , the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building Permit Officer.


§ 112-12. Start of construction.

A.	Work on the proposed construction and/or development  shall  begin within  six months and shall be completed within 12 month s after the date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Building Permit Officer. Construction and/or development  shall be considered to have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation of basement, footings, piers or foundations , erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes,  or electrical or other service lines from the street.

B.	Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applica nt, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building Permit Officer  to approve such a requ est.


§ 112-13. Inspection and revocation.

A.	During the construction period, the Building Permit Officer or other duly authorized Township official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municip al laws and ordinances. He shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.

B.	In the discharge of his duties, the Building Permit Officer  shall  have the  authority  to enter  any building , structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

C.	In the event the Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not comply with the  permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Building Permit Officer shall revoke the building permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.

D.	A record of all such inspection s and violations of this chapter shall be maintained.

E.	The requirements of the 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405 and the IBC (Sections
109.3.3, 1612.5.1, 104.7 and  103.8) and the 2003 IRC (Sections Rl06.l .3, 109.1.3 and



112:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-13                                     FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT                                     § 112-15

R 104.7) or latest revisions  thereof pertaining to elevation certificates and record retention
shall be considered.


§ 112-14. Fees.

App lications for a build ing permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality. Fees are ba sed upon separate a fee schedule as set by, and may be amended by, separate resolution of the Board of Supervisor s from time to time.


§ 112-15. Enforce ment; violations and penalties.

A.	Notices. Whenever the Buildin g  Permit  Officer  or other  duly authorized  Township official determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this  chapter, or  of  any  regu lations  adopted  pursuant thereto, the Building Permit Officer shall give notice of such alleged  violation  as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:

(1)	Be in wr iting;

(2)	Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;

(3)	Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performa nce of any act it requires;

(4)	Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however , that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this state;

(5)	Contain an out line of remedia l action which, if taken , will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.

B.	Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any  or  all  of  the  requirements  or provis ions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Building Permit Officer or any  other duly authorized Township official of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to Nort h Middleton Townsh ip of not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day during which any violation of this chapter continues shf!ll constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above pena lties  all  other  actions are hereby reserved, including an act ion in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for  any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excu se the violation or noncompliance or perm it it to continue, and all such persons sha ll be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed,  reconstructed,  enla rged,  altered,  or  relocated  in  noncompliance  with  this






112:7	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-15                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 112-18

chapter  may  be  declared  by  the Board  of Supervisors to be a public  nuisance  and abatable as such.1


§ 112-16. Appeals.

A.	Any person aggrieved  by  any  action  or  decision  of  the  Building  Permit  Officer concerning the administration of the  provisions  of  this  chapter  may  appeal.  to  the Township Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed,  in writing, within 30 days after  the decision, determination or action of the Building Permit Officer.

B.	Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall set a time and place, within not less than l 0 days nor more than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.

C.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this commonwealth, including the Pennsyl va nia Flood Plain Management Act.2


ARTICLE III
Identification  of Floodplain  Areas

§ 112-17. Identification.

The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Nort h Middleton Township subject to the one-hu ndred-year flood, which is identified as Zone A (Area of Special Flood Hazard) in the current Flood Insurance Study (FIS) undertaken by North Middleton Township (a  copy of which may be obtained at North Middleton Township)  and  the accompanying  maps or the most recent revi sion thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study. The current Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) applicable to North  Middleton Townsh ip shall be utilized and are hereby incorporated by reference.


§ 112-18. Descriptio n of floodplain areas.

A.	The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:

(1)	FW (floodway area): the areas identified as "floodway" in the AE Zone  i.n the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also  include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where  no  floodway  has been  identified  in the Flood Insurance Study.





I.   Editor's Note: Ame nded at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).

2.	Editor's Note: Sec 32 P.S. §679.101 et seq.


112:8	01-01-2014
 
§ 112-18                                    FLOODPLAIN  MANAGEMENT                                     § 112-21

(2)	FF (flood-fring e area): the remaining portions of the one-hundred-year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has been delineated. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-year flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.

(3)	FA (general floodplain area): the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which no one-hundred- yea r flood elevation s have been provided. When available, information from other federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is avai lable, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question.

B.	In lieu of the above, the municipalit y may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by profession al engineers, who shall certify that the technical methods u sed correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by Nort h Middleton Township.


§ 112-19. Changes in identification of area.

The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However , prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federa l Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).


§ 112-20. Boundary disputes.

Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Nort h Middleton Township Planning Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board  of  Supervisors.  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.


ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions

§ 112-21. General.

A.	No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office. In addition, the Federa l Emergency Management Agency  and Pennsylvania Department of Communit y and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation  of any watercourse.



112:9	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-21	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-23

B.	Any new construction , development , uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area shall  be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.


§ 112-22. Special requirements for FW and FA areas.

A.	With any FW (floodway area), the following provisions apply:

(1)	Any  new  construction,  development,  use,  activity,  or  encroachment  that  wou ld
cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.

(2)	No new construction  or development  shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained
from the Department  of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

B.	Within any FA (general  floodplain area), the following provisions apply:

(1)	No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet  landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmenta l Protection Regiona l Office.

(2)	Any new construction or development which would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited within any floodway area.


§ 112-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.

A	Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation. The design and construction  standards  and  specifications  contained. in  the 2003  IBC  (Sections  1612.4,
1603.1.6 and 3403.1) and in the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.l.4 , R323.2.1, and R323.2.2) and ASCE 24 (Sections 2.4 and 2.5, Chapter 5) and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended), or the latest editions thereof, shall be utilized.

B.	Nonresidential  structures.

(1)	Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including ba sement) elevated up to, or above, the regu latory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall rem ain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.

(2)	Any nonresid ential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor which is not elevated to at least 1 112 feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be floodproofed in a completely  or essentia lly dry manner in accordance with the Wl or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofin g Regu lations" published by the U.S. Army  Corps  of  Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other  equivalent standard as determined and approved for use by FEMA. All plans and specifica tions for such floodproofing   sha ll  be  accompanied   by  a  statement  certified  by  a  registered



112:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-23	FLOODPLAIN  MANAGEMENT	§ 112-23

professional   engineer  or  architect   which  states  that  the  proposed   design  and methods of construction are in conformance with the above-referenced standard s.

(3)	The design and  construction  standards  and  specifications  contained  in the  IBC (Sections  1603.1.2,  1603.1.6,  1605.2.2,  1606.5,  1612.5.1 and 3403.1.) and ASCE
24 (Sections 2.4 and Chapter 7) and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) , or the latest editions thereof, shall be utilized.

C.	Space below the lowest floor.

(1)	Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.

(2)	Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement , shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater s for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a)	A minimum  of  two  openings  having  a  net  total area  of not  less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

(b)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(c)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,  provided  that  they  permit  the  automatic  entry  and   exit   of floodwaters.

(3)	Consideration may be given to the requirements of 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) and the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.2.2 and R323.1.4) and the 2003 IBC (Sections 1612.4, 1612.5, 1202.3.2 and 1203.3.3).

D.	Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum,  with  the  following requirements:

(1)	The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,  but  shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal u se or activity.

(2)	Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.

(3)	The structure will have a low potentia l for substantial damage as defined herein.

(4)	The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.

(5)	Power   lines,   wiring,   and   outlets   will   be   at   least   1   112   feet   above   the
one-hundred-year  flood elevation.




112:1 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-23	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-24

(6)	Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances , such as furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.

(7)	Sanitary facilities are prohibited.

(8)	The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostati c forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a)	A  minimum  of  two  openings  having  a net  total area  of not  less than  one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

(b)	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(c)	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,  provided  that  they  permit  the  automatic  entry  and  exit   of floodwaters.


§ 112-24. Design  and construction standards.

The following  minimum  standards shall apply for all construction  and development proposed
within any identified floodplain area:

A.	Fill. If fill is used, it shall:

(l)	Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;

(2)	Consist of soil or small rock materia ls only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted ;

(3)	Be compacted to provide  the  necessary  permeability  and  resistance  to  erosion, scouring, or settling;

(4)	Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submjtted to and approved by the Building Permit Officer; and

(5)	Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties. The provisions contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 180l.1 and 1803.4), or the latest edition thereof, shall be utilized.

B.	Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets and  provide positive drainage away from buildings.  The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adja cent properties. The provisions contained  in the 2003 IBC (Appendix 0401 .5) shall be utilized.

C.	Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.





112:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-24	FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT	§ 112-24

(1)	All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located , designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwater s.

(2)	Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent  the discharge of
untreated sewer into floodwaters.

(3)	No part of any on-site  sewage  system  shall  be  located  within  any  identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such  systems. If any such system  is permitted,  it  shall  be  located  so as to avoid impairment  to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.

(4)	The design and construction provisions of the UCC and 34 Pa . Code (Chapters 40 l through 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Appendix G, Sections
401.3 and 401.4), the 2003 IRC (Section  323.1.6), the ASCE 24-98 (Section 8.3), FEMA No . 348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and The International Private Sewage Disposal Code (Chapter 3), or the latest  editions thereof, shall be utilized.

D.	Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

E.	Streets. The finished  elevation  of all new streets shall be no more than one foot  below
the regulatory flood elevation.

F.	Storage. All materials that are buoyant , flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in §  112-26, Development which may endan ger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulator y flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.

G.	Placement of buildings  and  structures. All  buildings  and  structures  shall  be designed , located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.

H.	Anchoring .

(1)	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices  to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

(2)	All air ducts, large pipes , storage tanks,  and  other  similar objects or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.

(3)	The design and construction requirements of the UCC pertaining to this subsection as  referred to in 34 Pa.  Code (Chapters  401  through  405, as  amended)  and contained  in the 2003 IBC (Sections 1605.2.2,  1605.3. 1.2, 1612.4 and Appendix 0501.3), the IRC (Sections R301.l and R323.l.1) and ASCE 24-98 (Section 5.6), or the latest ed itions or amendments thereof, shall be utilized.

I.	Floor s, walls and ceilings.



112:13	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-24	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-24

(1)	Wood flooring u sed at or below the regulator y flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,  perpendicular  to  the  flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.

(2)	Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant variety .

(3)	Wall s and ceilings at or below the regu latory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water- resistant and will withstand inundation.

(4)	Window s, doors, and other components at or below the regu latory flood elevation
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant materia l.

(5)	The provi sions of the UCC pertaining to thi s subsection and referenced in the 34 Pa . Code (Chapters 40 1 through 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3, 1403.2, 1403.4, 1403.6 and 1404.2), the 2003 IRC (Sections
R323. l.7 and R501.3) and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter 6), or the relevant sections of the
latest editions or amendments thereof: shall be utilized.

J.	Paints and adhesives.

(1)	Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
marine or water-resistant quality.

(2)	Adhesives used at or below the regu latory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant va riety.

(3)	All wooden component s (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with a marine
or water-resis tant paint or other finishing material.

(4)	The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) the 2003 IBC (Sections 801. 1.3, 1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2003 TRC (Section R323.l.7), or the latest editions or amendments thereof, shall be utilized.

K.	E lectrical component s.

(1)	Electrical distribution pa nels shall be at least three feet above the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.

(2)	Separate elect rical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be  dropped  from above.

(3)	The provisions perta ining to the above provisions and referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 40 1 throu gh 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the lRC (Section R323. 1.5),  the 2000 IFGC (Sections R301.5 and Rl 60 1.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8), or the latest editions or amendments thereof, shall be utilized.

L.	Equipment.





1 12:14	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 112-24	FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT	§ 112-26

(I) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.

(2)   The provisions  pertaining  to the above provision  and  referenced  in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the 2003 lRC (Section R323.1.5) the 2000 IFGC (Sections R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8), or the latest editions or amendments  thereof, shall be utilized.

M.	Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply  systems shall be  designed  to prevent  the infiltration  of  floodwaters  into  the  system  and  discharges  from  the   system   into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.


§ 112-25. Uniform Construction Code coordination.

The Standards and Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 40 l through 405, as amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and  other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this chapter:

A	International Building Code (IBC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof: Sections 80 1, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.

B.	International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof: Sections Rl04, RIOS, Rl09, R323, Appendix  AElOl , Appendix E and Appendix  J.


§ 112-26. Development which may endanger human life.

A	In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,J and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substa nces; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provision s. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:

(1)	Acetone.

(2)	Ammonia.

(3)	Benzene.




3.	Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679. 101 et seq.


112:15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-26	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 112-26

(4)	Calcium carbide.

(5)	Carbon disulfide.

(6)	Celluloid.

(7)	Chlorine.

(8)	Hydrochloric acid.

(9)	Hydrocyanic acid.

(10)	Magnesium.

(11)	Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.

(12)	Petroleum produ cts (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).

(13)	Phosphorus.

(14)	Pota ssium.

(15)	Sodium.

(16)	Sulphur and sulphur product s.

(17)	Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).

(18)	Radioactive substances, insofar as su ch substances are not otherwise regulated.

B.	Within  any FW . (floodway  area),  any  structure  of  the kind  described  in  Subsection  A
above shall be prohibited .

C.	Within any FA (general floodplain area), any new or substantially improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet  landward from the top of bank of any watercourse.

D.	Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantiall y improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be:

(l)	Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood; and

(2)	Designed to prevent polluti on from the structure or activity during the course of a
one-hundred-year flood.

E.	Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shal l be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.  Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight  standard .






112:16	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 112-27                                 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT                                  § 112-28

§ 112-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.

A.	Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.

B.	Within any FA (general floodplain area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited  within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any watercourse.

C.	Where   permitted    within   any   floodplain   area,   all   manufactured   homes,   and   any
improvements  thereto, shall be:

(I)	Placed on a permanent foundation.

(2)	Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1  112 feet or more
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year  flood.

(3)	Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

(4)	Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2003 International Residential Building Code, or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development' s Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest edition or amendment  thereto, and  34 Pa. Code Chapter 401 through 405 shall apply.

(5)	Consideration shall be given to the insta llation requirements of the 2003 IBC (Appendix G, Section 501.1-3) and the 2003 ffi.C (Sections R323.2, R323.3, R102.7.1, and Appendix AE 101, 604 and 605), or the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapter 401 through 405, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the unit's proposed installation.


ARTICLE V
Activities  Requiring Special Permits

§ 112-28. General.

In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area.

A	The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construct ion enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or intended to  be  used,  for  any  of  the  following activit ies:

(1)	Hospitals.

(2)	Nursing homes.

(3)	Jails or prisons.



112:17	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-28                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 112-30

B.	The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactur ed home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.


ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas

§ 112-29. Existing structures.

The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of§ 112-30 shall apply.


§ 112-30. Improvements.

The following provisions sha ll apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:

A	No expansion or enlargement of an exi sting structure shall be allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.

B.	No expansion or enlar gement of an existing structur e shall be allowed within any FE area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year flood elevation more than one foot at any point.

C.	Any modification , alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any kind to an ex isting structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial   improvement   and  shall  be  undertaken  only  in  full  compliance  with  the provi sions of this chapter.

D.	The above activity shall also address  the requ irements of the 34 Pa. Code Chapters 40 1 through 405, as amended, and the 2003 IBC (Sections 3402.l and 1612.4) and the 2003 IRC (Section 323.1.4), or the latest editions or amendments thereto.

E.	Any modification, alteration, reconstruction , or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed  to the greatest extent possible.

F.	Any modification , a lteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

G.	The requirements of 34 Pa . Code Chapter 401 through 405, as amended, and the 2003 IRC (Sections R l02.7.l, Rl05.3.l and Appendices E and J), or the latest revision thereof, and the  2003 IBC (Sections 101.3, 3403. l and Appendix G), or  the  latest  edition  or amendment   thereof,  shall  also  be  utilized  in  conjunction  with  the  provi sions of  this section.




112:18	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-31                                 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT                                  § 112-32

ARTICLE  VII
Variances

§ 112-31. General.

If compliance with any of the requirement s of this  chapter  would  resu lt  in an exceptiona l hard ship to a prospective builder , developer or landowner, North Middleton Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.


§ 112-32. Variance procedures and conditions.

A.	Request s for variances  shall be considered by North Middleton Township in accordance with  the procedures contained in § 112-16 and the following:

(1)	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or  activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.

(2)	No  variance shall  be  granted  for any  construct ion, development , use,  or  actlV!ty within any FA (general floodplain) area that would, together with all other existing and  anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year  flood elevation  more than one foot at any point.

(3)	If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.

(4)	In granting any variance, North Middleton Township shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.

(5)	Whenever   a  var iance  is  granted,  North   Midd leton  Township  shall  notify  the
applicant in writing that:

(a)	The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
msurance.

(b)	Such variances may increa se the risks to life and property.

(6)	In reviewing any request for a variance , North Middleton Township shall consider, at a minimum , the following:

(a)	That there is good and sufficient cause.

(b)	That failure to grant the varia nce would result in exceptional hard ship to the
applicant.

(c)	That the granting of the variance will neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increa se in flood heights, additional threat s to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regu lations.



112:19	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-32                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 112-34

(7)   A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Township; in adc;lition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

B.	Notwithstanding  any  of  the  above,  however,  all  structures  shall  be  designed  and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-hundred-year flood.


ARTICLE VIII
Terminology

§ 112-33. Interpretation.

Unless specifically defined below,  words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted
so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.


§ 112-34. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE - A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.

BASEMENT - Any area of the buildin g having its floor below ground level on all sides.

BUILDING - A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habit ation.

COMPLETELY DRY SPACE - A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the
structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.

DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation , repair, expan sion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.

ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE - A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

FLOOD - A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.

FLOODPLAIN AREA - A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unu sual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.

FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminat e flood damage to real estate or improved real property , water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.




112:20	01-01-2014
 
§ 112-34                                 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT                                  § 112-34

FLOODW AY The designated area of a floodplain required  to  carry  and  discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of  this chapter, the  floodway shall be capabl.e of accommodating a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.

HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Is any structure that is:

A.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

B.	Certified or prelimillarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

C.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

D.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

(1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(2)	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA - The floodplain area specifica lly identified in this
chapter as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood. LAND DEVELOPMENT - Any of the following activities:
A.	The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguou s lots, tracts, or pa rcels of land for any purpose involving:

(1)	A group of two or more residential  or nonresidential  building s, whether proposed initially or cumu latively, or  a  single  nonresidential  building  on  a  lot  or  lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or

(2)	The division  or  a llocation  of  land  or  space,  whether  initially  or  cumu latively, between or among two or  more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for  the purpose of streets, common areas,  leasehold s,  condominiums,  building groups or other features.                                                                  ·

B.    A subdivision of land.

LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfini shed, flood-resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non elevation design requirements of this chapter.

MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, tran sportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation



112:21	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-34                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 112-34

when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than  180 consecutive days.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for nontransient use.

MINOR REPAIR - The replacement of existing  work with equivalent  materials  for  the purpose of its  routine  maintenance  and  upkeep,  but  not  including  the  cutting  away  of  any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or  cutting  of  any  structural  beam  or  bearing support,  or  the  removal  or  change of any required  means  of egress, or  rearrangement  of  parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirement s; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,  drainage,  drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanica l  or  other  work affecting  public  health  or general  safety.

NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.

ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every l 00 years (i.e., that has one-percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any yea r).

PERSON - An individual , partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:

A.    Built on a single chassis;

B.	Not more than 400 square feet measured at the largest horizontal projections;

C.	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;

D.	Not  designed  for  use  as  a  permanent  dwelling  but  as  temporary  living  quarters  for
recreationa l, camping , travel, or seasona l use.

REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION - The one-hundred-year flood elevation plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/4 feet.

REPETITIVE LOSS - Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.

SPECIAL PERMIT - A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jai ls, and new manufactu red home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.




112:22	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 112-34                                 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT                                  § 112-34

STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including but not limited to building s, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water whether or not affixed to land.

SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heir s, or devisees, transfer  of ownership or  building or Lot development ; provided , however, that the subdivision by Lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcel s of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.

SUBSTANTIAL  ADDITIONS  TO  MANUFACTURED   HOME  PARKS            Any  repair,
reconstruction , or improvement of an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivi sion, where such repair, reconstruction, or  improvement  of the street s, utilities,  and pads will equal or exceed 50% of the value of the streets, utilities , and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement is started.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a stru cture, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss, when a repetitive loss provision is used) regard less of the actua l repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

A.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health , sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been  identified  by  the  local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

B.   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.

UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) - The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania Genera l Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all municipaliti es whether administered by the municipality , a third party or the Department  of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential  and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construct ion stand ard applicable with the commonwea lth floodplain constrnction. For coordination purposes , references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.








112:23	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 117

INSURANCE

 
ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims

§ 117-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds .
§ 117-2. Limits of liability.
§ 117-3. Insurance company rights
reserved.
 
§ 117-4. Construal of provisions.
§ 117-5.  Notification  of Pennsylvania Department  of Community  and Economic Development.
§ 117-6. Violations and penalties.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
as indicated  in article histories. Amendments  noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 3-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]

§ 117-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.

A.	No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer") doing business in the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania  shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire.damage to a structure located within the Township of Nort h Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, where the amount recoverable for the fire  loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the Secretary of the Township of Nort h Middleton with a certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992 and Act 93 of 1994 (collectively the "Act"), and unless there is compliance with the procedure s set forth in Section 508(c) and 508(d) of the Act.1

B.	Delinquent  taxes, assessments and charges.

(1)	Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are expenses which the Township has incmTed as costs for remova l, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property (collectively "municipal expenses"), the Secretary of the Township sha ll immediately render a bill for such work, if not already done. Upon written request of the named insured speci fying the description of the property, the name and address of the insurer and the date of receipt by the insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Secretary of the Township shall furnish a certificate within 14 days after the request to the insurer either:

(a)	Stating  that  there  are  no  unpaid  municipal  claims  or  municipal  expenses against the property; or


1.	Ed itor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.


117:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 117-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ ] 17-1

(b)	Specifying  the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,  accompanied
by a bill for such amounts.

(2) Taxes, assessments , penalties and user charges shall be deemed delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(l)(a) of this section, the insurer shall transfer to the Secretary of the Township an amount from the insurance proceeds sufficient to pay said sums prior to making payment  to  the named insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection C hereof.

C.	When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid pursuant to Subsection B of this section or when the Township Secretary has issued a certificate described in Subsection B(l)(a) indicating that there are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the property , the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured ; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the following procedures must be followed:

(1)	The insurer  shall transfer  from the insurance proceed s to the Township  Secretary,
in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim or fraction thereof.

(2)	If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured , such insured has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the Township , a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula , the insurer shall transfer to the Secretary of the Township of North Middleton from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. If there is more than one insurer , the transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurers insuring the building or other structure.

(3)	Upon receipt of the above-described portion of the insurance proceeds, the Secretary of the Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania , shall do the following:

(a)	Place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security against the total   municipal expenses anticipated by the Township to be required in removing, repairin g or securing the building or structure as required by this article. Such  costs shall include, without limitation , any engineering, legal or administrative   costs incurred by the Township in colllection with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings related thereto;

(b)	Mail to the named insured at the address received from the insurer a notice that   the proceed s have been received by the Township and that  the procedures  under this subsection shall be followed;

(c)	After the transfer, the named  insured may submit to the Township of Nort h Middleton a contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, in which event the Township Secretary shall, if such est imates deemed by the Township  Secretary to be rea sonable  return  to the  insured  the  amount  of  the funds transferred  to the



117:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 117-1		INSURANC E	§ 117-5

Township  of North  Middleton  in excess of that  amount required  to pay the
		municipal   expenses;	provided ,  however ,  that	the  Township  has  not
		commenced  to  remove,  repair  or  secure  the  building  or  other  structure  in
		which case the Township will complete the work;
	(d)	Pay  to  the  Secretary  of  the Township  for  reimbur sement  to  the Township
		general fund, the amount of the municipal expenses paid to the Township;
	(e)	Pay the remaining  balance in the fund without  interest to the named insured
		upon receipt of a certificate issued by the Township Secretary that the repa ir,
		remova l or  securing of the building or other structure has been completed in
		accordance with all applicable codes and regulation s of the Township;
	(f)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the Township to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal claims or municipal
		expenses recovered  pursuant  to this article, or to insurance proceeds,  by an
		action  at law or in equity to enforce the Township codes or to enter into an
		agreement  with  the named  insured with regard  to such other disposition  of
		the proceeds  as the Township may deem responsible.


§ 117-2. Limits of liability.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company, association or exchange liable for any amount  in excess of proceeds payable under  its insurance policy  or for any other act performed pursuant to this article or to make the Township or any publi c official of the Township an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation to pay delinqu ent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses other than as provided in this article.


§ 117-3. Insurance company rights reserved .

An insurance company, association or exchange making  payment  of policy  proceeds  und er this article for delinquent taxes or  structural removal  liens or removal expenses incurred by the Township of Nor th Midd leton shall have full benefit of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.


§ 117-4. Construal of provisions.

This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the abandorunent of property and to prevent  urban blight and deterioration.


§ 117-5. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.

The Secretary of the Township of North Middleton shall transmit  a  certified copy  of  this article promptly to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.



117:3	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 117-6                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 117-6

§ 117-6. Violations and penalties. 2

Any owner of property , any named insured or insurer who  violates the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirement s hereof shall  be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to pay a fine not greater than $1,000 plu s costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of irnprisorunent not to exceed 90 days. Each day in which an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.





















































2.	Ed itor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).


117:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 120

JUNKYARDS

 
§ 120-1.	Purpose.
§ 120-2.  Definitions.
§ 120-3.	Compliance with regulations.
§ 120-4.	Application for license.
§ 120-5. Bond requirements.
§ 120-6.	Fees.
§ 120-7.	Issuance of license and
renewals ; posting of license.
§ 120-8.	Status of existing junkyards.
 
§ 120-9.  Location of junkyards.
§ 120-10. Compliance with zoning and
subdivision  regulations.
§ 120-11. Basis for denial of license
renewal.
§ 120-12. Maintenance of junkyards.
§ 120-13. Application for license for existing junk yards; inspections.
§ 120-14. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 5-3-1979 as Ch. XIII, Part 1, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL  R EFER ENCES

 
Outdoor burnin g -See Ch. 92.
N uisances -See Ch. 134.
Solid waste and recycling -See Ch. 170.
 
Subdi vision and land development -See Ch . 180.
Zoning -See Ch.204.
 


§ 120-1. Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the Township, including protection of children, by regu lation of junkyard s and junk dealers. This chapter is intended to supplement land u se and other provisions of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 204, Zon ing, by regulation within pemtitted land use areas.


§ 120-2. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

BOARD - Board of Supervisors of the Township.

JUNK - Discarded materials, articles or things of no value or possessi ng value in part, gross or aggregate, and held for resale, including but not limited to scrapped motor vehicles and parts thereof, including motor s, bodi es of motor vehicles and vehicles which are inoperable, unu sable a nd do not have a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania, but not including garbage or other organic waste or farm machinery, provided said farm machinery is used in connection with a farming operation.



120:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 120-2                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 120-4

JUNK DEALER - Any person engaged in the business or act1v1ty of selling, buying, maintaining, dealing in, storing, and trafficking in junk, including but not limited  to junked, scrapped or abandoned motor or other vehicles or  parts  removed  from  such  vehicles;  or otherwise engaged in  business or  activity  of  a junkyard  or  auto  graveyard  as provided  in the Act  of  1933, May  1, P.L.  103, Art.  VII, § 702,  cl. LVIII,  added  1959, March  1 l, P.L.  13, No.
9, § 1, as amended  1961, May 23, P.L. 215, No.  115, § 1; 1963, Aug. 24, P.L.  1197, No. 503,
§ 1.•

JUNKYARD - Any place where activity of storing or accumulating junk occurs or where business of selling, buying or dealing in junk is carried on or where two or more motor vehicles are stored which are unlicensed , inoperable, and do not have a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Vehicle Code and other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

PERSON - Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation or authority or municipality. Singular shall include plural and masculine shall include feminine and the neuter.

PERSONAL NOTICE Not ice to a person of the date,  time  and  subject  matter  of proceedings concerning the person or of determination or action concerning the person , to be sent by certified mail.

PUBLIC NOTICE - Notice publi shed once in newspaper of genera l circulation in the Township at least I 0 days prior to hearing, stating the time and place of hearing and nature of the matter to be considered.

TOWNSHIP - Township of North Middleton.


§ 120-3. Compliance with regulations.

On and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall engage in or continue to engage in activity or bu siness as a junk dealer or engage in activity of establishing or operating or maintaining a junkyard  in the Township except as authorized and licensed under this chapter.


§ 120-4. Application for license.

Application  for license shall be made, in writing, under oath in a form prescribed by the Board and shall contain the name of the applicant and all owners or interested parties, their addresses, address of the premises upon which the activity or business is to be conducted or junkyard established or operated , name of the owner or owners of said property if other than the applicant, and, upon any subsequent applications, a statement that the applicant during the preceding term of license did comply with and did maintain the premises in compliance with provisions  of  this  chapter.  The application  shall  describe the premises  upon  which  the junkyard is to be established or operated, specifying thereon the zoned land u se, setback lines, parking requirements, structures erected thereon, dwellings erected upon premises adjacent to the premises propo sed to be used, and deed book reference. A corporation applicant shall provide the name and address of all officers. The application is to be signed by the applicant,


I.	Ed itor's Note: See 53 P.S. §66532.


120:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 120-4                                                   JUNKYARDS                                                    § 120-7

if an individual; by all members if a partnership or association; and by the president and secretary if a corporation. A separate application shall be required for each junkyard.


§ 120-5. Bond requirements.

A bond,  executed by the applicant with a surety company authorized to transact business within the commonwealth, shall be obtained for the sum of $2,000, and shall accompany every application for a license. The Township may accept an executed bond secured by deposit with the Township Secretary of a cashier's check, treasurer's check or certificate of deposit of a banking institution in the above amount. The bond shall be renewed and refiled annua lly not la ter than July 1 of each year, shall be executed in favor of and for the use of the Township; shall be for a term of one year; and shall be conditioned that if, upon and after issuance of the license, the licensee shall fully and faithfully observe and comply with the provision s of this chapter and rules and regu lations of the Township promulgated thereunder, the obligation of bond shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect.


§ 120-6. Fees.

Every junk dealer shall pay an initial annual license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors , and an additional fee for each annual renewal thereafter. The license is to be issued for the term of one yea r begi nning July l and ending June 30. No abatement of license fees shall be made for any cause. Licenses mu st be renewed annua lly on or before the first day of July. Such license shall be issued upon the condition that the same may, upon hearing with personal notice, be revoked in the event a licensee is found to have given false information or in any way misrepr esented facts upon which the Board has relied in considering or granting the license. No refunds shall be made. The license fee shall be prorated quarterly.


§ 120-7. Issuance of license and renewals; posting of license.

The Board, upon receipt of application for license under this chapter, shall determine whet her, in accordance with this chapter, license shall be issued or a renewal thereof granted after an examination of the application; and whether the applicant complies with Chapter 204, Zoning, and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, the Solid Waste Management Act,2 and laws and regulation s of state and federal agencies relating to activities subject to this chapter. The Board  may hold a public hearing upon any application or renewal application after public notice. Upon approval of an application for license, the Board shall issue the  applica nt  a license with the name of the junk dea ler and address of the premi ses approved as a junkyard. Such license shall be at all times conspicuou sly posted upon premises licensed and shall not be transferable or assignable by agreement, will, intestacy or otherwise.








2.	Ed itor's No te: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.


120:3	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 120-8                                        NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 120-12

§ 120-8. Status of existing junkyards.

Junkyards in existence prior to this chapter may comply with provisions hereof; except that preexi sting nonconforming junkyard uses may exist  in conformance with provisions of Chapter 204, Zoning.


§ 120-9. Location of junkyards.

Junkyards may be located and junk dealers may operate only in areas zoned for such use.


§ 120-10. Compliance with zoning and subdivision regulations.

Junkyards  must  comply  with  all provision s of  Chapter  204,  Zoning,  and  Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.


§ 120-11. Basis for denial of license renewal.

No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any person who has been twice convicted of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter and/or any state law relating to activities of junk dealers, junkyard s or solid waste, within any one license period of one year, until expiration of one year from the date when the last violation or violations charged has been corrected or abated.


§ 120-12. Maintenance of junkyards.

Every licensee shall maintain  licensed premi ses and comply with the below provisions:

A	Premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health  and welfare of the community or to residents nearby and shall not constitute a place for breeding of rodents and vermin .

B.	No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises.

C.	Manner of storage and arrangement and drainage facilities of premises shall be such as to prevent accumulation of stagnant water upon licensed land  and to facilitate access  for inspection purposes and firefighting.

D.	No junk shall be  stored  or  accumulated  within 75 feet  of any existing dwelling hou se erected  upon  premi ses  adjacent  to  licensed premises,  nor  within  40  feet  of any public street or  highway  within  the Township.  Such  restrictions shall  be in  addition  to  and subject to any more restrictive setback requirements of Chapter 204, Zoning, and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development. Existing structures pertaining to and being used in  connection with junkyards presently established and operating shall not be subject to this provision,  but all improvements, modifications and alterations of said structures shall be subject to this chapter.

E.	Enclosure.





120:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 120-12                                                 JUNKYARDS                                                 § 120-13

(1)	Premises shall be enclosed by a  structure consisting either of a metal chain link fence  constructed of heavy-duty steel and supported upon steel  posts  of  a  solid masonry or  metal wall of a uniform design and texture. The structure shall comply with and be  controlled  by  setback  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  Chapter  204, Zoning, and  Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development. The structure shall not  be  less than  five feet in height nor shall two or more vehicles or major parts thereof be stacked on  top  of one another or otherwise so as to protrude above the structure.  For  any junky ards in existence at time of this chapter, erection of the structure shall be completed   within 12 months after the effective date of  this chapter. For all other junkyard s,  structures shall be erected prior to application  or approval of application may be made subject to completion of the structure prior to commencement of the activity or bu siness.

(2) The Board may extend time for compliance with provi sions for the structure due to bona fide rea sons such as availability of fencing materials. Structure requirement s are applicable only to that portion of the premi ses immediately u sed for storage of junk.

F.	Plantings.

(1)	Land area between the fence or wall structure required above and a public highway or street shall be planted with evergreens or trees of the following types: white pine; Scotch pine; Austrian pine; Norway spruce; hemlock; or other similar vegetation approved by the Board as equivalent in growth and shading characteristics. Trees shall be planted in two rows 16 feet apart in each row and alternat ed eight feet apart on center, except for hemlocks, which shall be eight feet apart and four feet on center.

(2)	The trees when planted shall be at least three feet in height from the ground. The trees  shall be maintained in good health and replaced as required  in order  to achieve a  screening effect  w ithin  five years. The Board, from  time to time, may establish rules and regulations for the purpose of implementing this subsection.

G.	To facilitate inspection and fire control, all junk shall be arranged and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion and with a minimum of 20 feet of clear space between rows, with each row to be no greater in width than 40 feet.

H.    Junk shall not be burned on premises under any condition.

I.	No junk shall be stored or located near any river, stream , run, creek, irrigation ditch or any other natural watercourse within the distances established by regulations and/or determinations of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or other state agency as in violation of state law.


§ 120-13. Application for license for existing junkyards; inspections.

Appl ication for license for existing junkyard s shall be filed within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. The Township may, at its discretion, cause any junky ard to be inspected at reasonable times, and the applicant or licensee shall, as a condition for approval of his



120:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 120-13                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 120-14

application or renewa l of his license, grant any person acting under authority of the Township
the right to enter the premises for such inspection.


§ 120-14. Violations and penalties. J

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in  a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Crimin al Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and  shall  be punishable by  a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be senten ced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated  shall  also  constitute  a separate  offense.












































3.	Ed itor's N ote: Amended  at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provision s, Art. II).


120:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 126 LOITERING

§ 126-1. Loitering prohibited.                           § 126-2. Violations and penalties.

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 5-3-1979 as Cb. VI, Part 2, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Curfew -See Ch. 98.
Disorderl y conduct -See Ch. 102.
 
Peddling and soliciting -See Ch. 146.
 


§ 126-1. Loitering prohibited.

Loitering or congregating upon any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds of the Township in such a way as to annoy pea ceable residents or persons traveling nearby, or so as to disturb the public peace, is hereby prohibited .


§ 126-2. Violations and penalties.  [Amended 1-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11 J

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summary enforcement proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of C1iminal Procedure by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus a II court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incmTed by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the jud gment, the Township may enforce the jud gment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.

















I.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. ti).


126:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 134

NUISANCES

 
§ 134-1. Short title.
§ 134-2. Definitions.
§ 134-3. Activities or conditions constituting  nuisance.
 
§ 134-4. Unlawful to maintain nuisances.
§ 134-5. Notice of violations .
§ 134-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 134-7.  Actions in equity authorized.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 12-30-1980 by Ord. No. 80-15; amended in its entirety 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02. Subsequent amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Brush, grass and weeds -Sec Ch. 76. Outdoor burning -See Ch. 92.
 
Junkyards -Sec Ch. 120.
Solid waste and recycling -See Ch. 170.
 


§ 134-1. Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Nuisance Ordinance."


§ 134-2. Definitions .

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

ABANDONDED OR JUNKED VEHICLE - Any vehicle:

A.	Without a current, valid license plate; or
B.	With inspection stickers which are more than 60 days beyond their expiration date. GARBAGE - All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, pieces, parts, remains of meat,
fish and fowl, fruits, vegetab les and other parts thereof and all other articles or materials ordinarily used for food which ha ve become unfit for such use or which are, for any reason, discarded.

JUNK - Used material s, discarded materia ls, or both, including, but not limited to, waste, paper , rags , meta l, building materials, hou se furnishings, machinery , vehicles or parts thereof which are being stored or awaiting potential reuse or alternate disposal.

PERSON - An individual , firm, partnership or corporation, or any other legal entity.

PUBLIC  PLACE - Any  public  street, highway , road,  alley, park,  playground , public
building, or vacant lot.





134:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 134-2                                         NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 134-4

RUBBISH - Branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shaving s, wood, woodenware, leather, rags, grass, straw, manure and all other solid combustible materials not included in this section under the definition of garbage.

USED GREASE OR RECYCLABLE BIOFUELS - Any form of used grease, whether vegetable, synthetic or other composition, intended to be stored, processed, and later utilized as recyclable fuel/biofuel for combustion or operation of any motori zed equipment or vehicle.


§ 134-3. Activities or conditions constituting nuisance.

The following activities or conditions are hereby declared to be nuisances and are prohibited:

A.  Accumulations of garbage, junk , biofuel s and/or rubbish on private or public property.

B.	Unlicensed  storage of abandoned or junked  automobiles on private or public property.

C.	The operation of any offensive manufacture or business.

D.	Maintaining or permitting the existence of any vegetative matter on or near any public thoroughfar e which hinders or obscures the view of motorists of any road, thoroughfare, traffic device or sign.

E.	Any other activity or condition conducted or existing on public or private property which in law and in fact constitutes a public nuisance.

F.	The discharge of sump pump and/or foundation drain water onto lands other than that lot which is the source of said water. Exception: the  use  of  a  recorded  stormwater management drainage swale for the transport of sump pump and or foundation water is permitted.  However,  in no case will the outlet of the discharge pipe for the sump pump and  or the foundation drain 1ine be within 20 feet of any property  line, nor  will  the discharge water cause erosion.

G.	The discharge water from a swimmin g pool during the act  or process of  seasonal draining, maintenance or removal of a pool onto lands other than that lot which is the source of said water. Exception: the use of a recorded stormwater management drainage swale for the transpo1t of discharged pool water is permitted. However , in no case will the out let of the discharge pip e for the pool be within 20 feet of any property line, and in no case shall it cross any property line nor will the discharge water cause erosion.

H.	Residential and/or commercial construction activities between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m., prevai ling time.

I.   On any lot containing a residential use, the storage of biofuel outside a fully enclosed
structure or storage in a nonapproved grease recycling storage container.


§ 134-4. Unlawful to maintain nuisances.

A.   It is hereby declared to be unlawfu l for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having
a present  interest  in any land  in North  Middleton Township, or being present in North





134:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 134-4                                                    NUISANCES                                                     § 134-7

Middleton  Township,  to  engage  in  any activities constituting  a nuisance,  or permit  the
existence of any condition constituting a nuisance.

B.	Each five-day continuance of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.


§ 134-5. Notice of violations .

It shall be duty of the Township Manager or his agent or agents, upon complaint of citizens and property owners or otherwise, to investigate an alleged nuisance and, if a nuisance exists, to notify the person allegedly in violation of the following:

A.	The belief of the Township that a nuisance exists for which he is responsible;

B.	A description of the location and nature of the alleged nuisance;

C.	That the nuisance must be abated or removed by said person within five days of receipt
of notice;

D.	That failure to comply with the directions of the Township may result in the abatement or  removal of the nuisance by the Township or its authorized representative , and the cost of said  removal or abatement shall be assessed  against  the  violator,  together  with the additional amount of 10% of such cost, to be collected by summary proceeding s or in the manner   provided for the collection of  municipa l  claims  or by  an  action  of  assumpsit without  the filing of a complaint; provided, however, that the imposition of such cost and additional  amount may be in addition to any other penalty provided for in this chapter.


§ 134-6. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a  summary  offense and shall be puni shable  by  a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s costs of prosecution . In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each five-day cont inuance of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.


§ 134-7. Actions in equity authorized.

In the exercise of the powers herein conferred, the Board of Supervisors may institute proceedings in courts of equity.









I.  Editor 's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


134:3	01-01-2014
 
 
 
Chapter 137

OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS

 
§ 137-1. Short title.
§ 137-2. Permitted use.
 
§ 137-3. Existing outdoor wood-fired boilers.
§ 137-4. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted  by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 8-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GEN ERAL REFERENCES

 
Outdoor burning -Sec Ch. 92.
Uniform construction codes -See Ch. 95. Floodplain management -See Ch. 112.
 
Subdivision and land development -See Ch. I 80. Zoning -See Ch. 204.
 


§ 137-1. Short title.

This  chapter  shall be  known  and  may  be cited as the "North Middleton Township  Outdoor
Wood-Fired  Boilers Ordinance."


§ 137-2. Permitted use.

Outdoor  wood-fired  boilers are  permitted  m  North  Middleton Township  subject  to  the
following conditions and requirements:

A.	Only dry clean wood may be burned.

B.	Boilers are not permitted in any floodplain zone.

C.	Boilers may only be utilized on lots or parcels of land of 3.25 or more acres subject  to
the following conditions:

(I)	Boilers may only be utilized on lots or parcel s of land of 3.25 or more acres. For purposes of meeting this minimum lot area requirement, the owner of any lot having an area of less than 3.25 acres may utilize an easement area, granted by all legal owners of property abutting the property that is Jess than 3.25 acres, subject to the following conditions and requirements:

(a)	The easement area shall be specifically for purposes of allowing the use of an
outdoor wood-fired boiler;

(b)	The easement area shall be of a uniform equal distance from both side yard, rear   yard  and,  where   applicable,  front  yard  property  boundaries  of  the property  for which benefit the easement is granted;






137:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 137-2	


(c)	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 137-2

The area of the lot upon which the boiler is to be utilized, together with the
		area  of  the  easement  granted  by  the  adjoining  property  owner  or  owners,
		shall be no less than 3.25 acres;
	(d)	The easement  shall  be documented by an easement  instrument that shall be
		recorded  in  the  office  of  the  Recorder  of  Deeds for  Cumberland  County,
		which instrument shall describe and/or depict the dimension s of the easement
		area with specific reference to the boundaries  of the propert y benefitin g from
		the easement;
	(e)	The  easement  granted  shall  run  in  perpetuity  unless  it  is extinguished  by mutual recorded agreement  executed by the owners of the property receiving
		the benefit  of the easement  and the owners of the property  that had granted
the easement,  or their  respective successors  and/or  assigns in title, provided
		that the boiler  is first removed from the property and prior  notice thereof  is
		given to the Township;
	(f)	The easement  instrument  shall  be approved by the Township  Solicitor prior
		to recording, and, once recorded ,  evidence of recording shall be provided to
the Township;
	(g)	The boiler cannot  be constructed,  erected  or pla ced on the propert y prior  to
		the recording of the easement instrument; and
	(h)	The boiler must  be placed no less than 500 feet from the nearest residential
		structure not on the lot where the boiler is located.
(2) Upon approval and recording of the easement instrument, the boundari es of the easement area shall be con sidered  the lot lines of the lot on whkh  the boiler  is pla ced, only for the limited purposes of the setback requirements from  rear  and side lot lines as specified in Subsection D, however, no boiler may be constructed, erected or placed within any easement area granted.

D.	Boilers must be set ba ck at least 200 feet from the front lot line and 100 feet from the side and rear lot lines and 500 feet from the nearest residential structure not on the lot where the  boiler is located.

E.	Boilers mu st be equipped with a properly funct ioning spark arrestor.

F.	The boiler furnace may not be used as a waste incinerator.

G.	Lighter fluids, gasoline and chemicals to start the boiler are prohibited .

H.	Installation , use and operation must comply with all applicable county,  state  and/or federal Jaws, regulations and guidelines as well as applicable building and other codes of the Township.

I.	Use shall be limited to October 1 to May 1.

J.	Stack height shall be in accordance with the boiler manufacturer's  specifications.

K.	The use of the boiler shall not cause a nuisance to neighboring or other property.



137:2	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 137-3                               OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS                               § 137-4

§ 137-3.  Existing outdoor wood-fired  boilers.

Any wood-fired boiler existing as of the effective date of this chapter or for which any North Middleton Township zoning or building permit has been obtained prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to comply with § l 37-2B, C, or D above of this chapter.


§ 137-4. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magister ial District  Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Crimina l Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by  a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute  a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall  also  constitute  a separate offense.









































I.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch . I , General Provision s, Art. II).


137:3	01-01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 140

PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS

 
§ 140-1. Regulations for parks and
recreation facilities.
§ 140-2. Applicability; authority for additional regulations .
§ 140-3. Hours.
§ 140-4. Prohibited acts.
 
§ 140-5. Authority to establish events.
§ 140-6. Fishing.
§ 140-7. Authority to close area.
§ 140-8. Enforcement.
§ 140-9. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 11-17-1987 by Ord. No. 87-6. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL  REFERENCES

 
Recreation Advisory Board -See Ch .41.
Animal s -Sec Ch. 70.
Outdoor burning -See Ch. 92.
 
Disorderly conduct -See Ch. 102.
Solid waste and recycling -See Ch. 170.
Vehicles and traffic -See Ch. 196.
 


§ 140-1. Regulations for parks and recreation facilities.

The parks and recreation facilities owned or leased by the Township for recreational purposes, hereinafter referred to as "areas," shall be governed by the rules and regulations contained herein. The areas shall consist of the following locations, and any other such locations as the Board of Supervisors shall, from time to time, designate:

A	North Middleton  Park:  located  on  Waggoners Gap Road , Route 74,  at  brid ge and Conodoguinet Creek, consisting of approximately 13 acres.

B.	Village Park: located  off of Fern Avenue, Airport Drive and Sun Crest Drive, consisting of approx imately  13 acres.

C.	Creek View Park: located on Mountain View Road and Conodoguinet  Creek, consisting of approximately  10 acres.


§ 140-2. Applicability; authority for additional regulations.

Rules and regu lations are hereby promulgated to be effective immediately and to apply to the use of the areas. The Recreation  Board  is  authorized  to· prepare  additional  rules  and regu lat ions that shall not conflict with the rules and regulations set forth herein.


§ 140-3. Hours.

The areas are open to the public between 8:00 a.m. and sundown.





140:1	OJ  - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 140-4	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 140-4

§ 140-4. Prohibited acts.

The following acts and conduct are prohibited  in the areas:

A.	Possession or use of alcoholic beverages.

B.	Boi sterou s, immoral, indecent, or obscene conduct.

C.	Discarding of trash, ga rbage, or other litter, except into containers provided for that purpose.

D.	Damaging , defacing,  destroying,  or  removing  any  Township-owned  property,  sign, structure, equipment , or other material; driving nails or other hardware into trees.

E.	Posting of  signs;  distributing, selling, servicing  or renting of any  supplies,  equipment, materia l, or commodity whatsoever , or soliciting for any purpose, without written authorization from the Township  Supervisors.

F.	Operating, stopping , or parking of any vehicle or bicycle, except on designated roads, trails, or areas.

G.	Operating any vehicle or bicycl e in a reek.less or negligent manner, in excess of the posted speed limit of 10 miles per hour, or in such a manner as to become a nuisance to other users.

H.	All recreational vehic les, inclu ding, but not necessarily being limited to, the following: motorcycles, motorbikes, a ll-terrain vehicles, motor-driven cycles, motor  scooters, motorized pedacycles, three-wheelers, snowmobiles, and any other like or similar form of motorized propulsion, as well as any motor vehicle, whether or not  same is required to be licensed by the Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania.

I.	Commercial vehicu lar traffic, unless providing authorized service.

J.	Possess ion, except in transit on self or in vehicle or bicycle operated or owned by person, or discharge of any type of firearms, bows and arrows, air guns, slingshots, or fireworks, or lethal or dangerou s weapons.

K.	Hunting and trapping; and training of dogs.

L.	Camping, picnicking, swimming , boat launching or mooring, and use of all fires, except in designated areas and facilities. No fires will be left untended nor charcoal deposited or discarded.

M.	Any form of recreation or activity, except m designated areas established by the Recreation Board.

N.	All animals and/or pets of whatever nature or type. The walking of dogs on a lea sh or similar restraints shall be allowed at the Village Park  and Creek View Park recreation areas. The walking of dogs shall be prohibited at  North  Middleton  Park.  All  other anima ls and/or pets of whatever nature or type shall be prohibited at all other public recreation areas in North Middleton Township . [Amended 11-2-2006 by Ord.  No. 2006-9)



140:2	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 140-4                               PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS                               § 140-9

0.	Meetings, conferences, rallies or assemblages for any lawful purpose of over five persons unless approval is obtained from the Board of Supervisors upon application, in writing, at least seven days in advance, stating the name of the organization, purpose, number of persons, expected duration, and the names of persons in charge.

P.		Swimming, except where authorized by the Pennsylvania Department of Health or any other appropriate state agency.


§ 140-5. Authority to establish events.

The Recreation Board shall have authority to establish priority and to schedu le all events in
designated areas.


§ 140-6. Fishing.

All laws, rules and regulations pertaining to fishing in the Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania shall app ly to fishing in recreation areas and the provisions thereof are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto.


§ 140-7. Authority to close area.

Area   facilities  which  become  hazardous   for  public  use  due  to  weather,  water,   fire,  or
unforeseeable conditions may be closed at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors only.


§ 140-8. Enforcement.

Township police officer s are charged  with  enforcement  of the provisions of this chapter  and of rules and regulations promulgated by the Recreation Board.


§ 140-9. Violations and penalties.  [Amended 1-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1 1 ]

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a summary enforcement proceeding commenced under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure by the Township before a Magisterial District  Judge, pay  a fine of  not more than $ 1,000, plu s all court costs, including rea sonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter, or up to 90 days' imprisonment in default of paym ent of said fine. No judgm ent shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magi sterial District Judge.  If the defendant neither pa ys nor  timely appea ls the judgment , the Township may enforce the judgm ent pursuant to  the applicable Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day a  violation exists shall  constitute  a  separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of  the Township are hereby authorized  to  seek equitable relief,  including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.





I.    Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions , AJ·t. ll).


140:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 146

PEDDLING AND SOLICITING

§ 146-1.
§ 146-2.
§ 146-3.	Short title.
Definitions and interpretation.
License required; conditions of	§ 146-6.


§ 146-7.	Investigations and granting of
authorization.
Prohibited acts.
	issuance; fee.	§ 146-8.	Denial or revocation of
§ 146-4.	Representation by promoter ;
fee.	authoriza tion.
§ 146-9.  Appeal from denial or
§ 146-5.	Application for authorization required .	revocation  of  authorization.
§ 146-10. Violations and penalties .

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 3-4-1982 by Ord. No. 82-3; amended in its entirety 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFER ENCES

 
D isorderl y conduct -See Ch. 102.
Lo itering -See Ch. 126.
 
Zoning -See Ch. 204.
 


§ 146-1. Short title.

Thi s chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddlers, Canvassers and Transient
Retail Business Ordinance."


§ 146-2. Definitions and interpretation.

As used in this cha pt er, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural ; the plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.

AUTHORIZATION - Licen se shall be a tangible document to be carried or possessed by the licensee at all times when conducting any transient retail business within North Middleton Township.

LEGAL HOLIDAY - New Yea r's Day, Memorial Day, Easter, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

PERSON - Includes any natural person, partner ship, association, firm, corporation or other
lega l entity.

PROMOTER - Any person who organizes the gathering of five or more persons engaged in
transient reta il bu siness.




146:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 146-2	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 146-3

TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS - Includes the following:

A.	Engaging in peddlin g, canvassing, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandi se, upon any street or alley, sidewalk or public ground , or from house to house, within the Township of North Middleton; and

B.	Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise from a fixed location within the Township, on a tempor ary basis, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebration s, for sea sonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific yearly holidays or legal holidays.

C.	Tra nsient retail business shall not apply to:

(1)	Farmers selling their own produce.

(2)	For the sa le of goods, wares and merchandise , donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.

(3)	Children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and deliver newspaper s, greeting cards, candy, bakery product s and the like for any  school-approved activity or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations or nonprofit  groups.

(4)	A person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P .S. § 162.1 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented , modified or reenacted by the General Assemb ly of Pennsylvania.

(5)	Transient retail bu siness shall not include sidewalk sales when held by authority of
the ordinance governing the same.




§ 146-3. License required; conditions of issuance; fee.

A.	No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Township of North Middleton without first having obtained from the Police Chief or his  delegate authorization to do so, for which the following fees, which shall be for the use of the Township, shall be charged, to be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each category below:

(1)	One week.

(2)	One month.

(3)	One year.

B.	No fee sha 11 be charged under this section for any exception to a transient bu siness as set forth in § 146-2, Subsection C, of the definition of "transient retail bu siness."

C.	Any person dealing in both exempt categories  and nonexempt categories of goods shall be subject  to the payment of the author izat ion fee fixed by this section for his activities




146:2	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 146-3                                    PEDDLING AND SOLICITING                                    § 146-5

in connection  with peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking orders for goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempted categories.

D.	The Board of Supervisors, or their designated agent or representative, may similarly exempt from pa yment of the authorization fee, but not from registering, per sons working without compen sation and selling or taking orders for goods, wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation.

E.	Every authorization granted under the provi sions of this chapter shall be granted on an individual basis to persons engaging in such business; every person shall obtain an authorization, granted in that person's name, and the authorization fee hereby  imposed shall be applicabl e to every such authorization.


§ 146-4. Representation by promoter; fee.

A.	In lieu of the requirement s imposed by § 146-3 of this chapter, a promoter representing five or more person s engaged in tran sient retail business may, on behalf of such persons , obtain the authorization provided for in § 146-3 of this chapter, in which case such authorization shall be granted to such promoter in his name, for which the following fees, as may be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from ti.me to time, and which shall be for the use of the Township, shall be charged, for each category below:

(1)	For one day for every person represented by such promoter, up to and including 100 persons.

(2)	For  one  day  for  every  person  represented  by  such  promoter  in  excess of  100 persons.

B.	The fee exemptions set forth in § 146-3 of this chapter shall apply in instances where a group of person s engaged in transient retail bu siness falling into one or more of the exempted categories are represented by a promoter subject to the same limitation as set forth  in § 146-3C.


§ 146-5. Application for authorization required. 1

Every person desiring to engage in a tran sient retail business within the Township shall first make application to the Police Chief or his delegate for authorization on a form to  be furnished by the Township. The application, when completed, shall be verified by an oath or affirmation. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more other per sons, an application form shall be completed for each person , even in the case of a promoter. The required fee of $ 10  per person for the PSP patch background check shall accompany the application. A receipt shall be issued in return for each fee. Such receipt is not and shall not ever  constitute a permit.







I.  Editor's Note: Am ended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch . I, General Provi sions, Art. 11).


146:3	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 146-6	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 146-8

§ 146-6. Investigations and granting of authorization.

A.	Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of Police or his delegate shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business or organization and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare. Such investigation may include, but shall not be limited to, a criminal background check and  verification of employment.

B.	If, as a result of such  investigation , the applicant's  business  or  organization  or moral character is found to be unsatisfactory to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and  welfare,  the Chief of Police or  his delegate shall  endorse on such  application  his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return said application to the applicant.

C.	All applicants for selling hot, cooked or prepared food for public  consumption  shall obtain and present for review adequate licensing from the Pennsylvania Department of Health for operation of such food vending, preparation and sale.

D.	If, as a result of such investigation, the business or organization and moral character of the  applicant  are  found  to  be  satisfactory,  the  Chief  of  Police  or  his  delegate  shall endorse  on the application his approval and record the name of the applicant, date, duration of  authorization, and other data of public interest which he deems relevant in a book  of   "Peddling Authorizations Granted," which shall  be  available  for  publ ic inspection  at  reasonable times. The Chief or his delegate shall keep a pennanent record of all applications  made, authorizations granted, and authorizations refused. No evidence of authorization shall, however, be issued in tangible form to the person authorized.

E.	Proof of authorization and permission to occupy any specific location signed by owner must be presented.


§ 146-7. Prohibited acts.

No person engaging in any transient retail business, when working from house to house, shall engage in such business at any time on Sundays or official holidays , or upon any other day of the week prior to 10:00 a.m., prevailing  time, and shall cease at sunset or 7:00  p.m., prevailing time, whichever shall first occur, except that this prohibit ion shall not apply to any person who shall have made an advance appointment with a prospective customer  for  a specific day and hour or who shall apply for and be approved to operate at other  specific times, which approval sha ll be noted on the issued permit to be authorized.


§ 146-8. Denial or revocation of authorization.

Authorization may be denied, or authorizat ions granted under the terms of this chapter may be revoked , by the Chief of Police or his delegate for any of the following causes:

A.	Fraud , misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for authorization;

B.	Fraud,  misrepresentation  or  false  statement  made  in  the course of the business of  the person authorized or seeking authorization;



146:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 146-8                                    PEDDLING AND SOLICITING                                  § 146-10

C.	Any violation of this chapter;

D.	Convict ion of a crime involving moral turpitude; or

E.	Conduct of a person authorized, or seeking authorization, in an unlawful  manner  or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

F.	Failure to comply with all federal, state and local ordinances,  including, but not limited to, Township zoning, signs, setback requirements,  proper  ingress/egress,  clear  site triangles and sufficient parking .


§ 146-9. Appeal from denial or revocation of authorization.

Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his delegate in denying authorization, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of authorization, shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board, within five days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person 's last address or otherwise placed in his possession, a written statement setting fotth the grounds for the appeal. The Board of Supervisors shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, which hearing shall be held not later than 30 days after the date of such filing. The Board of Supervisors may take whatever action with respect to the matter that it deems appropr iate and shall have 30 days from the last hearing on the appeal to provide a w ritten decision.


§ 146-10. Violations and penalties. 2

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Penn sylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In defau lt of payment thereof , the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continu e shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
















2.	Editor's Note : Amen ded at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art.II).


146:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 152

REAL ESTATE SALES

 
ARTICLE I
Notification of Streetlighting Assessment

§ 152-1. Purpose.
 
§ 152-2. Notice of streetlighting assessment to purchasers of real estate.
§ 152-3. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
as indicated  in article histories. Amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Rental propert y registry -See Ch. 156.


ARTICLE I
Notification of Streetlighting Assessment
[Adopted 5-3-1979 as Cb. XIII, Part 3, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances]

§ 152-1. Purpose.

The purpose of this article is to provide for the proper management, care and control of the Township and its finances and the maintenance of good government and welfare of the Township, including the prompt collection of streetlighting assessments.


§ 152-2. Notice of streetlighting assessment to purchasers of real estate.

The sellers of real estate, including but not limited to individuals, pa1tnerships , corporations, as well as agents of individuals, partnerships and corporat ions, where said agents derive a commi ssion from any resulting sale, shall notify the purcha sers of said real estate of existing or pending street lighting assessments. Said notification shall be in writing and shall apply to improved and unimproved real estate. A copy of said notification shall also be sent to the Tax Collector in whose district the streetlights are located.


§ 152-3. Violations and penalties. 1

Any per son who violates or permit s a violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plu s all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial  District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appea ls the judgment, the Township may enforce  the  judgm ent  pursuant  to  the  applicable  Rules  of  Civil  Procedure.   Each  day  a


I.	Editor 's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


152:1	01 • 01 • 2014
 
§ 152-3                                         NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § ]52-3

violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction , to enforce complian ce herewith.




























































152:2	Ol   -01-2014
 
Chapter 156

RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRY

 
§ 156-1. Short title.
§ 156-2. Definitions.
§ 156-3. Registry of all rental properties .
 
§ 156-4. Change of occupancy or vacancy to be reported.
§ 156-5. Status of occupancy reports.
§ 156-6. Violations and penalties.
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
8-6-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1. Amendments  noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

Real estate sales -See Ch. I 52.


§ 156-1. Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Rental Registry  Ordinance."


§ 156-2. Definitions.

The following words  and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different or contrary meaning:

LESSEE - Any person or persons, including their agents, who have the use of real estat e of a lessor, wherever situate and wherever located in North Midd leton Township, and are responsible for giving any type of consideration, monetary or otherwise, therefor, excluding, however, those who are lessees for a period of less than 20 days.

LESSOR - Any person or persons , including their agents, who  grant  a  lease,  leasehold interest or otherwise perm it, either by virtue of a written  document  or  orally,  the  use  of  rea l estate or portions  of real  estate owned  by  them  for  consideration,  monetary  or otherwise.

PERSON - Any natural person or persons, partnership , associa tion, corpora tion, firm,
fictitiou s name or any other individual or bu siness entity or their agents.


§ 156-3. Registry of all rental properties.

All lessors, within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter , or in the case of real estate hereafter acquired or hereafter rented or becoming available for renta l or the actual rental or availability for rental thereof, as the case may be, shall report to the Secretary of North Middleton Township, in wr iting, the number of parcels or units of said rea l estate present ly or hereafter rented and/or available for renta l, including a description by address, number, tax identification parcel number of said parcels or units, along with the names and full addresses



156:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 156-3                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 156-6

of the applicable lessees at the time of such report, together and along with a designation as to which unit or parcel is occupied by each lessee.


§ 156-4. Change of occupancy or vacancy to be reported.

Any change in the occupancy of real estate rented or leased in North Middleton Township or in the identity of the lessee from that shown in the report of the lessor required herein shall be reported by the lessor to the Secretary of North Middleton Township within 15 days after such change. It is specifically intended hereby that all lessors shall report all new lessees or lessees who rent or lea se a different unit or parcel of a lessor's real estate, as well as when a unit or parcel of  said real  estate becomes vacant by virtue of the lessee voluntarily or involuntarily leaving.


§ 156-5. Status of occupancy reports.

The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township or its duly designated employee or agent shall prepare a form report entitled "status of occupancy report," which report will require and set forth the information required herein, as well as other information deemed pertinent ; and the Board of Supervisors of North Middl eton Township may, by resolution, direct the incorporated into said report. The status of occupancy report forms are to be enacted and may be changed from time to time by resolution. The failure to have such report forms available, how ever, shall not excuse the obligation of the lessors to provide the information required herein.


§ 156-6. Violations and penalties. 1

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plu s all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgme nt shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the jud gment, the Township may enforce the jud gment pur suant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce comp liance herewith.













I.   Ed itor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. l , General Provisions, Art. II).


156:2	01-01- 2014
 
Chapter 164 SEWERS AND WATER
 

ARTICLE I
Public Sewer Connections

§ 164-1.	Definitions and
interpretations.
§ 164-2.	Use of public sewers required.
§ 164-3.	Building sewers and
connections.
§ 164-4.	Rules and regulations
governing building sewers and connections to sewers.
§ 164-5.		Obstructions of easements and rights-of-way prohibited.
§ 164-6.	Violations and penalties.


ARTICLE II
Public Sewer System Rates and Usage

§ 164-7.	Definitions.
§ 164-8.	Sewer rentals and charges.
§ 164-9.	Time and method of payment .
§ 164-10.   Liens for sewer rentals; filling and collection of liens.
§ 164-11. Prohibited wastes.
§ 164-12. Access .
§ 164-13.   Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
§ 164-14.  Violations and penalties .


ARTICLE III
Public Wastewater Pretreatment

§ 164-15.  Enactment of program.
§ 164-16. Regulations governing
admission of industrial wastes into the sewer system.
§ 164-17.  Violations and penalties.
 

§ 164-18.   Authority of Director and
Borough of Carlisle.


ARTICLE IV
Public Water Connections

§ 164-19.  Definitions.
§ 164-20.		Use of public water system required.
§ 164-21.	Building mains and
connections.
§ 164-22.	Rules and regulations
governing building mains and connections to mains.
§ 164-23.	Violations and penalties.
§ 164-24.  Appeals; hardship.
§ 164-25.	Declaration of purpose.


ARTICL E V
Public Water Rates and Charges

§ 164-26.	Definitions.
§ 164-27. Payment procedure.
§ 164-28.  Meter installation required.
§ 164-29.	Water rates, rent and charges.
§ 164-30.	Additional rules and
regulations; violations and penalties.


ARTICL E VI
Water Meter Regulations

§ 164-31.	Definitions.
§ 164-32.  Installation of meters and
backflow preventors required.
§ 164-33.   Location of meter.
§ 164-34.	Access to meter.
 




164:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH  MIDDLETON CODE

§ 164-35.
§ 164-36.	Seals.
Reading and registration of	§ 164-63.	Covering of work only after inspection.
	meters.	§ 164-64.	Fees.
§ 164-37.	Minimum charge.	§ 164-65.	Revocation .
§ 164-38.	Size of meter.	§ 164-66.	Other remedies.
§ 164-39.	Violations and penalties.	§ 164-67.	Violations and penalties.
§ 164-40.	Additional rules and
regulations authorized .	ARTICLE vm
On-Lot Small Flow Sewage Treatment
ARTICLE VII	Facilities
On-Lot Sewage System Permits
§ 164-68.  Title.
§ 164-41.	Definitions.	§ 164-69. Purposes and background.
§ 164-42.   Title.	§ 164-70. Definitio os.
§ 164-43.		Legal authority for	§ 164-71.	Smallflow  sewage treatment regulations.		facilities permitted.
§ 164-44.   Installation of system requires	§ 164-72.	Supervision of installation and permit		construction.
§ 164-45.		Compliance with regulations	§ 164-73.	 Small flow sewage treatment and laws.		facility defined and limited.
§ 164-46.	System must comply with	§ 164-74.  Maintenance.
official plan.	§ 164-75.   Indemnification by owner.
§ 164-47.   Issuance of permit.	§ 164-76.	Maintenance security deposit.
§ 164-48.		Permits filed with	§ 164-77.	 Violations constitute a Department.		nuisance.
§ 164-49.	Sewage Enforcement Officer.	§ 164-78.  Abuse and revocation of
§ 164-50.   Administration.	privilege.
§ 164-51.	Application for permit.	§ 164-79.  Access to residential premises.
§ 164-52.   Application form.	§ 164-80.	Application and permit
§ 164-53.  Filing of application.	required.
§ 164-54.  Processing of application.	§ 164-81.	Civil enforcement and
inspection.
 
§ 164-55. Independent tests.
§ 164-56.  Judgment of application.
 

§ 164-82. Violations and penalties .
 
§ 164-57.   Expiration of permit.	ARTICLE IX
§ 164-58.  Authorized test procedures .	On-Lot Retaining Tanks
§ 164-59.  Notification of completion.
§ 164-60.   Inspection.	§ 164-83.  Title.
§ 164-61.  Alternate system.	§ 164-84.	Definitions.
§ 164-62.  Board to cause inspections.



164:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

 
§ 164-85.	Retaining tanks permitted .
§ 164-86.		Supervision of installation, construction  and maintenance.
§ 164-87.	Speci.fications of retaining
tanks.
§ 164-88.   Maintenance.
§ 164-89.	lndemnifieation by owner.
§ 164-90.	Maintenance security deposit.
§ 164-91.	Violations constitute nuisance.
§ 164-92.		Owner responsible for collector.
§ 164-93.	Abuse and revocation of
privilege
§ 164-94.  Access to residential premises.
§ 164-95.   Application and permit
required.
§ 164-96.	Enforcement.
§ 164-97.	Violations and penalties.


ARTICLEX
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Systems

§ 164-98.  Title.
§ 164-99.   Statutory authority; findings.
§ 164-100. Intent.
§ 164-101. Word usage.
§ 164-102. Definitions.
§ 164-103. Additional definitions.
§ 164-104. Applicability; permit required .
§ 164-105. Testing requirements.
§ 164-106.  Replacement location
required.
 
§ 164-107. Private sewage treatment
facilities and alternative
systems.
§ 164-108. Operation, maintenance,
inspection, repair and
replacement.
§ 164-109. Proof of compliance.
§ 164-110. Availability of regulations; water conservation ; discharges.
§ 164-111. Right of entry.
§ 164-112. Enforcement; administration fees.
§ 164-113. Disposal of seepage by
pumpers/haulers.
§ 164-114.  Violations.
§ 164-115. Violations and penalties.
§ 164-116.  Remedies.
§ 164-117. Effect on other regulations.

Appendix  A Pretreatment
Program

Industrial Waste Questionnaire

Wastewater Survey for
Nonresidential Establishments

Permit Application for Wastewater Discharge to the North Middleton Authority

Sampling R ord

Industrial User Analysis Results

Annual Inspection Report for
Nonresidential Establishments
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 8-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]









164:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164- 1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-1

GENERAL REFERENCES
 

Municipal authorities -See Ch. 7. Building construction -See Ch.80. Uniform construction codes -See Cb. 95.
 

Floodplain management -See Cb.112. Subdivision and land development -Sec Ch .180. Zoning -See Ch. 204.


ARTICLE  I
Public  Sewer Connections
 

§ 164-1. Definitions and interpretations.

Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the mea ning of terms used in
this article shall be as follows:

AUTHORITY - The North Middleton Authority , a Pennsylvania municipality authority.

B.U	DING SEWER - The extension from the sewage drainage system of any structure to
the lateral of a sewer.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property located within this Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation , occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or indust rial wastes shall be or may be discharged.

INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT - Any improved property located in this Township used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product , commodity or article, or any other improved property located in this Township from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary sewage, are discharged.

INDUSTRIAL WASTES - Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial establishment ,
other than sanit ary sewage.

LATERAL - That part  of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curbline or, if  no such latera l shall  be provided,  then  "lateral" shall  mean that  portion  of, or place in, a sewer which is provided  for connection  of any building sewer, and to be maintained  by the property · owner  there served.

OWNER - Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.

PERSON - Any individual, partnership , company , association, society, corpora tion or other group or entity.

SANITARY SEWAGE - Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property .

SEWER - Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used or usable for sewa ge collection purposes.

SEWER SYSTEM - All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, pumping , treating or disposing of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes, to be owned by the Authority and to be leased to this Township, for operation and use.



164:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-1                                              SEWERS AND WATER                                              § 164-2

TOWNSHIP    The  Township   of  North  Middleton,  Cumberland  County, Pennsylvania , acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, by and through its authorized  representatives.

WORKING HOURS - Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., except Authority
holidays or as determined by Authority Board.


§ 164-2. Use of public  sewers required.

A.	Responsibility for connection ; time limit. The owner of any improved propert y accessible to  and  whose  principa l  buildin g  is  within  150  feet  of  the  sewer  system  and  whose boundary line abuts the sewer system shall connect such improved property therewith, in such  manner as this Township may require, within 90 days after notice to such owner from this Township to make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and  industrial  wastes  from  such  improved  property,  subject  to  such  limitations and  restrictions  as shall be established  herein otherwise by this Township, from time to time.

B.	Connection to  sewer . All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property, after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be required under § 164-2A, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise by this Township, from time to time.

C.	Prohibited  means of disposal and discharge of sewage.

(1)	No person shall place or deposit or permit to be pla ced or deposited upon public or private property within this Township any sanit ary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of§ 164-2A.

(2)	No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within this Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of § 164-2, except where suitable treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this Township.

D.	Prohibited  connect ions; abandonment  of sewage receptacles.

(1)	No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved propetty which has been connected. to a sewer or which shall be required under§  164-2A to be connected to a sewer.

(2)	Every such privy va ult , cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Township, shall be cleansed and fil led und er the direction and supervision of this Township; and any such privy va ult, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandon ed and, if required by this Township, cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such improved property.

E.	Connection of sewage recept acles to sewer prohibited. No privy vault , cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or similar recepta cle at any time shall be connected with a sewer.


164:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-2	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-3

F.	Notification of connection and service. The notice by this Township  to  make  a connection to a sewer, referred to in §  164-2A, shall consist of a written or printed document requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions of§ l 64-2A. Such notice may be given at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other method as at the time may be provided by law.


§ 164-3. Building sewers and connections.

A.	Permit required to connect. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or the sewer system without first making application for and securing a permit , in writing, from this Township.

B.	Application for permit. Application for a permit required under § l 64-3A shall be made by  the owner of the improved property to be served or his duly authorized agent.

C.	Prerequisites to connections. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved property with a sewer until such per son shall have fulfilled each of the following conditions:

(1)	Such person shall have notified the Township/Authority of the desire and intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.

(2)	Such person sha ll have applied for and obtained a permit as required by§ 164-3A.

(3)	Such person shall have given the Township /Authority at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection wi ll be made; so that this Township may supervise and inspect the work of connection and necessary testing. Both notice and connection shall occur during working hours.

(4)	Such person shall have  furnished satisfactory evidence to the Township/Authority that any tapping fee charged and imposed by the Authority  against the owner of such improved property who connects such improved property to a sewer has been paid.

D.	One property per connection; exception. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall be connected separately with a sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under specia l circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, and then only after special permission of this Township, in writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations and condition s as may be prescribed by this Township.

E.	Cost responsibility. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs  and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne by the owner of  the improved property to be connected; and such owner shall indemnify and save harm less  this Township and the Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned , directly  or indirectly , as a result of construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building  sewer to a sewer.


164:6	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 164-3	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-4

F.	Connection point ; invert.

(1)	A building  sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated  by this
Township or the Authority and where the lateral is provided.

(2)	The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or a higher  elevat ion  than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and  the  connect ion  of  a  building  sewer  to  the  lateral  shall  be  made secure and watertight.

G.	Township may make connection. If the owner of any improved property is within 150 feet of the sewer system and whose boundary line abuts the sewer system, after 90 days' notice from this Township, in accordance with § 164-2A, shall fail to connect such improved propert y, as required, this Township may make such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In such case, this Township shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the owner of the improved property to which connection ha s been so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusa l by the owner of such improved property to pay said bill, this Township shall file a municipal lien for said construction within six months of the date of the completion of the construction of said connection , the same to be subject in all respects to the genera l law providing for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.


§ 164-4. Rules and regulations governing building sewers and connections to sewers.

A.	House sewer attachment to sewer. Where an improved property , at the time connection to a  sewer  is required,  shall be  served  by  its own  sewage disposal  system  or  device, the existing house  sewer  line shall be removed  and  replaced  on  the structure side of  such sewage disposal system  or device and attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to continu e such hou se sewer line as a building sewer.

B.	Inspection. No buildin g sewer shall be covered until it has been .inspected and approved by  this Township. If any part of a building sewer is covered before so being inspected and  approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.

C.	Maintenance. Every building sewer and lateral of any improved property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved property.

D.	Excava tions.  Every excavation for a building sewer shall be gua rded adequately with barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage  and  injury.  Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property being connected , in a manner satisfactory to this Township.

E.	Unsa tisfactory conditions; notice to remedy. If the owner of any improved property located in the Township shall fall or refu se, upon receipt of a notice of this Township, in wr iting, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a building sewer and



164:7	01-01 -2014
 
§ 164-4	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-4

lateral, within 30 days of receipt of such notice, this  Township,  in  addition  to  other remedies set forth in this section, may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial waste  into  the  sewer  system  until  such  unsatisfactory  conditions shall have been remedied to the  satisfaction  of  this  Township.  In situations  where  the owner of an improved property has failed to remedy an unsatisfactory condition  after receiving 30 days' notice as  provided herein, the Township  or  its agents  may  enter  upon such property and modify the building sewer  and  lateral  in  order  to  remed y  the unsatisfactor y condition. In such  cases,  the Township  shall  forthwith,  upon  completion  of the work,  send  an  itemized  bill  of  the  costs  of the work performed  on such  modification to the  owner  of  the  improved  propert y  to which  repair  to  the  building  sewer  and  lateral ha s been made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusa l  of the owner of such  improved  property  to  pay  said  bill, this  Town ship  shall  file a  municipal lien for  said  construction  within  six months  of the date of completion  of the constrnction of said modification ,  the  same  to  be  subject in all  respects  to  the general  law  providing for the filing and recovery of  municipal  liens.  Furthermore,  in  such  cases  where  the owner of the improved  property  has  failed  to remedy  the unsatisfactory condition  within said 30 days' notice, such failure shall be deemed to  be  a  violation  of  this  article  and subject the  owner  of  the  improved  property  to  the  enforcement  provisions  set  forth below.

F.	Additional rules and regulation s. This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time,  additional  rules and  regulations as it shall  deem necessary and  proper  relating  to connections with a sewer  and  the sewer  system, which additional  rules and regu lations, to the extent appropri ate, shall be construed pursuant to § l 64-4A.

G.	Objectives of connections:

(1)	Maintenance of an efficient sewer system by ensuring proper connection to and use of the sewer system to eliminate or reduce discharge of surface water or of any substance  other  than  sanitary  sewage  and  industrial  wastes  as  authorized  in
§ l64-2C and E.

(2)	Prevention of conditions in sewer system which are hazardou s to the public health,
welfare and safety.

(3)	Conduct of routine periodic inspections of buildings and premi ses  connected  to sewer system to ensure compliance with ordinances, resolutions and regulations , which  inspections are deemed essential to accomplish objectives set forth herein.

H.	Inspection s. Periodic inspections at least once per yea r are deemed reasonable for the accomplishment of the above objectives. More frequent inspections may be held when condition s exist which are a reasonable indication that violations of the sewer ordinances, resolutions and regulations exist.

I.	Authority of inspectors. Author ized offic ials, agents and employees of the Township, including members, agents and employees of the North Middleton Authority under operating agreement with the Township, shall have authority to conduct inspection s, including routine periodic inspection s, of premises by consent of owners, or in the absence thereof, by obtaining a search warrant; and said officials, agents and employees, upon information of conditions within sewer system from which an inference can be


164:8	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 164-4	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-7

drawn that violations of sewer ordinances, resolutions and regulations  have  been committed or can reasonably be construed to have been committed, shalJ have the authority to inspect premises by consent of owners or, in the absence thereof,  by obtaining a search warrant.


§ 164-5. Obstructions of easements and rights-of-way prohibited.

A.	Water lines/sewer lines and storm sewer lines.

(1)	The erection, construction, placement, locating or planting of any improvement, fixture, fence, landscaping, vegetation , trees, shrubbery, or other object , whether permanent or temporary, along any public water or sewer easement , or North Middleton Township or North Middleton Authority right-of-way shall be prohibited.

(2)	Any violation of this section shall entitle the Township, at its discretion, to remove such improvement , fixture, fence, landscaping,  vegetation,  trees,  shrubbery,  or other object at the property owner's expense. The Township or the Authority shall not be responsible for replacement thereof.


§ 164-6. Violations and penalties.

A.	Any violation of this article shall entitle the Township, at its discretion, to remove such improvement , fixture, fence, landscaping, vegetation, trees, shrubbery, or other object at the property owner's expense. The Township or the Authority shall not be responsible for replacement  thereof.

B.	Any person who shall violate this article shall be liable, upon summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000, together with cost of prosecution in each case, and, in default of payment, up to 90 days' imprisonment. Each day a violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.•

C.	Recovery of fines and costs. Fines and costs imposed under this Article I, Public Sewer Connections , shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable  law.


ARTICLE II
Public Sewer System Rates and Usage

§ 164-7. Definitions.

Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this article shall be as follows:

AUTHORITY - The North Middleton Authorit y, a Pennsylvania municipality authority.



I.  Editor's Note: Amended at time of adopt ion of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


164:9	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-7                                         NORTH MIDDLETON COD E                                         § 164-7

BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) - The quantity of oxygen expressed in parts per million (ppm) , utilized in the biochemica l oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, pub lished by the American Public Health Association.

DWELLING UNIT - Any room, group of rooms, house trailer or other enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as sepa rate living quarters by a family or other group of persons living together or by persons living a lone.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuou s or periodic habitation, occupancy or u se by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrials wastes shall be or ma y be discharged.

INDUSTRIAL WASTES - Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial , manufacturing , trade or business process or in the course of one development , recovery or processing of natura l resources, as disti11ct from sanitary sewage.

NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT - Any structure connected to the sewer system not covered by the definition of "dwelling unit" above.

OWNER - Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.

PERSON - Any individual , partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other
group or entity.

pH - The logarithm of the reciproca l of the concentrat ion of hydrogen ions, expressed in
grams or per liter of solution, indicating the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substa nce. PPM - Parts per million by weight.
 
SANITARY   SEWAGE
improved property.
 
Norma l  water-carried  household  and  toilet  wastes  from  any
 

SEWER - Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used or usable for
sewage collection purposes.

SEWER SYSTEM - All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanit ary sewage and/or industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township to be acquir ed and owned by the Authority and to be leased to this Township for maintenance and operations under a proposed agreement of lease, to be dated as of July 1, 1980, by and between the Authority and this Township and any supplements and amendment s thereto; and further including all other facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and/or industria l wastes situate within or adjacent to this Township.

SUSPENDED SOLIDS - Suspended solids as determined pursuant to the procedure set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, publi shed by the American Public Health Association.



164:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-7                                          SEWERS AND WATER                                           § 164-9

TOWNSHIP	The Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized  representatives.


§ 164-8. Sewer rentals and charges.

Sewer rentals or charges are imposed upon and shall be collected from the owner of each improved property which shall be connected to the sewer system, for use of the sewer system, whether such use shall be direct or indirect , which sewer rentals or charges shall commence and shall be effective as of the date of connection of such improved property to the sewer system and shall be payable as provided herein, in accordance with the applicable fee schedu le as adopted from time to time by resolution of the North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors.

A.	If a classification or fee is not shown on the current applicable fee schedule, the Board of Supervisors shall have the ability to create a new classification and set the fee therefor by subsequent resolution.

B.	Nothing herein contained  shall be deemed to prohibit  this Township from entering into separate agreements with owners (including any school) with respect to sewer renta ls or charges to be imposed in those cases where, due to seasonal fluctuations or other unusua l circumstances, the sewer rentals or charges set  forth  herein  shall  be  deemed  by  this Township to be unfair or inequitable.


§ 164-9.  Time and method of payment.

A.	All bills for sewer renta ls or charges sha ll be rendered on a bimonthly billing cycle, on the  first days of January,  March, May , July, September  and November,  respectfully , in each  yea r or on such  other dates as this Township by resolution shall specify and shall cover a  bimonthly  billing period consisting of the immediate past two calendar months.

B.	Owners of  improved  propert ies  connected  to  the sewer  system  during  any  bimonthl y biUing cycle shall pay a prorated sewer rental or charge  for service for portion of the bimonthly billing cycle the improved propert y was connected .

C.	Sewer rentals or charges shall be payable upon the applicable billing dates as provided for in Subsection A of this § 164-9 in the appropriate amount computed in accordance with this article, and sa id charges shall constitute the net bill. If sewer rentals or charges are not paid within 30 days after each billing date, an addit ional sum of 5% shall be added as a penalt y. Payments received after 60 days of the bi lling date shall be subject to an additional penalty of 5% and shall bear interest at the rate of 112% per month or fraction thereof until paid. Sewer bills shall be considered due as of the date of mailing to the customer. Payment received in the office of Nort h Middleton Authority on or before the last day of such thirty-day calendar period shall constitute payment within such period. If the 30th calendar day shall fa ll on an Authority holiday or Saturday or Sunday, payment received on the next succeeding workday which is not an Authority holiday shall constitute payment w ithin such period. Any bill not paid within said thirty-day calendar period shall be deemed delinquent.




164:11	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
§ 164-9                                         NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-11

D.	Every owner  of  an  improved  property  which  is  connected  to  the  sewer  system  shall initially provide the Authority with and shall thereafter keep the Authority advised of the propert y owner's correct address. Failure of any person to receive bills for sewer rentals shall not be an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which the net bill shall be payable.


§ 164-10. Liens for sewer rentals; filling and collection of liens.

Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be a lien on the improved property connected to and served by the sewer system, and any such sewer rentals which are delinquent shall be filed a s a lien against the improved property so connected to and served by the sewer system, which lien sha ll be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of municipal claims.


§ 164-11. Prohibited wastes.

A.	No person shall discharge or cause to be  discharged  any  stormwater,  surface  water, spring water, groundwater , roof runoff, subsurface drainage,  building  founda tion drainage, cellar drainage, dra inage from roof leader connections and overflow or drainage from cesspools into any sewer.

B.	This Township reserves the right to refuse permi ssion to connect to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or to compel pretreatment of any wastes in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful or to have a deleterious effect upon  any sewer or the sewer system.

C.	No sanita ry sewage or industrial wa stes shall be discharged to the sewer system:

(1)	Being harmful or deleteriou s to the sewer system.

(2)	Being inhibitory to the treatment  process at the sewage treatment plant constituting
part of the sewer system.

(3)	Conta ining   any   gasoline,   benzene,  naphtha,   fuel  oil   or   other   flammable   or
explosive liquids, solids or gases.

(4)	Carrying fats, oils or greases in excess of 288.5 ppm by weight.

(5)	Being discharged  into the sewer system at temperatures in excess of 180° F.

(6)	Being discharged  into the sewer  system  in batches  of such volume as to tax the capacity of the sewage collection system constituting part of the sewer  system or adversely affecting the treatment process.

(7)	Being of such color or other characteristic as to require special treatment to render t he  resulting effluent of the sewage treatment plant constituting part of the sewer system acceptable for discharge to the receiving stream.





164:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-11	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-11

(8)	Being food wastes , garbage (unless treated in an approved manner), vegetab le or fruit  rinds or paunch manure, feathers, bones, rags or any other solid, fibrous or viscous  inorganic or organic substance which the sewer system is not intended to receive.

(9)	Being  of  such  character,  concentration,   volume  or  combination  as  to  tax   the
capacity of the sewage treatment plant constituting part of the sewer system.

(I0) Including synthetic organic  detergents or similar compounds in such volume  as to interfere with the treatment process or the satisfactory operation of the sewage treatment plant const ituting part of the sewer system.

(11)	Including any liquids having a pH exceeding a minimum value of 6.0 or a maximum value of 9.0 or found to be excessively corrosive.

(12)	Including any waters or wastes with a BOD in excess of 500 ppm by weight.

(13)	Including any waters or wastes with a suspended solids content in excess of 500 ppm by weight or containing  suspended  solids of such character  and/or  quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle and/or treat such materials.

(14)	Including any waters or wastes containing any toxic, poisonous or any other material in sufficient quantity to cause a hazard in the  operat ion of  the  sewer system or which may result in an effluent discharge from the treatment plant unacceptable  to any governmental body having jurisdiction.

D.	Pretreatment  facilities.

(1)	Where necessary, all owners shall install suitable pretreatment  facilities in order to
comply w ith § 164-1 lB and C.

(2)	Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of wastes shall be submitted for approval of this Township, and no construction of any such facility shall be commenced until approval thereof first shall have been obtained, in writing, from this Township and until approval thereof first shall have been obtained from any governmental body having jurisdiction.

(3)	Whenever facilities for preliminary treatment and handling  of wastes shall  have been provided by any owner , such facilities continuou sly shall be maintained , at the expense of such owner, in satisfactory operating condition, and this Township shall have access to such facilities at reasonable times for purposes of inspection and testing.

E.	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibitin g any special agreement or arrangement between this Township  and  any  person  whereby  industrial  wastes  of unu sual strength or character may be admitted into the sewer system by this Township, either before or after preliminary treatment.







164: 1 3	OJ - OJ - 20J4
 
§ 164-12                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-16

§ 164-12. Access.

This Township shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any part of any improved property served by the sewer system as shall be required for purposes of inspection, measurement , sampling and testing and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by this Township through the sewer system.


§ 164-13. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.

This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in connection with u se and operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations  shall  be, shall becom e and  shall be construed  as part of this article.


§ 164-14. Violations and penalties. 2

Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under  the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.


ARTICLE Ill
Public Wastewater Pretreatment

§ 164-15. Enactment of program.

The North Middleton Township Pretreatment Program , attached hereto and included as Appendix A at the end of this chapter (hereinafter called "Pretreatment Program") is hereby enacted and adopted as the law of this Township with regard to all matters contained therein, said document containing the Pretreatment Program being incorporated herein by reference thereto as thou gh fully set forth in the body of this article.


§ 164-16. Regulations governing admission of industrial wastes into the sewer system.

A.	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any industrial wastes except upon application to this Township and upon receipt of a written permit therefor from this Township.

B.	Required  survey  data.  Any  person  desiring  to  make or  use a  connection to  the  sewer system through which industrial  wastes  shall be discharged  into the sewer system shall file  with  this  Township  an  industrial  wastes  questionnaire,  to  be  furnished  by  this



2.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


164:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-16                                            SEWERS AND WATER                                            § 164-18

Township, which shall supply to this Township pertinent data, including estimated quantity of flow, characteristics and constituents, with respect to industrial wastes proposed to be discharged into the sewer system. The Township shall, based upon this data, issue an industrial waste discharge permit , which shall set forth conditions for such discharge.

C.	Control  manholes.

(1)	Any person who shall discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system, when required by this Township, shall construct and thereafter properly shall maintain, at his own expense, a suitable control manhole and other devices as may be approved by this Township to facilitate observation, mea surement and sampling by this Township of industrial wastes discharged to the sewer system.

(2)	Any such control manhole, when required by this Township, shall be constructed at an accessible,  safe, suitable and satisfactory location in accordance with plans approved by this Township prior to commencement of construction.

D.	Changes in type of wastes. Any improved property discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system and contemplating a change in the method of operation which will alter the characterist ics and/or volumes of wastes at the time being discharged into the sewer system shall notify this Township, in writing , at least 10 days prior to consummation of such change.

E.	The Author ity and/or this Township reserve the right to require  improved  properties having large variations  in rates of waste discharge to  install  suitable regulating devices for equalizing waste flows to the sewer system.

F.	This Township reserves the right to impose surcharges in connection with any industrial wastes discharged into the sewer system either by agreement with the owner of the improved property or by application of an industria l waste surcharge, which shall form a part of industrial waste discharge permit, per Subsection B above.


§ 164-17. Violations and penalties.

In addition to all other civil penalties, liabilities and other enforcement remedies as set forth in said Pretreatment Program, any person (as defined in the Pretreatment Program) who shall violate any provision of the Pretreatment Program, and not excluding requirement s and conditions of permits issued thereunder, shall for each and every such violation be guilty of a summary offense and be sentenced to pa y a fine of not more than $ l ,000, restitution and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days.  Each day's  continuance  of a violation of  any such provision  shall constitute a
separate violation.


§ 164-18. Authority of Director and Borough of Carlisle.

A.	The Director, as defined  in the Pretreatment  Program,  is hereby authorized and directed to exercise and perform all actions, functions and responsibilities , including but  not limited  to  commencing  and  prosecuting   any  legal  actions,  civil  or  criminal  and  of



164:15	01-01 - 2014
 
§ 164-18                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 164-19

whatever nature, deemed by said Director to be necessary to the proper operation and enforcement of said  Pretreatment  Program, in the name  of the Township  of North M iddleton.

B.	Carlisle, as defined in the Pretreatment Program, is hereby authorized to exercise and perform all actions, functions and responsibilities, including but not  limited  to commencing and prosecuting any legal actions, civil or criminal and of whatever nature, deemed by Carlisle to be necessary for the proper operation and enforcement of said Pretreatment Program , in the name of the Township of North Middleton, only in those circumstances where such action pertained to users, as defined in the Pretreatment Program, directly connected to and discharging wastewater through the sewer  system owned solely by Carlisle. This section shall not apply  where a user is connected to a wastewater system of the Authority and Township as defined  in the  Pretreatment Program.


ARTICLE IV
Public Water Connections

§ 164-19. Definitions.

Unless  the  context  specifically  and  clearly  indicates  otherwise,  the meaning  of  terms  and
phra ses used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY - The North Midd leton Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality authority. BUILDING MAIN - The extension from the water system of any structure to the lateral of
a mam.

COMMONWEALTH - The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property within this Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation , occupancy or use by human beings or animals.

INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT - Any improved property located within this Township and used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product, commodity or article.

LATERAL - That part of the water system extending from a main to the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line or, if no such lateral shall be provided , then "lateral" shall mean that portion of or place in a main which is provided for connection of a any bui lding main.

MAIN - Any pipe or conduit constitutin g a part of the water system used or usable for water distribution purposes.

OWNER - Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or part ial, of any
improved property.






164:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-19                                            SEWERS AND WATER                                            § 164-21

PERSON - Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust, corporation, municipality, municipa lity authority or other group or entity.

TOWNSHIP - The Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania , a municipal subdivision of the commonwealth, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.

WATER SYSTEM - All facilities, as of any particular time, for production, transmis sion, storage and distribution of water in this Township and owned by the authority and to be leased to this Township for maintenance, operation and use.

WORKING HOURS - Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., except for Authority
holidays or as determined  by Authority Board.


§ 164-20. Use of public water system required.

A.	The owner  of any improved property abutting upon the water system, except any improved property which shall constitute an industria l establishment or a farm which has its own supply of water for uses other than human consumption, shall connect such improved property with and shall use such water system, in such manner as  this Township may require, within 90 days after notice to such owner from this Township to make such connection; subject , however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by this Township, from time to time.

B.	The notice by this Township to make a connection to a main,  referred  to in Subsection A,  shall consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments and/or supplement s at the  time in effect or a summary of  each  section  hereof  and  a  written  or  printed document  requirin g the connection in accordance with the provisions of this article and specifying that such connection shall be made within 90 days after the date such notice is given or served .  Such notice may be given or served at any time after a main is in place which can deliver  water  to the particu lar in1proved property.  Such notice shall be given or served upon the owner in accordance with law.


§ 164-21. Building mains and connections .

A.	No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any opening  into or shall use, shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any main or any part of the water  system without  first obtaining a permit, in writing, from this Township.

B.	Application for a permit  required under  Subsection A shall be made by the owner of the
improved propert y served or to be served or by the duly authorized agent of such owner.

C.	No person  shall make or  shall cause to be made a connection of any improved property with  a main until such person shall have fulfilled each of the following conditions:

(1)	Such per son shall have notified  the Township/Authority of the desire and intention to connect such improved property to a main;

(2)	Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit as required by
Subsection A;



164:17	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-21	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-22

(3)	Such person shall have given the Township/Authority at least 24 hours'  notice of the time when such connection will be made so that this Township may supervise and inspect or may cause to be supervised and inspected the work of connect ion and necessary testing. Both notice and connection shall occur  during  working hours.

(4)	If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory evidence to the Township/Authority that any tapping (or connection) fee which may be charged and imposed by the Authority against the owner of each improved property who connects such improved property to a main has been paid.

D.	Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection  D,  each  improved  property  shall  be connected separately and independently with a main through a building main. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building main shall not be permitted, except under   special  circumstances   and  for  good  cause  shown,  but  then  only  aHer  special permission  of this Township,  in writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such rules,  regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this Township.

E.	All costs and expenses of construction of a building main and all costs and expenses of connection of a building main to a main shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner shall indemnify and shall hold harmless this Township and the Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of a building main or of connection of a building main to a main.

F.	A building main shall be connected to a main at the place designated by this Township or  by the Authority and where, if applicable, the lateral is provided. A smooth, neat joint shall be  made and the connection of a building main to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.

G.	If tJ.e owner of any improved property located within this Township and abutting upon the  water system, subject, however , to the exception provided for in § l 64-20A, after 90 days'  notice from this Township,  in accordance  with  § 164-20A,  shall  fail  to connect such  improved  property ,  as  required ,  this  Township  may  enter  upon  such  improved property  and may construct such  connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses  thereof in the manner permitted by law.


§ 164-22. Rules and regulations governing building mains and connections to mains.

A.	No building main shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by this Township. If any part of a building main is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered  for inspection, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to a main.

B.	Every building main of any improved property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved property.

C.	Every  excavation  for a  building  main  shall be guarded  adequately  with  barricades  and
lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any street, sidewalk or other public



164:18	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 164-22	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-24

property disturbed in the case of installation of a building main shall be restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this Township.

D.	If any person shall fall or sha ll refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a building main, within 60 days  of receipt of such notice, this Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such per son to be served by the water system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of this Township and of the Authority. In cases involving an emergency or water leak or leakage the unsatisfactory condition shall be remedied within five calendar days. The Township/Authority reserves the right to enter upon such propert y and modify the building main to remedy the unsatisfactory condition. In such cases, the Township/Authority shall forthwith, upon complet ion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of work performed to the owner of the improved property which bill shall be payable forthwith. All bi lls for emergency work done to remedy the unsatisfactory condition which remain unpaid for a period in excess of forth 45 days from receipt shall constitute a lien on the subj ect property which may be recorded and indexed against the property by the Township or Authority.

E.	This Township reserves the right to adopt,  from  time  to  time,  additional  rules  and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with a main and with  the water  system,  which additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be constru ed as part of this article.


§ 164-23. Violations and penalties.

A.	Any per son who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brou ght before a Magisteria l District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $ 1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.J

B.	Fines and costs imposed und er the provisions of this article shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by applicable law. Upon judgment upon any person by  summar y  conviction  or by proceeding s by summons on default  of the payment of the fine and penalty imposed and the costs, such per son may  be sentenced and committed to the j ail of Cumberland County for the period not exceeding 30 days.


§ 164-24. Appeals; hardship.

In the event  any person  shall deem  the requirement to connect  as provided  in this article a hardship, such person may appeal to the Board of Supervisors for relief from such connect ion


3.	Editor 's Note: Ame nded at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provi sions, Art. 11).


164:19	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-24                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-27

requirement  which  appeal  shall be  heard in accordance with provisions  of the Pennsylvania
Local Agency Law.4


§ 164-25. Declaration of purpose.

It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservat ion of the health , safety and welfa.re of inhabitants of this Township.


ARTICLE V
Public Water Rates and Charges

§ 164-26. Definitions.

Unless  the context  specifically and  clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this article shall be as follows:

AUTHORITY - North Middleton Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality author ity.

DWELLING UNIT - Any room, group of rooms, house trailer or other enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons living together or by persons living alone.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property upon which there is erected a structu re intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sewage and/or indu strial wastes shall be or may be discharged .

OWNER - Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.

PERSON - Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other group or entity.

TOWNSHIP - The Township of Nort h Middleton , Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipal corporation, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, m appropriate cases, its authorized representatives.

WATER SYSTEM - A ll facilities, as of any particular time, for supply and distribution of
water and owned by the Authority and lea sed to the Township under the lease.


§ 164-27. Payment procedure.

The time and method of payment of water rates, rents and charges shall be as follows:

A.	All bil.ls for water rentals and charges shall be rendered on a bimonthly basis on the first days of January, March, May, July, September and November, respectfully, in each year or on such  other dates as this Township by resolution shall specify and shall cover a bimonthly billing period consisting of the immediate past two calendar months.



4.	Editor's Note: Sec 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 ct seq. and 751 et seq.


164:20	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-27                                         SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-30

B.	Owners of improved properties connected to the water system during any bimonthly billing cycle shall pay a prorated water rental or charge for service for portion of the bimonthly billing cycle that the property was connected.

C.	Water rentals and charges shall be payable upon the applicable billing dates as provided for in Subsection A of this § 164-27 in the appropriate amount computed in accordance with this article, and said charges shall constitute the net bill. If water rentals or charges are not paid within 30 days after each billing date, an additional sum of 5% shall be added as a penalty. Payments received after 60 days of the billing date shall be subject to an additional penalty of 5% and shall bear interest at the rate of 112% per month or fraction thereof until paid. Water bills shall be considered due as of the date of mailing to the customer. Payment received in the office of North Middleton Authority on or before the last day of such thirty-day calendar period shall  constitute payment within such period. If the 30th day shall fall on an Authority holiday or Saturday or Sunday, payment received on the next succeeding workday which is not an Authority holiday shall constitute payment within such period. Any bill not paid within said thirty-day period shall be deemed delinquent.

D.	Every owner of an improved property which is connected to the  water  system  shall initially provide the Authority with and thereafter shall keep the Authority advised of the property owner's correct address. Failure of any person to receive bills for water charges shall not be an excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which the net bill shall be payable .


§ 164-28. Meter installation required.

Beginning on April  1,  1988, each  improved property which is connected to the water system is required to have a water meter installed for the purpose of the measurement of water usage on the improved property.


§ 164-29. Water rates, rent and charges.

A.	Water rates, rent and charges are imposed upon and shall be collected from all water customers of each improved property , whether  such use or benefit resulting therefrom or such connect ion shall be direct or indirect. Such rates, rents and charges shall be at a rate based upon a gallon of water per bimonthly billing cycle measured through the meter in accordance with  the  applicable  fee schedule as adopted  from time to time by resolution of the North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors.

B.	If a classification or fee is not shown on the current applicable fee schedule, the Board of Supervisors shall have the ability to create a new classification and set the fee therefor by subsequent resolution.


§ 164-30. Additional rules and regulations; violations and penalties.

A.	Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit this Township from entering into separate agreements with owners with respect to water rates, rents and charges and sewer renta ls and charges to be imposed in those cases where, due to seasonal fluctuations or


164:21	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-30                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 164-31

other unu sual circumstances, said rates, renta ls and charges set forth herein shall be deemed by this Township to be unfair or inequitable.

B.	Discontinu ation of  service. At the discretion of the Township, the water supply to any customer  may  be  cut  off  for  nonpayment  of  sewer  rental s,  as  provided  in  53  P.S.
§ 3102.502 ; provided , however, that the sewer bill must be in arrears in excess of 30
days and the cu stomer mu st have received notice, in writing, from the Township of the intent to shut off the water supply at least 10 days before the action is taken, pursuant to said Act.s

C.	Additional  rules and regu lations. This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such  additional  rules and  regulations  as  it shall  deem proper  for operation of the water and sewer systems which shall be construed as part of this article.

D.	Penalties. Any per son who violates or permit s a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary  proceeding  brought  before a  Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punfah able by a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a  tem1 not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continu e shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.6


ARTICLE VI
Water Meter Regulations

§ 164-31. Definitions.

The following definitions apply to terms in this article:

AGREEMENT - Management agreement executed by Township and Authority dated June
1, 2006, providing for operation and management of the system by Authority. AUTHORITY - North Middleton Authority , a Pennsylvania municipal authority. BOARD - Governing body of the Authority.
CONSULTING ENGINEER - Person appointed by the Authority to pa ss upon engineering questions, being a person who is a professiona l engineer duly registered under the laws of the commonwealth.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any propert y Located within the Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals.

INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHM ENT - Any improved property located in the Township used wholly or in part for manufacturing , processing, cleaning, Laundering or assembly of any


5.	Ed itor's Note: Amen ded at lime of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions , Art. II).

6.	Editor's Note : Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).


164:22	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 164-31                                         SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-33

product,  commodity  or  article or  any other  improved  property  located  m  the Township
obtaining or requiring water service from the Authority.

LEASE - Agreement of lease executed by the Authority and the Township , dated October
1, I 967, providing for lease of sewer and water system to the Township.

METER - Water meter and remote reading device of type and specifications determined by
Authority.

OWNER - Any person vested w ith ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
improved property.

SUPERVISORS - Board of the Township.

SYSTEM - Water system providing water to the service area, as set forth in agreement of lease and trust indenture, dated October 1, 1967, generally consisting of Schlusser Village-Basin Hill Heights and areas to the north.

TOWNSHIP - The Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, by and through its authorizedrepresentatives.

WORKING HOURS - Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., except for Authority
holidays or as determined by Authority Board.


§ 164-32. Installation of meters and backflow preventors required.

A.	Every  improved  property  obtaining  water  service from the system shall have installed a meter to record water u sage and  a  remote  reading  device  to  enable  usage  to  be determined  without  entry into improved property, together with a back flow preventor  in order to prevent contamination of the public water supply.

B.	Installation of meters with remote reading devices and  back  flow  preventor  in  all improved property presently connected to the system or required to be connected or voluntarily connected to the system is hereby authorized, directed and required .

C.	Each  and  every  connection  made  to  the  system  shall  include  a  meter  remote  reading device and back flow preventor  furnished by the Authority and paid for and installed by owner of improved propert y at owner's expense  in  accordance  with  the  article  and regulation  promulgat ed  pursuant  hereto  by  the  Township  and  the   Authority,   in accordance with the agreement and lease.


§ 164-33. Location of meter.

A.	The owner is required to permit  installation  of  meter , remote  readout  and  back  flow preventor on improved property at a location within or about the improved property, to be  determined by the Author ity,  which  location  provides  for  unobstructed  access  and protects  the meter and other equ ipment from freezing or other harm. Property owners are responsible to keep the meter from freezing or any other harm.




164:23	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 164-33                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-37

B.	In cases where it is not practical to place the meter within a building , the Authority may require the owner to construct adequate enclosure inside the property line for the meter at a   location  to  be  determined  by  the  Authority  in accordance  with  this  article  and regulation  promulgated  pursuant  hereto  by  the  Township  and   the  Authority,   in accordance with the agreement and lease.


§ 164-34. Access to meter.

A.	The owner shall permit access to the meter to the Township and to the Authority or persons operating under written authorization on reasonable days and at reasonable times upon request. The owner shall not perm.it any obstruction of the meter or of convenient access thereto by person or ani mals or man-made or natural obstacles or devices. The owner is responsible for security and safety of the meter, remote readout and backflow preventor on the owner's premi ses.

B. The failure to permit installation or, after installation, to permit reasonable access to the meter , remote reading device or backflow preventor after 30 days' written notice from the Township/Authority to the property owner shall be sufficient cause for discontinu ance of service. Should customer fail to make and maintain reasonable and unobstructed access to meter , remote reading device or backflow preventor during norm al working hours within said thirty-day period , water service will be discontinu ed until reasonable access can be provided and maintained on a continuing ba sis.7


§ 164-35. Seals.

No seal placed by the Authority for the protection of any meter , valve, fitting or other water connection shall be tampered with or defaced. Tt shall not be broken except upon authorization from the Authority or in the presence of an Authority  representative.  Where  the  seal  is broken , the Township reserves the right to remove the meter for test at the expense of the customer, even though said meter register s accurately, in addition to other fines and penalties imposed  herewith.


§ 164-36. Reading and registration of meters.

Reading of meters shall be taken monthly, bimonthly or quarterly at the opuuon of the Authority, and the quantity recorded by the meter shall be taken to be the amount of water passing through the meter.


§ 164-37. Minimum charge.

Every meter is installed subject to a fixed minimum monthly , bimonthly or quarterly charge in accordance with the rates thereof, for which certain quantities of water  wlll  be  allowed without additiona l charge; and where more than one premi ses is furnished service through one meter, the same fixed minimum monthly or quarterly charges shall apply  for each and every



7.	Editor's Note:  Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I, General  Provisions, Art. 11).


164:24	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-37                                            SEWERS AND WATER                                            § 164-41

premises. Such rrurumum shall be nonabatable for a nonu ser of water and noncumulative against subsequent consumption. In the case of fractional bills covering less than a month of a quarter, monthly or minimum charges and allowances shall be prorated.


§ 164-38. Size of meter.

The Authority shall have the right in all cases to stipulate the size and type of the meter to be installed on each service line.


§ 164-39. Violations and penalties. s

Any person who violates or permit s a violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge  under  the  Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable  by a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that su ch violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute  a separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.


§ 164-40. Additional rules and regulations authorized.

The Authority shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations pursuant to this article, which shall be binding and effective upon owners pursuant to lease and agreement. The purchase and installation of meters is hereby authorized, ratified and confirmed.


ARTICLE VU
On-Lot Sewage System Permits

§ 164-41. Deimitions.

The following word s and term s shall have the following meanings unless the Act, regulations
or the context indicate otherwise:

ACT - The Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535 (No. 537), as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.

BOARD - The Board of Supervisors.

COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM - Any system publi cly or privately owned for the collection of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature from two or more lots and the treatment and/or disposal of sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at any other site.




8.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provision s, Art. II).


164:25	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-41                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-43

DEPARTMENT - The Department of Environmental Protection.

HEARING - Hearing held by Board for a determination under this Article VII, upon at least 15 days' written notice of charge or violation and right to appear, in accordance with Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 75 1 et seq.9

INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM - A system of piping, tanks or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of this commonwealth or by means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.

INSTALLATION - Any act of placing a system, including repair, replacement or enlargement of any system, including system preexisting the effective date of this Article VII.

OWNER - Person owning property on which system is to be installed or containing buildin g to be served by system; or person having written authority to act for owner.

REGULATIONS - Regulation s as promulgated by the Department.

SECRETARY - The Secretary of Township.

SEO - The Sewage Enforcement Officer.

SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines. Enumerating of lots shall include as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts remaining after other lots have been subdivided therefrom .

SYSTEM - Individual and/or community sewage system. TEST - Soil suitability test and/or soil seepage test. TOWNSHIP - The Township of North Middleton.
WORKJNG HOURS - Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. ; and during regu lar meetings of the Board; or as determined by motion of Board.


§ 164-42. Title.

This Article VII shall be known as "Sewage Facilities Ordinance."


§ 164-43. Legal authority for regulations.

This Article VII is adopted in accordance with the Act; the Clean Streams Law, Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.l et seq.; and regulations of the Department; and applies to all persons installing systems.








9.	Editor's Note : Amende d at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


164:26	01 - OJ - 20 14
 
§ 164-44                                        SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-49

§ 164-44. Installation of system requires permit.

The installation of any treatment tank, subsurfa ce absorption area or any holding tank constitutes the installation of a system and requires a permit prior to beginning installation or occupancy of any building  for which system will be installed. A permit is required  for a rural residence  regardless of lot size.


§ 164-45. Compliance with regulations and laws.

No person shall install a system or construct any building in or for which a system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit and a determination that site, plans and specifications are in compliance with this Article VII, the Act and regulations.


§ 164-46. System must comply with official plan.

No permit  shall be issued for systems unless consistent with the official plan of the Township
in accordance with the Act.


§ 164-47. Issuance of permit.

Permit  shall  be  issued  after  application  and  determination  that  the  proposed  system  meets requirements  herein.


§ 164-48. Permits filed with Department.

In  the event  a  system  other  than defined  herein  is required,  application  for permit  shall  be
filed with the Departm ent.


§ 164-49. Sewage Enforcement Officer.

The SEO shall:

A.	Be responsible for admini stration of this Article VII.

B.	Not install any system in any area under his juri sdiction.

C.	Not  accept  any  fee  for  services  or  work  performed  other  than  compensation  set  by
Township  resolution.

D.	Not conduct a test or issue any permit for system for any lot in which there is a financial interest of SEO or of any person related by blood or marriage to SEO or of any employer or partner unless approved by the Township .

E.	Observe,   conduct   personally   or   confirm   all   tests   m   a   manner   approved   by   the Department.

F.	Submit required forms to the Department.





164:27	OJ - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-49                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-56

G.	Maintain  records  of administration  of this  Article VII and make reports  as required  by the Board by motion.

I-1.   Be available for performance of duties during working hours or as required by the Board.


§ 164-50. Administration.

The Township shall employ a SEO certified in accordance with state law to administer this Article VII. The Township shall submit annually, by January 31, to the Department the name and address of its SEO and within 30 days shall submit any change in the name or address.


§ 164-51. Application for permit.

Application for permit for installation of systems shall be obtained from and made to the Secretary at the Township Building during working hour s.


§ 164-52. Application form.

Application shall be on form provided by the Township and accompanied by fees.


§ 164-53.  Filing of application .

Applicant shall file with the Secretary application with Part l completed, at which time the Secretary shall date the application as "date received." lf the applica tion is incomplete or the Secretary is unable to verify information , the applicant shall be notified by the Secretary, in writing , within seven days, with deadline for acting by the Township  extended  15  days beyond  date of receipt of adequate supplementary or amendatory data.


§ 164-54. Processing of application.

The SEO shall obtain the application from the Secretary and shall process the application within 15 days, weather conditions and equipment availability permitting. The SEO shall conduct soil tests and analysis and percolation tests and analysis.


§ 164-55. Independent tests.

In the event the applicant has independent engineering determination of soil tests and percolation tests, the SEO shall process resu lts received from the applicant within  l 0 days.


§ 164-56. Judgment of application.

Upon completion  of Part II, the SEO shall approve or disapprove within seven days.








164:28	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 164-57                                            SEWERS AND WATER                                            § 164-63

§ 164-57. Expiration of permit.

If construction or installation of system or building has not commenced within three years
after issuance, permit sha ll expire.


§ 164-58. Authorized test procedures.

Three  alternate  procedures  for  conduct  of  soil  and  percolation  tests  and  analysis  are authorized:

A.	Testing and analysis by the Township.

B.	Soil test and percolation test by applicant through approved  soil scientist or engineer and analysis by the Township.

C.	Site preparation for soil test and percolation tests by applicant and testing and analysis by the Township.


§ 164-59. Notification of completion .

The applicant shall notify the SEO, in writing (which may be entered on the top portion of
application  form at the Township Building), of completion of installation.


§ 164-60. Inspection.

The  SEO  shall  inspect  site  within  72  hours  of  receipt  of  written  notice  of  completion,
excepting Sundays and holidays from said calculation.


§ 164-61. Alternate system.

In the event soil analysis indicates limiting zone(s), the limiting zone(s) must be confirmed by a soil scienti st. If confirmed, the type of alternate system shall be determined by the SEO upon consultation with soil scientist.


§ 164-62. Board to cause inspections .

The Board shall have the power to make or cause to be made through its SEO,  such inspection s and tests as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article VII, with the right to enter upon lands for said purposes.


§ 164-63. Covering of work only after inspection.

No part of any installation shall be covered until it is inspected within 72 hours of written notice of completion (excepting Sundays and holidays) and given full approval by the SEO. The applicant may cover installation if not inspected within 72 hours. If improperly covered, the Board, throu gh the SEO, may require applicant to uncover for inspection.         ·




164:29	01 - OJ - 2014
 
§ 164-64                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-67

§ 164-64. Fees.

Fees shall be set in accordance with the applicable fee schedule as adopted from time to time
by resolution of the North Midd leton Township Board of Supervisors.


§ 164-65. Revocation.

A.	The Board shall revoke permit where:

(1)	Information material to issuance of permit  is false.

(2)	Tests were not property conducted.

(3)	Any change occurs in physical conditions of land which materially affect operation of system.

(4)	App licant violates any provisions of this Article VII, Act or regulations.

(5)	Issuance of permit falls to conform to Act or regulations.

B.	Revocation shall occur  only after written  notice  and  an opportunity  within  10 days to request a hearing. If no hearing is requested, revocation shall be effective. Hearing shall be held, upon request, with notice to the Department.


§ 164-66. Other remedies.

In addition, the Board may take appropriate action at law or equity to enforce provisions of
this Article VII, the Act and regu lations.


§ 164-67. Violations and penalties. 10

Notwithstanding any action taken by the Board under § 164-65 and § 164-66  above,  any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article VII, Act or regu lations, or who resists or interferes with any officer, agent or employee of the municipality in the performance of hi s duties shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be puni shable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of pa yment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense,  and  each  section of this article  that  is violated shall a lso constitute a separate offense.










I 0.  Edito r's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Ar t. II).


164:30	OJ - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-68	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-70

ARTICLE  VIII
On-Lot Small Flow Sewage Treatment Facilities

§ 164-68. Title.

This article shall be known as the "North Middleton Township  Small Flow Sewage Treatment Facility  Ordinance."


§ 164-69. Purposes and background.

A.	North Middleton Township is in a state of transition from a rural-suburban community to a  community  of varying uses  and functions, thereby  increasing municipal governmental concerns and responsibilities.

B.	As an indication of such change, is the creation of a public water distribution system and a public sewage collection and disposal system, both of which systems are designed to enhance the quality of  life and  to protect health and safety; however, it is fiscally and practically  impossible to provide such services to all areas of the Township.

C.	It is further recognized that stringent rules have been enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to control on-site sewage disposal facilities in the interest of protecting the waters of this commonwealth and the health of citizens, which rules sometimes virtually prohibit the continued use of traditional sewage disposal facilities, thereby depreciating values of property.

D.	The Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania permits, but does not require, the use of small flow sewage treatment facilities under certain circumstances,  but  places  certain responsibility for oversight of such treatment facilities on the  local  municipality .  Accordingly,  the Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township has traditiona lly refused to allow the use of small flow sewage treatment facilities.


§ 164-70. Definitions.

The following  words  and phra ses shall have the meanings  set forth herein unless the context of the use thereof shall dictate another interpretation:

AGREEMENT - A written agreement between the Township and owner as authorized by
this article.

BOARD - The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township. DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmenta l Protection.
MANUAL - The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Small Flow Treatment Facilities Manual,
current  edition as of  the date of application,  together  with any recommendation  or guideline manuals referenced therein or which are a part thereof.

OWNER - The person, persons or entity owning the residentia l premises. Said term
excludes the lessee, tenant  or other nonowning occupant of a residential unit.




164:3 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-70                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 164-72

RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT - A portion of a residential premises occupied by a
single family or persons living as a family.

RESIDENTIAL PREMISES - A parcel of real estate improved with a buildin g used for human hou sing. Said  term excludes any commerc ial or industrial use or any other nonresidential u se of real estate, including a combination of residential and nonresidentia l uses.

SEO - The Sewage Enforcemen t Officer appoint ed by the Board.

SEWAGE - Domestic wastewater originating from a residential use and does not include industrial waste, hazardou s or toxic materials or any other substance not generated from normal residential use.

SMALL FLOW SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY - An individual sewerage system designed to adequately treat domestic sewage flows not greater than 600 gallons per day (maximum five-bedroom dwelling) for final disposal using a stream discharge, discharge to the surface of the ground or discharge to a constructed wetland as further defmed in § 164-73 of this article.

TOWNSHIP - North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.

TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - A professional engineer appoint ed by the Board to review applications and plans for small flow sewage treatment facilities.


§ 164-71. Small flow sewage treatment facilities permitted .

A small flow sewage treatment facility may be installed , constructed and used only to serve a resident ial  dwelling unit on a residential premises where a traditional on-site sewage disposal system cannot be installed or maintained as evidenced by the denial of the SEO of an on-lot sewage system permit under applicable regulation s of DEP and the Township and where no municipal sewerage system is readily available to serve the premises, whether by direct connection or  reasonable extension. Small flow  sewage treatment  facilities are not permitted for any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential premises or use. Small flow sewage treatment facilities may only be installed , constructed or used in accordance with all the provisions of this articl e. All costs and expenses of designing, constructing, installing, repairing and maintaining  the small flow sewage treatment facility shall be borne by and paid for by the owner.


§ 164-72. Supervision of installation and construction.

All small flow sewage treatment facilities shall be installed and constructed under the supervision of the professional engin eer responsible for the design of the system. The engineer will provide the Township with a letter certify ing to the same at the completion of the project. This will be provided to the Township prior to the occupancy of the building and the use of the system, except in repair situations.







164:32	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-73	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-73

§ 164-73. Small flow sewage treatment facility defined and limited.

A.	Definition. "Small flow sewage treatment facility" (hereinafter referred to as "facility" in this section) is an on-site sewage treatment facility as permitted by DEP under guidelines and regu lations promulgated by DEP from time to time, but as limited or restricted by this article, in the event of conflict between the provision of this article and DEP regulations, it is the Board's intention to require the more restrictive provisions.

B.	Minimum land area . The minimum lot size for any new system installed on a lot created after April 1, 2008, shall be three acres. Smaller lot sizes for nonconforming lots created prior to April 1, 2008, or existing systems and repair situations, shall be considered, provided the SEO has determined that there is no area  on the existing lot  suitable for insta llation of an on-lot disposal system and it can be demonstrated that all other requirements of the article can be met. This minimum land area requir ement shall  be imposed by the owner as an express restriction or condition of the residentia l premises as a covena nt running with the land by instrument recorded in the office of the Cumberland County Recorder of Deeds, to be enforceable by the Township, said recording being an express condition precedent to the construction of such facility. Such restr iction or condition  shall be subject to the prior approval  and review by the Township's Solicitor.

C.	Isolation distances. All requirements for isolation distance shall be as required by the Manual.

D.	Specific limitations on discharge.

(1)	Wastewater  to  be treated  shall be  domestic  sewage emanating from a  residentia l
premises.

(2)	Wastewater sewage flows shall not be greater than 600 gallons per day as estimated by the DEP. See 25 Pa. Code§ 73.17, as amended.

(3)	No facility shall be designed for a commercial, industrial or community wastewater sewage flow even if same flow is estimated to be less than or equal to 600 gallons per day. The Board of Supervisors may consider a requ est for the use of a SFSTF in a repair situation if the SEO has determined there is no area on the existing suitable for the installation of an on-lot sewage disposal system. This would be if there is no feasible way to connect to public sewer and in lieu of the use of a holding tank to abandon the discharge of untreated wastewater to the sur face of the ground.

E.	Design  requirement s.  Each  facility  shall  be  designed,  installed   and   operated   in accordance w ith the terms, prov isions and requirements of the Manual. The app licant is required to obtain sewage planning  approva l  from North Middleton  Township  and the DEP  and to obtain the necessary permits from DEP, as applicable, to comply with  the Clean Stream Law, and the Sewage Facilit ies Act.

F.	Easements shall be determined per the Manual.








164:33	01 -0 1 - 2014
 
§ 164-74                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 164-76

§ 164-74. Maintenance.

The  owner  shall  be  responsible to  the  Township  for  the  maintenance  of  each  small  flow
sewage treatment  facility in accordance with the Manual.


§ 164-75. Indemnification by owner.

Each owner of a residential premises contalillilg a small flow sewage treatment facility installed, constructed or used pursuant to this article shall, by reason of such installation , construct ion or use, be deemed to have agreed to indemnify the Township and  hold  it harmless of and from any and all liability, damages, costs, expenses, attorneys' fees and any other obligation imposed upon it by reason of such owner's failure to perform the obligations imposed hereunder or by otherwise violating this article, and further, shall be deemed to agree to reimburse the Township for all costs, expenses and expenditures which it incurs by reason of such owner's failure to perform the obligations imposed hereunder or in enforcing the provisions of this article against said owner.


§ 164-76. Maintenance security deposit.

A.	As a condition of  permitting the installation, construction and/or use of a small flow sewage treatment facility, the owner shall deposit with the Township the amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for each residential unit served by a small flow sewage treatment facility. Set amount shall serve as partial security for the Township for reimbur sement for any costs or expenses incurred in enforcing the provi sion of this article against said owner. Said deposit shall be retained by the Township in an account to be known as "Small Flow Sewage Treatment Facility Maintenance Security Account," which shall be interest-bearing, which interest shall be retained by the Township and may be disbursed annually for general Township purposes, including the sum per year  per  small  flow  sewage  treatment  facility  for  Township's adm inistrative cost in maintaining said account , said amount that may be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors ."

B.	The Township shall have the right to u se and consume said deposit to reimbur se its costs and  expenses in the enforcement of this article to include, but not necessarily be limited to, the   following: removing and disposing of  sewage  from  the  small  flow  sewage treatment   facility; repairing the said facility; inspecting the  facility;  testing  sewage; attorneys'  fees,  court  costs  and  witness  fees  in  any  litigation  required  to  enforce this article.

C.	At any time such deposit falls below the original amount thereof, the owner shall promptly deposit such additional funds to restore the full amount. Such further deposit shall be made within 10 calendar days after the date notice requiring such further deposit is mailed to owner.

D.	All  deposits  made  hereunder   shall  be  deemed  to  be  in  rem  and  appur tenant  to  the
residentia l premi ses containing such small flow sewage treatment facility. As such, the



I I.  Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. 11).


164:34	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-76                                         SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-79

deposit shall be deemed to relate to the owner of said residential premises at the time any question a rises thereto. Said deposit shall be deemed to  be transferred  from owner  to owner at each time the ownership of the residential premises is transferred.

E.	Township shall return and refund to the then-current owner of the maintenance security deposit  (or the remaining balance thereof), w ithout  interest, upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

(I)	The residential unit is connected to a municipal sewage system; or

(2)     The residentia l unit is discontinued as a dwelling place and the small flow sewage
treatment facility is discontinued and removed.


§ 164-77. Violations constitute a nuisance.

The owner 's failure to comply with the maintenance provi sions of this article (§§ 164-74 through 164-76) shall be deemed to be a public nuisance becau se of the threa t to public health and damage to the waters of this commonwealth and may be abated by injunctive action. By installing, construct ing or u sing a small flow sewage treatment facility pursuant to this article, the owner shall be deemed to agree with the foregoing sentence and further acknow ledges that the Court of Common Pleas  of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, sitting in equity shall be jurisdiction of the residential premi ses and each owner and that no adequate remedy at law exists.


§ 164-78. Abuse and revocation of privilege.

A.	Township's permission for the installation, construction and/or use of a small flow sewage treatment facility is hereby declared to be a privilege (as distinguished from a right) of the owner of residential premi ses. Therefore, the owner's abu se of said privilege by failure to comply with the provisions of this article may be cause for the privilege to be revoked, in w hich event, the residential unit served by any such small flow sewage treatment facility sha ll be vacated and no further sewage shall be generated on or discharged from said residential unit , without liability to the Township. 12

B.	Township may revoke such pr ivilege upon not less than five days' written notice mailed to the owner of the resident ial  premises and  posted conspicuously on each  residential unit.


§ 164-79. Access to residentia l premises .

Each owner  constructing, insta lling or using a  small flow sewage treatment facility shall be deemed to have authorized duly authorized officials of the Township to enter upon the residentia l premi ses to inspect the facilities authorized by this article, to enforce the provi sion of this article,  abate any nuisances arising from delinquent maintenan ce of such facilities and enforce the revocation of the privilege of continu ed u se of such facilities. Any such entry shall not constitute a trespa ss.


12.	Editor 's N ote: Am end ed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch . I , General Provisions, Art. II).


164:35	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 164-80                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 164-80

§ 164-80. Application and permit required.

After the property owner has obtained sewage planning approval and the necessary permits from DEP for the small flow sewage treatment facility, they will apply for a  small  flow treatment  facility permit  from North Middleton Township. This permit  will be obtained prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit for the construction of a new dwelling. This would be required for a system whether it is for a new construction or in a repair situation.

A  Application.

(1)	An owner of a residential premises seeking to use a small flow sewage treatment facility shall submit an application therefor on a form to be provided by the Township, which shall include the following information :

(a)	Name(s) and address(es) of each owner.

(b)	Identifica tion of residential premises to include the Cumberland  Count y Real Estate Tax Assessor's parcel number; street address; copy of current deed or other  document  whereby the owner(s) claim(s) title to said premises.

(c)	A true copy of the denial by  the  SEO  of  the  owner's  application  for  a traditional on-lot system permit for the same residential premises.

(d)	Description of the residential unit to include floor plan, room dimensions and
nature of each room.

(e)	A plot or map to sca le of the resident ial premises accurately showing the location and description of all  improvements,  sign ificant  differences  in surface grade or level and the location of the proposed small flow sewage treatment facility.

(f)	A detailed  drawing  and  narrative  specifications  of the proposed  small  flow
sewage treatment  facility and sufficient for adequate review by DEP.

(g)	True, complete  and correct copies of all submissions to and communications from DEP concerning owner's application to DEP for said small flow sewage treatment  facility, said ob ligation to su pply materials shall be continuous until the permit  required herein expires or is revoked .

(2)	The application shall be accompanied by:

(a)	A filing and proces sing fee as may be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.13

(b)	The maintenance security deposit required under § 164-76 hereof.

(c)	An acknowledgment /agreement signed by each owner in the following form: ACKNOWLE DGMENT AND AGREEMENT BY OWNER(S)

13.	Editor's Note: Amended  at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General  Provisions, A1·1. II).


164:36	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-80	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-80

The under signed, being  all the owners of the following residential premises:
In North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and m consideration of being granted permission by North Middleton Township to install, construct, and the privilege to use a small flow sewage treatment facility to serve the residential unit on said premises known as:
do hereby acknowledge receipt of a copy of North Midd leton Township Small Flow Sewage Treatment Ordinance ("Ordinance") and, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree to comply with each and all provisions of said Ordinance and Manual and to otherwise be legally bound thereby. We further acknowledge, understand and agree that said Ordinance, Manual and this acknowledgment /agreement shall be binding upon all successive and future owners of said residential premises.
We further understand that when public sewer is constructed we  will  be required to abandon the system, pay tapping fees  and  connect  to  the public sewer  system.
IN  WITNESS   WHEREOF,   I/we,  jointly   and   severa lly,   have  hereunto   set
my/our hand(s) and seal(s) this	day of	,  20_
_	(SEAL)
Owner  (individual)
------(SEAL)
Owner  (individual)
--------(SEAL)
Owner  (individual)
Or if by a corporation:

 


ATTEST
 
Name of Corporate Owner


By     	
President  of Corporation
 

Corporate Secretary (Corporate Seal)
Or if by a Partnership:

Name of Partnership Owner
By     	
Partner
By     	
Partner


(d) This acknow ledgement shall be recorded and indexed against the  subject property at the time of approval in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for the County of Cumberland , the cost of which shall be  paid  by  applicant  and proof  of which shall be provided to the Township.


164:37	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-80	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-82

(e) In addition, the owner, if required by the Township, shall enter into further agreements and forms of security, including but not necessarily being limited to judgment  notes, all as approved by the Township Solicitor.

B.	Permit.

(1)	It shall be unlawfu l for any owner, person, corporation or other entity to construct, install or maintain a sma ll flow sewage treatment facility on any land in this Township without  first obtaining a permit under this article.

(2)	A permit shall be issued by the Townsh ip's  Secretary  upon  the  applicant's fulfillment of the following matter s in the order indicated:

(a)	Submission of a properly completed applicat ion, acknowledgment and agreement and the payment and/or deposit of all sums required under Subsection A of this § 164-80.

(b)	Receipt of true, complete and correct copies of all DEP required and  duly issued permits, licenses or other evidence of permission to construct a small flow sewage treatment facility on the residential premises under DEP regulations.

(c)	Receipt  of  a  certificate  from  the  SEO   indicating   that   all preconstruction/prein stallation requirements  of this article have been fulfilled.

(3)	Such  permit  shall  be  issued  within  10 bu siness  days  after  receipt  of  the  SEO
certificate.


§ 164-81. Civil enforcement and inspection.

A.	The SEO, with the consent of the Board and the Township Solicitor, is hereby authorized to take all appropriate action of law or in equity to abate any violation of this article where the continued violation is believed to be a threat to the health of the inhabitants of this Township or deleteriou s to the quality of the waters of this commonwealth.

B.	AIL sma ll flow sewage treatment facility system inspection s shall be conducted as required, and/or recommended by the Manual , but in any case, shall be not less than once per year with a certified copy of the results provided to the Township.


§ 164-82. Violations and penalties.

A.	Any per son, partner ship or corporation who or which ha s violated or permitted the violation of the provi sions of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by North Midd leton Township, pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s all court costs,  including  the reasonable attorneys'  fees incurred by North Middleton Townsh ip as a resu lt thereof.

B.	Each day's violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.





164:38	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 164-83                                        SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-85

ARTICLE IX
On-Lot Retaining Tanks

§ 164-83. Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited  as the  "North Middleton Township  Retaining Tank Ordinance."


§ 164-84. Definitions .

The following words and phrases , when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different or contrary meaning:

BOARD - The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township.

COLLECTOR - A person or entity engaged in the remova l, transportation and disposal of sewage from retaining tan.ks.

DEP - The Department of Environmental Protection.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sewerage shall or may be discharged.

OWNER - The person, persons or entity owning a residential or commercial property. Said term excludes the lessee, tenant or other nonowning occupant of a residential or commercial property.

RETAINING TANK - A watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of sewage at another site. Said term shall be synonymou s with the term "holding tank."

SEO - The Sewage Enforcement Officer appointed by the Board.

SEWAGE - Domestic wastewater originating  from a  residential  or  commercia l  use and  does not include industrial waste, hazardous  or  toxic  materials  or any other  substance  not  generated from normal  residential  or  commercial  use.

TOWNSHIP - North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.


§ 164-85.  Retaining  tanks permitted.

Retaining tanks may be installed, constructed and used only to serve a residential or commercial premises where an existing on-site sewage disposal facility has failed and cannot be repaired, rehabilitated or replaced by any other means approved under the regulations of DEP and where no municipal sewerage system is readily available to serve the premises, whether by direct connection or reasonable extension. Retaining tan.ks are not pennitted for any new residential premises , but may be permitted for an institution, recreational vehicle dump station or commercial premises with a sewage flow of less than 800 gpd (gallons per day). Retaining tanks may only be installed, constructed or used in accordance with all the



164:39	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-85                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 164-89

prov1S1ons  of  this  article.  All  costs and expenses of designing,  constructing , installing,
repairing and maintaining a retaining tank shall be borne by and paid for by the owner.


§ 164-86. Supervision of installation, construction and maintenance.

AJ l retaining tanks shall be installed and constructed under the supervision of the SEO. The SEO is hereby authorized and empowered to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the SEO shall receive, review and retain pumping receipts from permitted retaining tanks and shall conduct an annual inspection thereof with the completion and retention of written inspection reports.


§ 164-87. Specifications of retaining tanks.

A.	Except where greater requirements are imposed by this article, all retaining tanks must comply with all applicable standards and requirements of DEP as now existing or hereafter enacted or amended.

B.	The minimum capacity of a retaining tank shall be l ,200 ga llons for each residential or commercial  property  or a volume equal to the quantity of sewage generated in three days, whichever is greater, said determination to be made by the SEO.

C.	A retaining tank shall be equipped  with a warning device to indicate when the tank is filled to within 75% of its capacity. Such device shall consist  of two alarms; an audible or visual signal located inside the improved property; and a visual signal located on the improved property so as to be seen from the nearest public road. The owner  shall  be respon sible for the continuous operation of such device.

D.	The specific design of a retaining tank shall be submitted in detail, in writing, to the SEO for review and approval prior to installation or construction.


§ 164-88. Maintenance.

The owner shall be responsible to the Township for the maintenance of each retaining tank. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the removal of sewage from the retaining tank, repair of said tank, assurance of continuous operation of the warning  device required under § 164-87 hereof and all other actions required to assure containment of sewage and to prevent  leakage or spillage of sewage outside said tank.


§ 164-89. Indemnification by owner.

Each owner of an improved property containing a retaining tank installed, constructed or used pursuant to this article shall, by reason of such installation, construction or use, be deemed to have agreed to indemnify the Township and hold it harmless of and from any and all liability, damages, costs, expenses, attorneys' fees and any other obligation  imposed upon  it by reason of such owner's failure to perform the obligations imposed hereunder  or  by  otherwise violating this article and, further, shall be deemed to agree to reimburse the Township for all costs, expenses  and expenditures  which it incurs by reason of such owner's failure to perform



164:40	OJ - OJ - 20J4
 
§ 164-89                                         SEWERS AND WATER                                         § 164-91

the obligations imposed hereunder or in enforcing the provisions of this article against said owner.


§ 164-90. Maintenance security deposit.

A	As a condition of permitting the installation, construction and/or use of a retaining tank, the owner shall deposit with the Township a sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors or an amount recommended by the SEO, whichever amount is greater, in cash, for the improved property served by a retaining tank as partial security for the Township for reimbursement for any costs or expenses incurred in enforcing the prov1s1ons of this article against said owner. Said deposit shall be  retained by the Township in an account to be known as "Retaining Tank Maintenance Security Account," which shall be interest-bearing, which interest shall be retained by the Township and may be disbursed annually for general Township purposes , including the application of a sum, as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, per year per retaining tank for the Township's administrative cost in maintaining said account.

B.	The Township shall have the right to use and consume said deposit to reimburse its costs and  expenses in the enforcement of this article to include but not necessarily be limited to the following: removing and disposing of sewage from the retaining tank; repairing the retaining   tank  and/or  warning  device;  inspecting  the  retaining  tank;  testing  sewage; attorneys'  fees, court cost s and witness fees in any litigation required to enforce this article.

C.	At any time such deposit falls below the original amount thereof, the owner shall promptly deposit such additional funds to restore the full amount. Such further deposit sha ll be made within 30 calendar days after the date notice requiring such further deposit is mailed to owner.

D.	ALI deposits made hereunder shall be  deemed  to  be  in  rem  and  appurtenant  to  the improved property containing such retaining tank. As such , the deposit  shall be deemed to relate to the owner of said improved property at the time any question arises thereto.

E.	The Township shall return and refund to the then-current owner the maintenance security deposit  (or the remaining balance thereof),  without  interest,  upon the occurrence of any of  the  following  events;  the  improved  property  is  connected  to  a  municipal  sewage system;   a DEP approved on-site sewage  disposal  system  is  installed  to  serve  the improved  property; the improved property is no longer occupied and the retaining tank is discontinued and filled with solid, dry material as approved by the SEO.


§ 164-91. Violations constitute nuisance.

The owner's failure to comply with the maintenance provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a public nuisance becau se of the threat to public health and damage to the waters of the Commonwealt h of Pennsylvania and may be abated by injunctive action. By  installing, constructing or using a retaining tank pursuant to this article, the owner shall be deemed to agree with the foregoing sentence and, further, acknowledges that the Court of Common Pleas



164:41	01 • 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-91                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 164-95

of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, sitting in equity, shall have juri sdiction of the improved property and each owner and that no adequate remedy at law exists.


§ 164-92. Owner responsible for collector.

The Township shall not provide sewage removal , transportation  or disposal services and does not intend to license, regulate or otherwise control collectors. The owner of the improved property requiring the services of a collector shall be entirely responsible for  collector's services and shall indemnify Township and hold it harmless of and from any and all liability (without limitation or exception) imposed or sought to be imposed against the Township by reason of the collector 's activities, including but not limited to the Township's costs of defending against any such claim, including the Township's attorneys' fees.


§ 164-93. Abuse and revocation of privilege

A.	The Township's  permission  for  the installation,  construction  and/or  use  of  a  retammg tank  is hereby declared to be a privilege, as distinguished  from a right, of the owner of an improved property. Therefore, the owner's abuse of said privilege by failure to comply with  the terms and provisions of this article may be cause for the privilege to be revoked, in which  event the improved property served by any such retaining tank shall be vacated and no further  sewage sha ll be generated on or discharged from said improved property without liability to the Township.•4

B.	The Township may revoke  such  privilege upon  not  less than  five days' written  notice mai led  to  the  owner  of  the  improved   property  and  posted  conspicuously  on  each improved property.


§ 164-94. Access to residential premises.

Each owner constructing, installing or using a retammg tank shall be deemed to have authorized the SEO and/or any duly authorized officials of the Township to enter upon the improved property to inspect the facilit ies authorized by this article, to enforce the provisions of this article, abate any nuisances arising from delinquent maintenance of such  facilities, enforce the revocation of the privil.ege of continued use of such facilities. Any such entry shall not constitute a trespass.


§ 164-95. Application and permit required.

A.	An owner of an improved property seeking to use  a retammg tank shall submit an application therefor on a form to be provided by the Township, which shall includ e the following information:







14.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I , General  Provisions, Art. 11).


164:42	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 164-95	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-95

(1)	Name(s) and addresses of each owner.

(2)	Identification of the improved property, to include the Cumberland County Real Estate Tax Assessor's parcel number; street address; copy of current deed or other document whereby the owner(s) claim(s) title to said improved property.

(3)	Description of each improved residential unit or commercia l unit on each prope1iy
to include floor plan, room dimensions and nature of each room.

(4)  A plot  or map  to  scale of the improved  property  accurately showing the location and description of all improvements, significant  differences  in  surface  grade  or level and the location of the proposed retaining tank and exterior warning device.

(5) A detailed drawing and narrative specifications of the proposed retaining tank and warning devices sufficient for adequate review by the SEO.

B.	A permit issued pursuant to  this  article  shall  not  be  transferred  except  as hereinafter provided. A transfer or attempted transfer of any permit or any interest therein, except in conformity with this article, shall constitute a  default  under  the  maintenance  security agreement and a violation subject to penalties as set forth herein.

C.	An owner of an improved property seeking to transfer or acquire an existing retaining tank permit or authority to use a retaining tank for which a permit has been granted to another owner shall submit a written application as required by this article. In addition, the new owner of improved property (the transferee) shall submit a maintenance security agreement either assuming, without exception or reservation , the obligations of the existing landowner (the transferor) or a substitute agreement whereby the transferee undertakes all legal obligations of a permit holder under this article. The Township shall have the right to refu se the transfer if the proposed transferee is unable to comply with the provisions of this article. In addition, the Township shall have the right to impose such other conditions and safeguards upon the transferee as are deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public interest and to prevent a nuisance or health hazard.

D.	The application shall be accompan ied by:

(1)	A filing and processing fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.

(2)	The maintenance security deposit required under § 164-90 hereof.

(3)	An acknowledgment /agreement  signed by each owner in the following form:


ACKNOWLEDGMENT  AND AGREEMENT  BY OWNER(S)
The undersigned being all the owners of the following improved residential or commercial property	_
------in







164:43	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-95	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-96

North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and in consideration of being granted permission by the Township of  North  Middleton  to  install, construct and the privilege to use a retaining tank to serve the property known as:



do hereby acknowledge receipt of a copy of the Nort h Middleton Township Retaining Tank Ordinance and, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree to comply with each and all revisions of said Ordinance and to otherwise be legally bound thereby. We further acknowledge, under stand and agree that said Ordinance and this acknowledgment/agreement shall be binding upon all successive and future owners of the improved residential or commercial property .
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF, 1/we, jo intly and severally, have hereunt o set my/our
hand(s) and seal(s) this __ day of	, 20	.
--------(SEAL)
Owner (individu a l)
--------(SEAL)
Owner (individual)
 	 (SEAL) Owner (individual)



 





ATTEST :


Corporate Secretary
(Corporate  Seal)
 
Name of Corporate Owner
By	 	 President of Corpora t ion
 



Name of Partner
By	 	 Partner
By     	 Partner
By	 	 Partner



§ 164-96. Enforcement.

The SEO, with the consent of the Board , is hereby authorized to take all appropriate actions at law or in equity to abate any violation of this article where the continued violation is believed to be a threat to the health of the inhabitants of this Township or deleterious to the qua lity of the waters of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania.



164:44	0 1 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-97                                        SEWERS AND WATER                                       § 164-100

§ 164-97. Violations and penalties.

Any person who  shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof by a summary proceeding action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Proced ure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $1,000, plus all court costs and imprisonment, all pursuant to the purpose and mandate of Act No. 172 of 1996.15 Each day's violation  of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.


ARTICLE X
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Systems

§ 164-98. Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Sewage Facilities  Management  Ordinance."


§ 164-99. Statutory authority; findings.

As authorized by the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.), the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L.  1535 as amended, 35 P.S. § 750. l  et seq.), and the municipal codes, North Middleton Township has an obligation to provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection of the public health by preventing the discharge  of  untreat ed  or  inadequately  treated  sewage. The North  Midd leton Township  Act
537 Officia l Sewage Facilities Plan has evaluated the need to provide adequate sewage facilities and has found that the formation of an on-lot management program to  be  an effective method of preventing and abating water pollution and hazards to the public health.


§ 164-100. Intent.

A.	The Board of Supervi sors  recognizes  that  on-lot  sewage disposal  systems constitute  a va lid and approved manner of preserving the quality of the water and other natural resources of the Township through the proper treatment of wastes generated  by development within the Township. The use of on-lot sewage systems will be regulated in accordance wit h the provisions of this article until such time as the Board of Supervisors has obtained approva l of a revision of its Act 537 Plan and has adopted an ordinance amend ing or repealing this article. In addition, the Township has determined that should an on-lot system fail, the water quality and other natural  resources of the Township may be polluted.

B.	All landowners of lots hereafter created should provide and set aside areas for the installation of replacement on-lot sewage disposal systems. As further implementation of this policy for lots on which on-lot disposal systems are  not  feasible,  the Township desires to establish procedures for the u se and maintenance of privately owned and operated  sewage treatment  facilities.



1S. Editor's No te: See 53 P.S. §6660 I .


164:45	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-101                                 NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                 § 164-102

§ 164-101. Word usage.

In the interpretation of thi s article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.


§ 164-102. Definitions.

For  the  purposes  of  this  article,  the  terms  u sed  shall  be  construed  to  have the  following
meanings:

ACT 537 - The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., as amended.

ALTERNATE SYSTEM - A method of demonstrated on-lot sewage treatment and disposa l
not  described in Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73, as amended.

AUTHORIZED AGENT - A licensed sewage enforcement officer, qualified registered professional engineer, the Township Engineer , qualified registered professional  geologist, qualified soils scient ist, codes enforcement officer, plumbing inspector, municipal manager or any other qualified person who is authorized by the Board to administer or enforce the provi sions of this article.

BOARD - The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township.

CODES ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) - An authorized agent of the Township to admini ster and enforce ordinances and regulations in the Township.

DEPARTMENT - The Department of Environmental Protect ion of the Commonwea lth of
Pennsylvania or any successor agency.

DEVELOPER - Any person who constructs, or contracts to construct, any bu ilding or other structure which is serviced, or intended to be serviced, by sewage facilities, or which is required to be connected to sewage facilities.

EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) - For the purpose of determining the number of lots in a subdivision or land development only as it relates to the determination of planning exempt ions and fees for p lanning module reviews under Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Rules and Regulations , Department of Environmenta l Protection, that part of a multipl e-family dwelling or commercial or industrial establishment with flows equal to 400 gallons per day. These flow figures are not intended to be used for the calcu lation of flows for the design of community sewage systems  or for the allocation  of flows related to community sewage systems. Community sewage system flows for design and permitting purposes shall be calculated using the procedures established in the Departme nt's Domestic Wastewater Facilities Manua l.

IMPROVED PROPERTY - Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a struct ure intended for continuou s or periodic habitation , occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.

LAND DEVELOPMENT - A land development as defined in Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, as the same is amended from time to time.



164:46	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 164-102                                       SEWERS AND WATER                                       § 164- 102

LOT - A parcel of land held in single and separate ownership.

MALFUNCTION - The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into surface waters of this commonwealth , backs up into the building connected to the system or otherwise cau ses a nuisance hazard to the public health or pollution of ground or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking water wells. Any septic or holding tank observed to be leaking is considered a malfunctioning tank. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the conditions noted above occur for any length of time during any period of the year.
MUNICIPALITY - North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania. OFFICIAL PLAN - A Comprehensive Plan for the provision of adequate sewage disposal
systems adopted  by  the Township  and  approved  by the Department  in  accordance  with  the
Act and with applicable Department regulations  regarding Act 537.

OWNER - Any per son having a vested legal or equitable interest m land within the
Township.

PERSON - Includes an individual; association; public or private corporation for-profit or not-for -profit; partnership; firm; trust; estate; department; board ; bureau or agency of the United States or the commonwea lth; political subdivision; municipalit y; district; authority; or other legal entity which is recogni zed by law as the subject of rights and duties. The term includes the members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of a local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for-profit or not-for-profit.

PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT - A revi sion to, or exception to the revision of, the Township Official Plan submitt ed in connection with the request for approval of a subdivision or land development in accordance with Department regulations.

REPLACEMENT LOCATION - A location designated as the future location of an on-lot sewage system that shall be installed should the initial on-lot system installed or to be installed fail or otherwise become inoperable and which sha ll be in accordance with all applicable Township ordinances for an on-lot system, and shall be protected from encroachment by a note on the final plan recorded in the Office of the Cumberland County Recorder of Deeds.

SEWAGE - A substance that contains the waste product s or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals; a substance harmful to the public health, to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for recreation; or a substance which constitutes pollution under the Clean Streams Law.

SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - An official of the local agency who reviews permit applications and sewage facilities planning modules, issues permits as authorized by the Act and conducts the investigations and inspections that are necessary to implement the Act and regulations thereunder.

SEWAGE FACILITIES - A system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and
disposal which  will prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage or other





164:47	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-102                                  NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 164-103

waste into waters of this commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of sewage or other waste. The term includes:

A.	INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM - A system of piping, tanks or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into waters of this commonwealth or by means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.

(1)	INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM -An individual sewage system that uses a system of piping, tanks or other facilities for collecting, treating or disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area or spray field or by retention in a retaining tank.

(2)	lNDNIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM -All individual sewage systems which use a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal  other  than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a retaining tank.

B.	COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM -A sewage facility, whether publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, or two or more equivalent dwelling unit s and the treatment or disposal, or both, of the sewage on one or more of the lots or at another site.

(1)	COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM - A community sewage system that uses a system of piping , tanks or other facilities for collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area or retaining tank.

(2) COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM -A publicly or privately owned community sewage system which uses a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal other than retaining tank.

SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP - The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, which such ownership is separate and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining a lot.

STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.

SUBDIVISION - A subdivision  as defined  m Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land
Development, as amended from time to time.

TOWNSHIP - The Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.


§ 164-103. Additional definitions.

All other definitions of words and terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 73, Standards for On-Lot Sewage Treatment Facilities , of Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Department of Environmenta l Protection.








164:48	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-104	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-106

§ 164-104. Applicability; permit required.

A.	General. The owner of any  land, building or structure within the Township served or to be serviced by a sewage facility shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article except as specifically exempted herein.

B.	Permits required. A permit  shall be obtained from the authorized agent of the Township in accordance with the applicable provi sions of Act 537, the  regulations  of  the Department of Environmenta l Protection, this article, and any other applicable authority prior to the installation  or repair of any sewage facility.


§ 164-105. Testing requirements.

A.	General. After the effective date of this article, no requests for approval of  planning modules for land development and no revision, exceptions to revision, or supplements to the official plan shall be granted by the Board unless the applicant presents evidence satisfactory to the Board that each lot to be created contains a suitable location for the installation of an sewage facility and replacement location.

B.	Except ion. Land which is to be served by a  community  sewage  system  is  exempt, provid ing that the owner and the Department  have executed  a  capacity  agreement  for such system. Any division or development of land that does not constitute a subdivision or land development , as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalitie s Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P .L. 805, as reenacted December 21, 1988, P.L.  1329, No.  170 (53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.), as amended, or Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development, and,
further, does not increase the EDU demand on an existing sewage  facility,  shall  be exempt from requirements of this §  164-105;  provided, however, that the provisions of Act 537, and the regu lations of the Departm ent of Environmental Protection so provide.

C.	Proced ure. The Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) shall perform or observe all tests required by this article for the location of a sewage system, and confirm the suitability of the location . The applicant shall provid e a plot plan, which identifies the location of the deep probe, the percolation holes, and the type of, and area for, the wastewater disposal system approved by the SEO.


§ 164-106. Replacement location required .

A.	General. After  the  effective  date  of  this  article,  a  replacement  location  for  an  on-lot sewage system shall be requ ired for all newly created lots which are not serviced or to be serviced  by  a community  sewage  system.  Lots existing on or  prior  to the date of this article shall be  exempt  from  the  requirements  of  this  section.  Suitability  testing  is required and shall comply with all applicable regulations.

B.	Identification . The location of the initial on-lot sewage system  and the replacement location shall be identified on the final plan .

C.	Notation required . A note sha ll be added to the furn! plan stating that no improvements shall  be constructed upon the replacement location.




164:49	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-106	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-108

D.	Waiver. Upon application, and upon  a showing that none of the conditions exists ·which replacement  locations are required under then current regulations of the Department, the Board may waive the requirement s of this section.


§ 164-107. Private sewage treatment facilities and alternative systems.

A		Applicability. When it is impossible for an owner to provide a sewage facility, the Township will consider a request for the installation of an alternate private sewage facility. No such facility shall be approved unless it compiles with all applicable federal and state statutes, Township ordinances, all and any regulations promulgated by any governmental agency having juri sdiction.

B.	Procedure. In the event any alternate private sewage facility is proposed to serve more than one owner, the applicant for such facility shall provide an agreement and financial security for the governance and maintenance of such facility. The agreement  and financial security shall be subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor, and the Township Engineer shall determine the amount of the financial secu rity. The applicant shall further comply with all applicable regulations set forth in Title 25  of  the Pennsylvania  Code.


§ 164-108. Operation, maintenance, inspection, repair and replacement.

A	General. Commencing on the effective date of this article, all sewage facilities and alternate systems shall be accessible at reasonable times for complete inspection by the Township or its authorized agent. Every owner of an individual sewage system shall have seepage or other solids removed from the treatment tank at least once every four years unless an inspection program reveals that the treatment tank is filled, in a longer time interval, with solids in excess  of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank or with  scum  in excess of I /3 of the liquid depth of the tank. In either of the latter events, the longer time interval shall control. At the time of required pumping, periodic inspection shall be performed to determine whether or not  any  system  is  operating  properly.  Inspections shall include the inspect ion of the septic tank, aerobic tanks, disposal field, distribution box and any other components of the system.

B.	Frequency. The Township may increase the frequency of inspection :

(J)	If the system is presently malfunctioning;

(2)	If a regular inspection reveals a malfunctioning system;

(3)	If the system has malfunctioned in the past;

(4)	If frequent tank pump out is required ;

(5)	If the nature of use will significantly increase the load on the system periodically;

(6)	If the number of people u sing the system increases; or

(7)	For any other reason deemed necessary by the Township.




164:50	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 164-108	SEWERS AND WATER	§ 164-109

C.	Malfunction defined. The sewage facilities or alternative system is malfunctioning when it  causes pollution to the grou ndwater or surface water, contamination of private or public   drinking  water  supplies,  nuisance  problems,  or  a  hazard  to  public  health. Indications  of  malfunctioning  systems are evident when, but are not limited to, foul odors,  lu sh   grass growing over the system, backup of wastewater in the  attached building s, soggy  ground  over the system, surfacing  sewage effluent flowing over the ground and occurring  at any time of the year.

D.	Maintenance. The Board, or its designated agent, may require any owner to provide other periodic maintenance which may include, but is not limited to, surface contouring to divert stormwater and specific maintenance of system components inclusive of electrical, mechanical, plumbing , chemical system features, collection and conveya nce piping, pressure lines and manholes , alarm and flow recorder devices, pumps , disinfection equipment and related safety items. Every owner shall protect the absorption area from physica l damage. Holding tanks shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable regulations of the Department.

E.	Compliance. If the owner fails to promptl y comply with the order of the Township, or its authori zed agent , and should such failure result in a public nui sance, the Board shall have the right to abate such nuisance under the authority of the Second Class Township Code and to assess the cost of abatement as a Hen against the property.


§ 164-109. Proof of compliance.

A.	General. Proof of pumpin g and/or inspection shall be provided by the owner of the individual system within 30 days of the date of  service.  The  inspection  may  be performed	by the Board's designated agent, who may be  a  licensed  seepage pumper/hauler approved by the Board. In either event, a signed receipt containing the following information shall be provided to the owner and the Township:

(I)	Date of pumping;

(2)	Name and address of system owner;

(3)	Address of tank location if different than owners;

(4)	Description and diagram of loca tion of tank, including location of any marker s,
risers, and access hatches;

(5)	Size of tank;

(6)	Age of the system (where applicable);

(7)	Last date of pump out;

(8)	List of any maintenance performed ;

(9)	Any indication of system ma lfunctioning observed;

(10)	Amount of sewage or other solid or semisolid mater ial removed; and




164:51	01  -01-2014
 
§ 164-109	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-111

(11)	Waste hauler's state license number  permitting  him to collect  and haul  sewage in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

B.	Submittal to the Township. The owner shall sign the receipt to affirm that, to the best of
his or her knowledg e, the sewage contains none of the prohibited substances specified in
§ 164-11OC of this article. The original counterpart of the receipt shall be filed with the Township within 30 days of the date of pumping, and a copy of it shall be provided to the owner.


§ 164-110. Availability of regulations; water conservation; discharges.

A.	General. The Township shall make available to all existing and new residents a copy of an abstract of the pertinent information and regulations as outlined by  this article. Appropriate literature and publications discu ssing the care and maintenance of septic tanks, waterless toilets and other subsurfa ce waste disposal systems shall be made available to those residents who utilize such systems to the knowledge of the Township.

B.	Resid ents shall  be encouraged to minimize water  u se and to install water-saving devices in order to increase the efficiency and promote the long  life of on-lot disposal  system; water conservation measu res shall be implemented as directed by  the  Township,  its agents or Sewage Enforcement Officer. The following criteria shall be considered as the maximum allowable water usage limits where a home is to  be considered  as utilizing water  conservation practices:

(1)	Flow-control  faucet aerators (two gallons per minute).

(2)	Low-flush toilet s (1.5 gallons per flush).

(3)	Flow-limiting shower heads (2.5 gallons per minute).

(4)	Use of other water saving appliances.

C.	Permitted and prohibited discharges. No owner shall permit a flow in excess of the designed capacity to discharge into a sewage facility. No owner shall permit hazardous substances or chemicals, including, but not limited to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paint , paint thinner , herbicides , solvents, or petroleum-derived products to be discharged into any system.


§ 164-111. Right of entry.

A.	General. Except as provided in Subsection B herein, upon presentation of proper identification, Township employees, agents or officials shall be admitted to any property for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, maintenance or rehabilitation of sewage facilities, and alternative systems; provided, however, that 72 hours' prior written notice by certified mail shall have been given to the owner.

B.	Emergency  procedure s.  When,  in  the  opinion  of  an  authorized  Township  employer's agent or official, there is imminent danger of a threat to the public health, such person is authorized to order the owner not to permit further discharge into a sewage facility until



164:52	01-01-2014
 
§ 164-111                                       SEWERS AND WATER                                       § 164-114

the threat has been removed.  In the event of such emergency, no prior written notice
shall be required.

C.	Dental of entry. If entry is refused or not obtained, the authorized agent of the Township is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.

D.	Remedial measures. The Township may require the correction or alteration of the system in  the event that the inspection reveals a malfunction or inadequac y. The SEO shall provide  a written notification requiring specific remedial action to be completed with.in a reasonab le  period of time as is deemed necessary according to the severity of the malfunction or inadequacy.


§ 164-112. Enforcement; administration fees.

A.	General. The Board shall appoint, by resolution, such persons, as it deems necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Such persons, as appointed, sha ll deemed to be the authorized agents of the Township as that term is defined in this article. The procedure for initial  and  continuing  implementation of this article shall  be adopted by resolutions of the Board from time to time.

B.	Fees. The Township may establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect fees, to cover the cost of administering the on-lot maintenance program. The Township can set fees from time to time by a properly enacted resolution or ordinance.


§ 164-113. Disposal of seepage by pumpers/haulers. •6

Every seepage pumper/hauler shall be licensed by the Department and shall,  at  all  times, comply with the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. No seepage pumper/hauler shall  disperse any  liquid or solid seepage or sewage into or upon the air, land or waters of the Township without first having provided written  notice of such intention to the Township at least 14 days prior to the proposed dispersal, which notice shall include copies of written approvals  from the Department  and all other  governing authorities for such activity and the terms and conditions imposed by the  Department  and  other governing  authorities.


§ 164-114. Violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fall to comply with any provision  of this article, including but not necessa rily being limited to the construction, maintenance, repair , alteration, or failure to maintain, extend or use any sewage facility or any alternate sewage facility, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the Township or its authorized agent.








16.	Editor's Note:Amended at time of adoptio n of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).


164:53	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 164-115	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 164-117

§ 164-115. Violations and penalties.

A.	Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof by a summary proceeding action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses und er the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plu s all court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, and imprisonment , all pursuant to the purpose and mandate of Act No. 172 of 1996.17 Each day's continuance of a violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.1s

B.	The discharge by the Town ship of its obliga tions as set forth in this article shall create no
liability upon the Township, its officials, employees or agents .

C.	All reports, inspections, appraisa ls, certifications or records required  or produced by the Township, its officials, employees or agents, as requ ired by this article, shall be for the use and benefit of the Township only and shall not be accepted, uti lized or relied upon by any other person or party by way of certification or otherwise.


§ 164-116. Remedies.

In case of any unlawfu l acts, the Township's authorized agent shall institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided in § l 64-l 15A. In addition, the authorized agent, at the direction of the Board, shall ask the Township Solicitor to proceed at law or in equ ity against the person or persons responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering that person:

A.	To restrain , correct or remove the violation or retrain from any further use of the sewage facility;

B.	To restrain or correct the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or alteration of a sewage facility or alternate sewage facility;

C.	To require the removal of work in violation;

D.	To prevent the occupancy or u se of any structure that is serviced by a sewage facility which is not in compliance with the provi sions of this article; or

E.	To institute proceedings to abate a public nuisance under any lawfu l authority providing for  the abatement of such nuisances and to assess the cost and related expenses of such abatement as a lien against the premises.


§ 164-117. Effect on other regulations .

The provi sions  of  this  article,  so  far  as  they  are the  same as those of  ordinances  in  force
immediately  prior  to  the  enactment  of  this  article,  are  intended  as  a  continuation  of  such



17.	Editor's Note: See SJ P.S. §66601.

18.	Editor's Note: Amended at t ime of adoption of Code {see Ch. I, General Provisio ns, Ari. II).


164:54	01 - 01 -2014
 
§ 164-117                                       SEWERS AND WATER                                       § 164-117

ordinances and not as new enactments. Provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any  right or  penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any ordinance repealed by this article.



























































164:55	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachm ent  I
Township-of North Middleton Appendix.A
Pretreatment  Program

1.	PROGRAM  INTRODUCTION

1.1	Purpose of Pretreatment Program

The Township of North Middleton ("Township"), through the North Middleton Authority , provides a municipal sanitary sewage collection system within said Township through which it transports wastewater to its own wastewater treatment plant and to the Carlisle Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant. Township is also a party to an intermunicipal agreement with the Borough of Carlisle ("Carlisle") (and others) whereby it is a contributing municipality for the treatment of wastewater ·generated  in said Township. Carlisle is required to assure the federal Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection ("DEP") that its contributing municipalities have developed and enforce sewage pretreatment requirements for certain industrial users. This Pretreatment Program is enacted in order to provide uniform regulations which will meet EPA and DER .requiremen ts as well as to regulate wastewater discharged into the Sewer System, whether such wastewater is ultimately disposed of through North Middleton or the Carlisle treatment plants.


1.2	Discussion of Pretreatment Requirements

Any municipal wastewater treatment facility should be used in the common interest of the public. This principle demands that the facility be used in a manner consistent with the purpose and capacities for which it was designed. No use should be allowed that could result in physical damage, interference with proper operation, unreasonable maintenance , attention or expense, or pollution as defined by the Clean Streams Law.

Municipal treatment plants are normally designed to receive a relatively dilute influent containing solids and other constituents primarily from domestic sources. Domestic wastewater has  certain settling and biodegradation rates that involve predictable responses when the wastewater is subjected  to conventional treatment  methods .  Industrial wastewaters can be much more concentrated or toxic, and the constituents may adversely affect the conventional treatment processes ·usually associated with sewage disposal.

The pollutants in industrial wastewater can cause a variety of problems at municipal plants such as structural damage, inhibition of bacterial action in the biological treatment processes, plant upsets, and the pass-through of toxic pollutants to the stream resulting in damage to aquatic life or NPDES permit violations. In addition, industrial wastes in municipal treatment plants can cause ·accumulation of pollutants in sludge that may preclude or limit disposal practices involving incineration, landfilling or land application , or expose workers to chemical hazards from poisonous gases or volatile materials. Many of




164 Attachment 1:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

these potential problems can result in increased costs for operation of the municipal facility. The nature of industrial wastewaters may make pretreatment necessary before they can be discharged to a municipal system. Pretreatment can generally be defined as any operation used to remove pollutants or change the quality of wastewater to make it acceptable for discharge into a conventional treatment system.

Federal regulations require that any municipal plant with a design flow greater than five million gallons per day develop a local program. In addition, plants with design flows less than five million gallons per day may also be required to develop a local program if industrial waste contributors cause problems at the facility such as upsets, permit violations, or sludge contamination.

Protecting the significant investment of public funds made by federal, state, and local government in the construction and operation of municipal wastewater treatment facilities from damage caused by industrial discharges, and providing for the control of the discharge of hazardous and toxic pollutants from indirect sources that could pass through municipal systems and cause pollution or contamination of municipal sludges eventually disposed on the land, will eventually lead to full implementation of the pretreatment program which will benefit all the citizens of the Commonwealth by abating and preventing pollution and by providing a clean and safe supply of water critical for healthy economic development.

It is the purpose of this document to establish and set forth the local pretreatm ent program to regulate the wastewaters into all wastewater treatment facilities receiving sewage generated in North Middleton Township.


2. DEFINITIONS

Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the terms defined in this Section 2, wherever used or referred to in the Pretreatment Program, shall have  the following respective meanings unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise:

Authority	shall mean the North Middleton Authority, a  municipality  authority incorporated, organized, and existing under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, P.L. 382, 53 P.S. § 30 I et seq., as amended. 1

Average Daily Flow shall be calculated by dividing total Sewage Wastes flow under consideration for the 60 days immediately preceding the date of calculation by the number 60.


Best Management Practices (BMP) means schedules of acttv1ties, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedure s, and other management practices to prevent violation of the prohibition s listed in Section 8.4 of the Program. BMP's include treatment requirements, operating procedure s, and practices to control plant site run-off, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage . BMP's also include


1 Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.



164 Attachment 1:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

alternative means (i.e. management plans) of complying with or in place of certain established categorica l pretreatment  standards and effluent limits. .[Added 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)

Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/I utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five consecutive days at 20 degrees Centigrade. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" published by the American Public Health Association.

Board shall mean the Board of Township Supervisors acting as the governing body of
Township.

Carlisle  shall  mean  the  Borough  of Carlisle  or  the  Carlisle  Borough  Sewer  System
Authority.

Control Authority. For situations where waste water flows into treatment facilities owned by the Borough of Carlisle, the Control Authority shall be the Borough of Carlisle. As relating to wastewater that flows into treatment facilities owned by North Middleton Authority, the Control Authority shall be North Middleton Authority and/or North Middleton Township. [Added 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)

Director shall mean the Person employed and designated by the Authority to administer and supervise the Pretreatment Program· and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by the Pretreatment Program, or his duly authorized representative. He or she shall be qualified by experience, training, and knowledge of applicable regulations of the duties set forth hereunder.

Domestic Wastes shall mean normal household wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories and laundries.

Garbage shall mean solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and dispensing food
and from handling, storage and sale of produce.

Holding Tank Waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks, including -but  not limited tQ vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum tank trucks .

Improved Property shall mean any property upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings or animals and from which structure Sanitary Sewage and/or Industrial Wastes shall or may be discharged.

Indirect Discharge or Discharge shall mean the discharge or the introduction of non­ domestic Pollutants from any source, including Holding Tank Waste, regulated under 307
(b) or (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the Sewer System.

Industrial User shall mean a source of Indirect Discharge .





164Attachment 1:3	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

Industrial Wastes shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery, or processing of natural resources , as distinct from Sanitary Sewage.

Interference shall mean a Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: (1) inhibits or disrupts the Treatment Works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Treatment Works NPDES Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345); the Solid Waste Disposal  Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
·	(RCRA)"; any State regulation s contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

·	mg/I shall mean milligrams per liter.

National or Federal Categorical Treatment (Pretreatment) Standard shall mean any National Pretreatment Standard established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6 and established as separate regu lations under 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, which applies to a specific category of Industrial Users.

National Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standard shall mean any regulation containing Pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 13 17) which applied to Industrial Users.

New Source shall mean any building , structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutant s, the construction  of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards, if such standard s are applicable upon promulgation.

Owner shall mean any Person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any Improved Proper.ty.

pH (Hydrogen Ion Content) shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution, and indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substance.

ppm shall mean parts per million.

Pass-through shall mean a Discharge which exits the Treatment Works into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or  in  conjunction  with  a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Treatment Works NPDES Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).




164 Attachment 1:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER



Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, society, estate, trust, any Federa l, State or local governmental entity, or any other group or entity, or any legal representative, agent, successor or assign thereof.

Pollutant shall mean any Wastewaters containing any substance or material which is an Interference, constitutes a hazard to humans or to the receiving stream or creates a public nuisance, violates National Categorical Pretreatment  Standards or Pretreatment  Standards or causes any Treatment Works to violate receiving water standards.

Pretreatment or Treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of Pollutants , the elimination of Pollutant s, or the alteration of the nature of Pollutants properties in Wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in Lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such Pollutants into any Treatment Works. Such reduction, elimination or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemica l or biological processes, process changes or other means except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).

Pretreatment Program or Program shall mean this Program entitled "North Middleton Township Pretreatment Program," dated December 1990, and any future amendments or supplements thereto.

Pretreatment Requirements  shall mean  any substantive  or procedural  requirement  related to Pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an Industrial User.

Sanitary Sewage shall mean all water-carried Domestic Wastes discharged into the Sewer System from any Improved Property.

Sewage Wastes shall mean Sanitary Sewage or Industrial Wastes or any combination of either thereof, but only to the extent that Industrial Wastes have been  pretreated  and otherw ise meet the requirements of the Pretreatment Program.

Sewer shall mean any pipe, main, or conduit constituting a part of the Sewer System used
or usable for collection of Sanitary Sewage and/or Industrial Waste.

Sewer System shall mean all facilities as of any particular time for collecting, transporting, pumping , treating and disposing of Sanitary Sewage and Industrial Wastes owned by the Authority.

Significant Industrial User (SIU) shall mean any user propo sing to contribute  or contributing wastewater to the POTW who meets any of the following criteria: (1) any Industrial User (IU) subject to categorica l standards; (2) any non-categorical Industrial User that discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW or any
ru that contributes  a process waste stream which  makes up five percent  or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW  treatment plant; or (3) any
IU designated as significant by the Control Authority on the basis that the IU has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.





164 Attachment 1:5	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


Slug Discharge shall mean any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but
not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge.

Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial. Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, and any future amendments or supplements thereto.

Suspended Solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension or dissolved in water, sewage, or other liquids and which shall be determined by laboratory analysis.

Township shall be the Township of North Middleton, a township of the second  class situated in Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.

Toxic Pollutant shall be any Pollutant  or  combination  of  Pollutants  listed  as toxic  in regu lations promu lgated by the EPA under the provisions of 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ l 317) or other acts.

Toxic Substance shall mean any poisonous substance, including but not limited to wastes containing cyanide, lead, copper, and/or chromium ions.

Treatment  Works  shall  mean  any  system  to  which  Wastewater   generated  m  North
Middleton Township is transported and disposed.

User shall mean any Person who contributes, causes or permit s the contribution of Wastewater into the Sewer System and shall include any Owner of Improved Property contributing Wastewater to the Sewer System.

Wastewater shall mean Industrial  Wastes, Sanitary Sewage and Sewage Wastes which are
contributed into or permitted to enter tbe Sewer System.

Wastewater Discharge Permit (Permit) shall  mean the Permit issued pursuant to the Pretreatment  Program.



3.	PRETREATMENT PROGRAM  REGULATIONS

3.1 General Discharge Prohibitions

No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, into the Sewer System any Pollutant or Wastewat er which causes Pass-through or Interference.  These genera l prohibition s apply  to all Users of the Sewer System whether or not the User is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other National , State or loca l Pretreatment Standards or Requirement s. A User shall not contribute any infiltration or prohibited discharges described in the Technical Requirements section of this Pretreatment Program.





164 Attachment 1:6	01-01-  2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER



3.2	Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards

The National Categorical Pretreatment Stand ards, located in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated herein .



3.3	Specific Pollutant Limitations

No U ser shall discharge any Pollutant or Wastewater containing concentrations in excess of the "Pollutant Discharge Limitations" contained in the technica l portion of this Pretreatment Program.



3.4	State Requirements

State requirements and limitations on discharge sha ll apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those imposed under this Program.



3.5	Township's Right of Revision

Township reserves th e right to adopt and promul gate and, from time to time, may adopt and prom ulgate, as it shall deem necessary, limitations or requirements on discharge s to any Treatment Plant in order to ensure compliance with the requirement s of EPA, DER or any other governmental bod y having juri sdiction.


3.6	Excessive Discharge

No User shall ever increase the u se of process water or, in any way, attempt to di lute a discharge as a partial or complete substitut e for adequate Treatment to achieve compliance with the lim itations contained in this Pretreatment Program.


3.7	Accidental Discharges

Each User shall provide protection  from accidental discharge of prohibited  substances or materials regulated by this Program. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited substances or materials shall be provided and maintained at the Owner 's or User's own cost and expense and shall be modified as necessary to meet the requirements of this Program. In the case of an accidental discharge, it  is the responsibility of the User to immediately telephone and notify the Director of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type  of waste, concentrat ion  and  volume,  and  corrective actions.  With in five days  following an accidental  discharge, the User  shall  submit  to the Director  a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and  the measw-es to be taken  by the User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any expense, loss, damage or other liability wh ich may be incurred as a result of damage to




164 Attachment 1:7	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


any Treatment Works or any other damage to Person or Property; nor shall  such notification relieve the User of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed under this Program or other applicable law, rule, or regulation. A notice shall be perman ently posted on the User's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Users shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



4.	CHARGES AND FEES

It is the goal of the Pretreatment Progra m that the cost of implement ing this Program shall be recovered from Users of the Sewer System regulated by the Program. The subjects of permissible charges and fees shall be those listed below and such subject s of charges and fees may be amended from time to time as deemed necessary to meet the cost recovery goal.

A.	Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up the Pretreatment Program.

B.	Charges and fees for operating the Pretreatment Program .

C.	Application fees for Permits.

D.      Fees for monitoring , inspections and surveillan ce procedures.

E.	Fees for reviewing accidental discharges and corrective actions.

F.	Fees for filing appeals.

G.	Charges  and  fees  for  consistent  removal  by  the  Township  of  Pollutants  otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards.

H.       Other charges and fees as may be deemed necessary to carry out the requirements
contained in the Program.



5. ADMINISTRATION

5.1	Wastewater Discharges

(1)	It shall be unlawfu l for any User to discharge any Wastewater into the Sewer System
except in accordance with the provisions of this Program.

(2)	It shall be unlawful for any Significant Industrial User (SIU) to discharge any Wastewater into the Sewer System unless such SIU has first obtained a Permit issued or approved by the Director in accordance with the procedures contained herein.

(3)	Slug Dischar ge Control.  The POTW  or Director  shall  evaluate whether  each  SIU
needs  a  slug  control  plan  or  other  action  to  control  slug  discharges.  For  SIUs




164 Attachment 1:8	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


identified prior to Novemberl4, 2005, the evaluat ion must have been conducted  at least once by October 14, 2006 . Add itional SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated a Significant Industrial User (SIU). The director may require any SIU to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan, or take other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Additionally , the Director may develop such a plan for any SIU. [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)



5.2	Reporting Requirements for Users

(1)	Within 30 days following a requ est from the Director a User shall respond to and answer a preliminary "Industrial Waste Questionnaire," the sample form for which is contained in the technica l portion of this Pretreatment Program , and shall submit the same to the Director.

(2)	Within 30 days following a request from the Director , a User shall respond to and answer a "Wastewater Survey for Nonresidential Establishments," the sample form for which is contained in the technica l portion of this Pretreatment Program, and shall submit the same to the Director.

(3)	Following a request from the Director and within the time limitations as the Director shall specify , a User shall submit such other reports and information as may be required in order to comply with all applicable national, state or local laws, rules, and regulations to the Director.

(4)	A User shall report in writing to the Director and to the municipa lity in which such User is located when the constituents, characteristics or volwne of Wastewater will be changed from that previously discharged by such User into the Sewer System. The User shall submit such report at least 90 days prior to the contemplated change to allow samplin g of the User's Wastewater.

(5)	SIUs are required to notify the Control Authority and the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge or changes affecting wastewater discharge characteristics. [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)

(6)	Signatory/Certification Requirements for Industrial User Permit Applications and Reports. Submissions of all applications for a Pennit, as well as all compliance schedules and reports required by this Program, shall be dated and signed by one of the follow ing:

(a)	By a responsible corporate officer which  includes  a  president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function.

(b)	By a genera l partner of proprietor , if a partnership or sole propri etorship exists.

(c)	By a duly authorized representative if the authorization is made in writing by
an  individua l described  in (a) or (b). The authorization  shall specify either an




164 Attachment l :9	01-01 -20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


individual or a position having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the facility.

(d)	In addition, all such applications, schedules and reports shall comply with all signatory and certification requirements as provided in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6) and 403.12(1).

(7)	Hazardous Waste Notification

(a)	The Industrial User shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director , and State hazardous waste authorities  in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which , if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazard ous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardou s waste number, and the type of discharge (continuou s, batch , or other). If the Industrial User discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month  to  the POTW,  the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readi ly available to the lndustrial User: An identifica tion of the hazardou s constituents contained  in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month , and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to  be discharged during the following twelv e months. Industrial Users who commence discharging sha ll provide notification no later than l 80 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However , notifications of  changed  discharges must be submitted  und er 40 CFR 403. 12. The notification requirement in thi s section does not apply to pollutan ts already reported under self-monitoring requirements.

(b)	Discharger s are exempt from the requirement s of this subsection during a calenda r month in which they discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of hazardou s wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261 .33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quality of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.

Subsequent months during which the lndustrial User discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.

(c)	In the case of any new regulations under section 300 1 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the Industrial User must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorit ies of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.




164 Attachment 1:10	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER



(d)	In the case of any notification made under paragraph (a) of this section, the Industrial User shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicit y of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.



5.3	Wastewater Discharge Permits

(1)	General. All Significant Industrial Users (SIUs) propo sing to connect to or to contribute to the Sewer System shall obtain a Permit before connecting to or contributing to the Sewer System. All existing SIUs connected to or contributing to the Sewer System shall obtain a Permit within 180 days of the effective date of this program.

(2)	Permit Application. Not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW, except as otherwise provided in Section 5.3(1), all SJUs shall complete and submit to the Director an application for a Permit , accompanied by the applicable fee(s), the form for which application shall be prescribed by the Director and sha ll contain or include not less than the following information:

(a)	The name, address and location (if different from address) of the applicant.

(b)	The name, title and telephone number of the applicant's local manager, local superintend ent, or the like; and the name, title and telephone number of the applicant's employee responsible for the activity or  process  generating  the Wastewater for which the Permit is applied .

(c)	The name, address, location (if different from address) and telephone number of the applicant's consulting engineer, if any.

(d)	The address and location (if different from address) of the activity or process generating such Wastewater.

(e)	The SIC classification of the activity or process generating such Wastewater.

(t)  A  general  description  of the activity or process generating  such Wastewater , and a general description of the facilities and equipment utilized in  such activity or process.

The information submitted pursuant to the following subparagraph s (g) to (q), inclusive, shall include an explanation of any daily, weekly, monthly and seasonal fluctuations or variation s:

(g)	The days of the week and the hours during such days when such activity or process will be in operation, the peak days of such operation, and the peak hours of such operation during such day.





164 Attachment I:11	01-01  -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


(h)	The average number of employees  and the maximum  number  of employees who will be employed directly in such activity or process during the peak hours of such operation on the peak days of such operation.

(i)	The types of raw materials utilized in such activity or process, and the average quantity or volume and the maximum quantity or volume of such raw materials utilized per day on the peak days of such operation.

U) The types of finished products produced by such activity or process, and the average quantity or volume and the maximum quantity or volume of such finished products produced per day on the peak days of such operation.

(k)	The average volume and the maximum volume of water utilized per day for such activity or process on the peak days of such operation, and the source of such water.

(1)	An analytical description of the type, constituents and characteristics of Wastewater generated by such activity or process, including a written report of such analysis made by an analytical laboratory acceptable to the Director. The methods and procedures for sampling such  Wastewater  and  for performing such analysis shall be in accordance with the methods  and  procedures prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 which are hereby incorporated herein.

(m)	A description of the nature and concentration of any material , matter, mixture and substance, toxic or otherwise, which is a constituent of such Wastewater.

(n)	A description of the nature and concentration of any Pollutant which is a constituent of such Wastewater.

(o)	The average daily volume and the maximum daily volume of such Wastewater which  will be discharged  into the Sewer System from such activity or process on the peak days of such operation.

(p)	The hours during each day when such Wastewat er will be discharged into the Sewer  System; the hours  during each day when  maximum  volumes  will  be discharged   into the Sewer System; the volume  of  each  discharge  and  the duration  of  each   such discharge; the hours  during  each  day  when  peak instantaneous  volumes  will be discharged into the Sewer System; and the volume of each such peak  instantaneous  discharge and  the  duration  of  each such discharge.

(q)	A description of the location, type, characteristics, and operation of each flow equalization facility, flow equalization process, Pretreatment facility and Pretreatment process which will be utilized; an explanation of the days and hours during such days when each such facility or process will be in operation; and an identification of the National, State and local Pretreatment Standard and Requiiement s with which each such facility or proce ss will achieve compliance.




164 Attachment l: 12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER



(r)	A disclosure of whether each such facility or process will achieve compliance with all National, State and local Pretreatment  Standards  and  Requirements; and if so, whether such compliance will be achieved on a consistent basis.

(s)	If compliance with any national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement will not be achieved on a consistent basis, such Industrial User shall include with  such application a progress  compliance  schedule provided for below.

(t)	A description of any monitoring facilities which will be utilized.

(u)	Schematic drawings or plans showing by location, size and elevation : the site of such activity or process; all existing and proposed flow plan s or designs; all existing and propo sed water sources; all existing and proposed domestic waste and industrial waste pipes, building drains, outlets, manho les, sewers  and points of connection to the Sewer System; all existing and proposed flow equalization processes, Pretreatment facilities, and Pretreatment processes; and all existing and proposed  monitoring facilities.

(v)	A description of all existing and proposed facilities and operating procedures intended to prevent accidenta l discharges into the Sewer System which are prohibited by any national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement.

When submitted as herein provided, the application for a Permit shall comply with all signatory/certification requirements contained in Section 5.2(6) of thi s Program . The signing of the applicat ion shall constitute a representation that the individual signing the same is duly authorized to submit the application on behalf of such Industr ial User to the Director and to the municipal ity in which such Industrial User is located.

(3)	Change in Activity, Process or Wastewater. All Sills connected to or contributing to the Sewer System shall complete and submit to the Director and to the municipality in which such Industrial users are located an application for a Permit, accompanied by the applicable fees and including a progress compliance schedule , when required, when a new activity or process generating the Wastewater for which the Permit is applied will be utilized from that previously utilized by such SIU, or when  the constituents, character istics or volu me of Wastewater will be changed from that previously discharged by such SIU into the Sewer System.

(4)	Progress Compl iance Schedule. When a progress compliance schedule is required to be included with an application for a Permit or following a request from the Director and within the time limitat ions as the Director shall specify, a SIU shall submit such a schedule setting forth the dates completion of the construction, insta llation and operation of additional Pretreatment facilities or processes necessary to achieve compliance with the applicable national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement. Within 14 days following  each such date contained in such schedule, such Industrial User shall submit a progr ess report to the Director, which report shall state whether such SIU has completed such construction, installation or operation by




164 Attachment 1:13	01 - 01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


such date; and if not , the date when such construction, installation, or operation will be completed, and the reason s for failing to complete and the measures to be taken to restore such construction, installa tion or operation to such schedule.

(5)	Issuance of Permit. When a SIU has submitted an applicat ion for a Permit as herein prov ided, the Director and the municipality in which such SIU is located shall require all other reports and information prescribed in 40 CFR 403.12(b) which are hereby incorporated herein and may require such other report s and informat ion as may be required in order to properly evaluate  such  application.  After  evaluation  of  such appl ication and such other reports and information required to be submitted, the Director may issue a Permit subject to the terms and conditions contained in this Program.

(6)	Permit Conditions. Permits shall be issued expressly subject to all of the provision s of this Program and to all other applicable regulations, User charges, and other charges and  fees  as may  be adopted  and promul gated  from  time  to time  and  made  a part thereof.   Permits  shall   contain  the  following   conditions,  unless   waived   by  the Director:

(a)	The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the Wastewater to be
discharged to the Sewer System.

(b)	Limits on the average and maximum constituents and characteristics of such Wastewater , including Best Management Practice requirements based on applicable pretreatment standards. [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008- 07)

(c)	Limits on the average and maximum rates and time of discharge into the Sewer
System, or requirements for regulation and equalization of flow;

(d)	Requirements for the installation and maintenance of monitoring facilities;

(e)	Specifications for monitoring  programs  including  sampling  locations, frequency of samplin gs, the number, types and standards for tests, schedules and report s;

(t)    Progress compliance schedules and reports;

(g)	Requirement s for submi ssion of technical reports or discharge reports;

(h)	Requirement s for mainta ining and retaining an Industrial User's records relating to the discharge of such Wastewater for a minimum of ten years or for such longer period as may be specified by the Director and affording the Township access to such records;

(i)	Requirements for notification to the Director of any new activity or process generating Wastewater or of any change in the constituents , characteristics or volume of Wastewater which will be discharged into the Sewer System;




164 Attachment 1:14	01 - 01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER



(j) Requirement for notification to the Director and the municipality in which such Industrial User is located of all discharges which are in violation of this Program .

(k)	Requirements for notification to the Director of discharges taking on the proportions of a Slug; and

(1)	Requirements to control slug discharge(s), if determined by the Director to be necessary . [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)

(7)	Permit Duration. The Director shall specify the period of time during which all Permits shall be valid and effective. In no event and under no circumstances shall the duration of any Permit exceed five years. The terms and conditions of any Permit shall be subject to modification at any time by the director as National, State or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements are modified in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Program.

(8)	Permit Transfer. All Permits are issued to a specific SIU for a specified activity or process at a specific location. No permit shall be assigned, reassigned, transferred, or sold to another Person, another Owner, another SIU, another location or another activity or process without the prior written approval of the Director, and then only upon such terms and conditions as the Director shall specify. When any Pennit has been transferred to a SIU as herein provided, such SIU shall complete and submit to the Director an application for a new Permit, accompanied by the application fees in accordance with the procedures contained in this Program.

(9)	Reporting  Requirements.

(a)	Compliance Data Reports: Within 90 days following the date established for final compliance with the national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement, or in the case of a change in activity, process or Wastewater following the date when such Wastewater is first discharged into the Sewer System, aJI Sills affected thereby shall submit to the Director a report describing the nature and concentration of all Pollutants which are constituents of such Wastewater and which are limited by such Standard or Requirement and the average and maximum daily flows of such Pollutants. Such report shall state whether compliance with such Standard or Requirement is being achieved on a consistent bass; and if not, what additional measures are necessary to achieve compliance with such Standard or Requirement.

(b)	Periodic Compliance Reports. All SIUs subject to any Nationa l, State, or local Pretreatment	Standard or Requirement, after the date established for compliance with  such Standard or Requirement, or in the case of a change in activity, process, or Wastewater after  first discharging  such  Wastewater  into the POTW , shall submit to the Director and to the municipality in which such Sills are located, during the months of  June and  December  unless  required more frequently by such  Standard or Requirement  or by the Director, a report




164 Attachment 1:15	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


describing the nature and concentration of all Pollutants in the effluent of such Wastewater which are limited by such Standard or  Requirement.  In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the SIU shall submit documentation and maintain records as required by the Director of the Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the SIU. Such report shall conta in a record of all daily flows wh ich during the period of time covered by such report exceeded the Average Daily Flow of such SRI 's Permit. At the discretion of the Director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Director may agree to alter the months during which such report shall be submitted. The Director may impose ma ss limitations on any SIU when such SIU is utilizing dilution to achieve compliance with the applicable Nationa l, State, or local Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or in such other cases when  the Director shall determine that the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, such report shall disclose the mass of Pollu tants in the effluent of such Wastewater which are lim ited by such Standard or Requirement, and shall contain the resu lts of sampling and analysis of such Wa stewater, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or the product ion and mass when requested by the director, of such Pollutants, the frequency of which sampling and analysis shall be as prescribed in such Standard or Requirement or by the Director.   [Amended  10-2-2008  by  Ord.No.2008-07)

(c)	For sampling in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance repo1ts, a minimum  of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds for which historical samplin g data does not exist; for facilities for which h istorica l samplin g data are available, the Director may authorize a· lower minimum. [Amended  10-2-2008 by  Ord. No.  2008-07)

(d)	SW's may submit pretreatm ent reports electronically to meet the requirements of this section provided the requirements set fo1th by the Director are met. [Added 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]

(10)	Revocation  of Permit.  Any  SIU who  violates any  of  the  conditions contained  in Section 6.2, Suspension of Wastewater Treatment Service, of this Program is subject to having such STU's Permit revoked in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 6 of this Program.

(11)	Reissuance of Modification of Permit, or Reinstatement of Revoked Permit. Not less than 90 days prior to the expira tion date of any Permit, the SIU to whom such Permit is issued  shall complete and submit to the Director an application for the reissuance of such Permit. When any Permit has been modifi ed as herein provided, the SIU to whom such Permit is issued shall complete and submit to the Director an application for a modification of such  Permit. When any Permit has been revoked as herein provided, the SIU to whom such Permit is i ssued shall complete and submit to the Director an application for the  reinstatement  of such Permit.  All  such applications





164 Attachment l: 16	01-01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


shall be completed and submitted in accordance with the procedures contained in this Section 5 of this Program , accompanied by the applicable fees.



5.4	Monitoring  Facilities

When required by the Director, a User shall construct and install a suitable control manhole in the sewer service line to allow observation, sampling and measurement of the User's Wastewater. Such manhole, when required , shall be accessible and shall be so located and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the User, at his expense, and sha ll be maintained by the User so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Construction of such manhole shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the  Director or from any local Director of a NPDES­ permitted  Treatment Works.



5.5	Inspection and Sampling [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]

The director may inspect the facilities of any User to ascertain whether the purpose of this Program is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of any premises where Wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Director ready access at all reasonable times to all part s of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, records examination and copying or the perfonnance of any of their duties. All wastewater samples must be representative of the SRI's discharge. The Control Authority , DEP, and EPA shall have the right to install on any User's premises such devices as are necessary to conduct inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations . Where a User has security mea sures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into such User's premises, the User shall make necessary arrangemen ts with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Control Authority, DEP, and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose s of performing their specific responsibilities .



5.6	Pretreatment

Each User shall provide all necessary Wastewater treatment as may be requir ed in order to comply with this Program and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat Wastewa ter to a level in order to ensure compliance with this Program shall be provided , operated and maintained at the User's expense. Detailed plans showing the Pretreatment facility and operating procedur es shall be submitted to the Director for review and approval. Any subsequent changes in the Pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported to and be reviewed and approved by the Director prior to the User's initiation of such changes.



5.7	Availability of and Confidential Information




164 Attachment 1:17	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE



(1)	All records relating to compliance with Pretreatment  Standards and Requirements and any records, reports or information obtained under Section 5 of this Program shall be made available to EPA upon request and without restriction.

(2)	A ll such records, reports and information shall be  available to the public and any State and local governmental agency without restriction unless a User or any other Person shall request and shall be able to demonstrate in accordance with Section 308(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1318) that such record s, reports, or information , or particular portion s thereof, if made public would divulge method s or processes entitled to protection as trade secret s of such User or Person. Wastewater constituents and character istics and other "effluent data" as defined in 40 CFR 2.302(a)(2)(i) shall not be recogni zed as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction.


5.8	Emergency Measures of Director

Under exigent circumstances the Director may take any reasonable action as is necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of EPA, DER or any other governmental body having juri sdiction.



5.9	Forms and Procedures

The Director shall promulgate and amend, from time to time such procedural rules, administrative procedures and forms as are convenient or necessa ry to the effective administrat ion and operation of the Pretreatment Program.



6. ENFORCEMENT

6.1	Harmful Discharges

Wastewater treatment service may be suspended immediately to any User (after informa l notice to such User) when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director, to effectively prevent an actua l or thr eatened discharge which represents or may present an imminent or substantia l endangerment to the public health, safety or welfare, to the environment, causes or threatens to cause Interference to any Treatment Works, or causes or threatens to cause the Treatment Works to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit.

Any User notified of a su spension of the Wastewater treatment service shall immediately cease or eliminate the harmful discharge. In the event such User fails to comply voluntarily with such suspension order, the Director shall take such action as may be deemed necessary, including but not limited to the immediate severance of the User's sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the Sewer System, any Treatment Works or endangerment to the public. The Director shall reinsta te the Wastewater treatment service upon  satisfactory  proof  of  the  elimination  of  the harmful  discharge.  Within   15  days




164 Attachment 1:18	01 - 0l-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


following the harmful discharge, such User shall submit a detailed written report to the Director describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken by the User to prevent any similar future occurrence.



6.2	Suspension of Wastewater Treatment Service

Any User who violates the following conditions of this Program , or applicable Federa l and State regulations or Requirements , is subject to having such User's Wastewater treatment service suspended in accordance with the procedures contained in thi s Section 6 of this Program:

(1)	Failure of a User to factually report the Wastewater constituents, characteri stics or volume of such User's discharge;

(2)	Failure of a User to report changes in Pretreatment facilities, methods of operation, or Wastewater constituents, characteristics or volume;

(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to a User's premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement , sampling, records examination and copying or the performance of any duties authori zed by this Program; or

(4)	Violation  of  any  condition  or provi sion  of  this  Program  und er  which  a  User  is
authorized to discharge any Wastewater into the Sewer System .



6.3	Notification  of Violation  [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]

Whenever the Director determines that any User has violated or is violating this Program or any prohibition, limitation, or requirement contained or referred to herein, the Director shall notice in writing such User indicating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of such notice, such  User shall submit a detailed written  plan to the Director and to the mun icipality in which such User is located describing the measures to be taken by the User to satisfactorily correct the violat ion. If the Control Authority has perform ed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the SIU, the Control Authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis within 30 days unless it notifies the SIU of the violation and requires the SIU to perform the repeat analysis.


6.4	Legal Action

If any User discharges any Wastewater into the Sewer System contrary to the provi sions of this Program, Federal or State Pretreatment Requirements or any other limitation or requirement referred to herein, the Director may commence appropriate action for legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, or in any other court or before any governmental body having jurisdiction thereof.





164 Attachment 1:19	01 .01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE



6.5 Damages Recoverable by Township from Users for Pretreatment Program Violations

It is recognized that in the case of significant violations as herein defined by Users, substantial damages of a value not easily ascertainable will be suffered by the Township in excess of penalties which may be imposed by governmental agencies upon the Township. Therefore, in addition to the requirement that any User reimburse the Township for any penalty imposed upon the Township as the result of any violations of the Pretreatment Program by such User, it shall be the obligation of any User committing a significant violation to pay to the Township as liquidated damages the further  sum of $1,000.00 per day for each day in which such significant violat ion continues. The liability of any User for such reimbursement for penalties and such pa yment of liquidated damages is an express condition upon which the Township predicates any User's performance hereunder, and shall be in addition to liability for any penalties and charges, civil or criminal, Federal, State or local to which any User may also be subjected , and to any equ itable relief in the nature of an injunction or similar decree which may be appropriate.


7. ENFORCEMENT  GUIDELINES

7.1	Overview

This enforcement guide has been prepared to assist Pretreatment Program administrative personnel in identifying any noncompliances with this Program and in responding with the appropri ate enforcement measures. While the Enforcement Guide is directed towards the objective of assuring industrial user compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements, the process of meet ing these objectives are to be flexible and dynam ic. This Guide establishes a system for identifying priorities and directing the flow of enforcement actions based on these priorities and available resources. In Sections 7.2 and 7.3, procedures for compliance screenin g are reviewed, and the various categories of noncompliance are defined. Enforcement options available to the Town ship are described in Section 7.4, and guidelines for applying appropri ate enforcement action to the various categories of noncompliance are provided in Section 7.5.

This Guide has been developed for the internal use of the Township and is not intended to
create legal rights or obligations, or to limit the enforcemen t discretion of the Township.



7.2	Compliance  Screening

Inform ation received will be reviewed to identify noncompli ance with the requirements of the Pretreatment Program. The compliance status of an industrial user w ill generally be assessed semiannually. Compliance may, at the Township's discretion , be assessed more frequently at the time that periodic reports on complian ce are required or at such other time as deemed appropri ate by the Township.

For compliance schedule progress and self-monitoring reports, the initial review may determine  that  the  repo1ts  have been  submitted  on schedule, cover the appropriate  time




164 Attachment 1:20	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


period, contain the required information, and are properly signed. The review may entail comparison of the parameters reported, the number of measurements recorded for each parameter, the method of analysis employed, the sampling procedures used, the discharge concentration s and mass loadings reported, and any other infonnation supplied by any User, with the monitoring and reporting requirements contained in the User's Permit. Any discrepancy is a violation that may be identified for enforcement action.

Similarly, information obtained as a result of scheduled or unscheduled  monitoring activities will be reviewed for User noncompliances. User facility inspection s may , depending upon the situation, confirm that no unreported or unapproved changes in process or character of waste discharged have occurred, that sampling monitorin g facilities are operating and in good condition , that Pretreatment facilities are being properly operated and maintained, that discharge monitoring records for at least the past three years are on file, and that the User is aware of the applicable regulations and requirements for handling and storing hazardous material s. Analytical results obtained from the compliance monitoring activities must be reviewed for violations in discharge limits.



7.3	Categories of Noncompliance

The nature and frequency of noncompliance often determines the appropriate enforcement response to be taken. Therefore, to enable Program administrative personnel to respond in a consistent manner , the following categories of noncompliance are defined:

(1)	Noncompliance. Any noncompliance with a User's Permit requirements or Pretreatment Program criteria which occur as an infrequent  or  isolated  event,  and does not meet any of the criteria for significant noncompliance.

(2)	Significant Noncompliance  (SNC). A user is in significant  noncompliance  if one or
more of the following criteria are satisfied:

a.	Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of all measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement , including instantaneous  limits; [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]

b.	Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violation. Thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter dming a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits; [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No.2008-07]

c.	Any other violation of pretreatment standards or  requirements  (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative) the Director or the POTW determines  bas caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07)




164 Attachment 1:21	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE



d.	Any discharge of a Pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment has required the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority consistent with 40 CFR Section 403.8 (f)(l)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;

e.	Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control  mechanism  or  enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction , or obtaining final compliance;

f.	Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as base line monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

g.	Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

h.	Any other violation or series or  series of violations including a violation of Best Management Practices that the Director or the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.  [Amended  10-2-2008  by  Ord. No. 2008-07]

(3)	Significant Violation . A significant violation is one which rema ins uncorrected 45 days after notification of significant noncompliance; which is part of a pattern of significant noncompli ance over a twelve-month period ; which involved a failure to accurately report significant noncompliance; or which resulted in the POTW exercising its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(l)(vi)[B].

* SNC status will be evaluated on a six-month rolling average ba sis, beginning with the first
month of each quarter.



7.4 Enforcement Criteria

This Enforcement Guide provides a process for reviewing and screening industrial user violations to assure that enforcement resources are concentrated on the most serious violations. This Guide places priority on response to instances of industrial user SNC, especially by significant industrial users ("Sills"). As resource s allow, non-SIU discharges of concern and other instances of noncompliance are subject to enforcement responses. Notwithstanding the priority placed on a SIU's SNC, it is recognized that it may be appropriate to exercise enforcement discretion even if a SIU meets the SNC criteria (e.g., SNC criteria is triggered due to the result of one sample).

This Guide is intended to provide the Township as much flexibility as allowed by applicable federal and state requirements in responding to industrial user violations. As such, deviations from this Guide may occur, depending upon the facts of a specific case.






164 Attachment 1:22	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


Furthermore, this Guide hereby incorporates the conditions and other requirement s set forth in intermunicipal pretreatment agreements between the Township and Carlisle. Such agreements, as approved by EPA, are a condition of this Enforcement Guide, and any enforcement actions taken by Carlisle will be undertaken in accordance with the conditions set forth in the agreements.



7.5	Enforcement  Response Guidelines

(1)	Levels  of  Response.  There  are  three  possible  levels  of  response  to  all  violations
available to the Director. They include:

(a)	No response action;

(b)	An informal response; and

(c)	A forma l response.

The Director will evaluate industrial user noncompliance. Factors to consider may include, but are not limited to, severity, potential effects to the POTW, receiving stream and public health/welfare, frequency of occurrence, and such other factors as are deemed appropriate.

For some violations, the response may be no action necessary at this time ("NA").  A decision by Township not to initiate an  enforcement  response  for  industrial  user violation(s) does not absolve the industrial user from any liability or damages should Township, EPA, Pennsylvania, or any other person, as appropri ate, seek to initiate an enforcement response for such, or any other, violations by the industrial user.

If an enforcement response is deemed appropriate, enforcement options include informal and formal responses. These enforcement respon ses may include, but are not limited to:

(i)	Phone Call ("PC")

(ii)	Meeting ("MTG")

(iii)	Increased Monitoring ("IM")

(iv)	Notice of Violation ("NOV")

(v)	Modification of Industrial Users Permit to Include Additional Monitoring, Reporting, Effluent Limitations , or to Provide for Permit of Short Duration ("MOD")

(vi)	Administrative Order, which may contain a Compliance Schedule ("AO")

(vii)	Public Notice of Noncomp liers beyond significant noncompliance ("PUB")

(viii)	Show Cause Order ("SCO")




164 Attachment 1:23	Ol - Ol - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE



(ix)	Consent Order, which may contain Fines ("CO")

(x)	Industrial User's Permit Revocation ("PR")

(xi)	Termination of Sewer Service ("TSS")

(xii)	Termination of Water Service ("TWS")

(xiii)	Civil Suit for Injunctive Relief and/or Civil Penalties ("CIV")

(xiv)	Collection of Damages ("DAM")

(xv)	Criminal Invest igation and/or Action ("CRIM")

(xvi)	Performance Bonds/Liability Insurance ("PB/LI")

(xvii)	Referral  to  EPA  and/or  DER  for  federal  and/or  state  enforcement   action
("REF")

The enforcement response will depend upon the specifics of each case. Moreover, the identified enforcement response s are not mutua lly exclusive; Township may combine any enforcement responses provided for by J aw as it deems appropriate.

(2)	Monetary Penalties. This Enforcement Guide  recogni zes that the pena lty amounts available to Township (as well as to other authorities) under state law may not be sufficient to recover the economic benefit of noncompliance by industrial users. In its discretion Township may refer any industrial user's noncompliance to DER and/or EPA so as to subject the noncompl ying industrial user to the higher penalties available to such agencies under applicable law. Township may join in any such proceeding or otherwise assist DER and/or EPA (e.g., provide testimony).

(3)	Appropr iate Respon se Ranges. A summary of enforcement responses for  various levels of noncompliance is included as Table 7.1, when Township deems an enforcement response to be appropriate. This  Table  compares  the  noncompliance with the circumstance s surrounding the violation and suggests the appropriate response or range of response s available to the Director.

As stated above, for some violations an enforcement response may not be required. For example, equitable considerations may ju stify Township exercise of its enforcement discretion.

(4)	Time Frames For Response s. Generally, the time frame for responses will be based upon  the nature of the vio lation  and competing  pretreatment priorities.  Violations which  threaten human health, the POTW or the environment will be given priority, as will SNC violations by SIUs.






164 Attachment 1:24	01- 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


Except as otherwise provided, an enforcement response will usually be initiated within ninety (90) days of Township undertaking a review of an industrial user file and determining that an enforcement respon se is appropriate. This, however, does not preclude Township from responding to a violation in a shorter period of time as it deems appropriate. It is also recognized that initiation of some of these enforcement options may be time consuming and result in the initiation of an enforcement action beyond a time
period otherwise anticipated.

TABLE 7.1 ENFORCEMENT  RESPONSE  GUIDE


UNAUTHORIZED  DISCHARGES


Noncompliance	Nature of the Violation	Enforcement  Responses

 
1.	Unpermitted discharge
(no permit)
 
IU unaware of requirements ; no harm to POTW/environment

ru unaware of requirements ;
harm

POTW/environment
 
PC, MTG , NOV with
application form.



PC, MTG, NOV with
application form.

SCO, TSS, TWS, CIV,
DAM , PB/LI
 

 
2.	Fa ilure to timely renew Permit
 
fU has not submitted	NA, PC, MTG, N OV, AO application within 30 days of
due date
 


DISCHARGE LIMIT VIOLATION


 
1.	Exceeda nce of local or
Federal Standard
 
Isolated, non-routine  or infrequent ba sis; no hann to POTW/environment.

Isolated, non-routin e or
infrequent basis; no harm to POTW/environment













164 Attachment  1:25
 
NA , PC, MTG, IM, NOV ,
MOD, AO



NA , PC, MTG , IM, NOV , MOD, AO, CO, TSS, TWS, CIV, CRIM, DAM, REF, PB/LI












01-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


 
Noncompliance
 
Nature of the Violation

Routine or frequent basis; no harm to POTW/environment

Routine or frequent basis; and
harm to POTW/environment
 
Enforcement  Responses

MTG , IM, NOV, MOD, AO, SCO, CO, TSS, TWS, CIV, CRIM, REF
IM, NOV, MOD, AO, PUB,
SCO, CO, TSS, TWS, CIV,
CRlM, DAM, REF, PB/LI
 


MONITORING  AND REPORTING  VIOLATION


 
1.	Reporting Violation
 
Report is improperly signed
or certified

Failure to properly sign or certify report after notice by POTW

Isolated, non-routine, infrequent or minor reporting deficiency (e.g., typo, computation error or omission.)

Gross reporting discrepancies
or report 30 days late.

Failure to report slug load or significantly  changed discharge (no harm to POTW/environment.)

Failure to report slug load or significantly changed discharge (results in harm to POTW/environment.

Routine or frequent failure to report slug loads












164 Attachment  1:26
 
NA , PC, MTG, NOV, MOD



MTG, NOV, MOD, AO,
sco


NA, PC, MTG, NOV






MTG, NOV , MOD, AO,
SCO, CO, CIV, REF

PC, MTG, NOV, MOD, AO





MTG, NOV, MOD , AO, PUB, SCO, CO, PR, TSS, TWS, CIV, DAM, CRIM, REF

NOV, MOD, AO, PUB, SCO, CO, PR, TSS, TWS, CIV, DAM, CRIM, REF











01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


Noncompliance	Nature of the Violation

Intentional falsification	Enforcement Responses

SCO, CO, PR, TSS, TWS,
		CIV, DAM, CRIM, DEF

2.	
Failure to monitor	
Failure to monitor all	
PC, MTG, NOV, MOD, AO
	correctly.	pollutants as required by
permit	
		
Routine or frequent failure to	
MTG, NOV, MOD, AO,
		monitor all pollutants by	PUB, SCO, CO, PR, TSS,
		permit	TWS, CIV, REF

3.	
Improper sampling	
Evidence of intent	
SCO, CO, TSS, TWS, CIV, CRIM, REF

4.	
Failure to install monitoring equipment	
Delay of less than 30 days
Delay of 30 days or more	
NA, PC, MTG, NOV  MTG, NOV, MOD, AO, SCO, CO, PR, TSS, TWS, CIV, CRIM.
			REF. PB/LI

5.	
Compliance Schedules (in permit)	
Missed milestone by less than 90 days, or will not affect final milestone	
NA, PC, MTG, NOV, AO,
SCO, CO, CIV
		
Missed milestone by more than 90 days, or will affect final milestone (good cause	
NA, PC, and/or MTG (to require documentation or other indicia of good cause),
		exists for delay)	NOV, MOD, AO, SCO CO, PB/LI
		
Missed milestone by more
than 90 days, or will affect	
NOV , AO, PUB, SCO, CO,
PR, TSS, TWS, CIV, REF,
		final milestone (no good cause exists for delay)	PB/LI
		
Routine or frequent violation	
SCO, PR, TSS, TWS, CIV,
		or violations of schedule in
CO by more than 180 days	CRIM, REF, PB/LI
		(no good cause exists for	
		delay)	










 
164 Attachment 1:27
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE



OTHER PERMIT VIOLATIONS


Noncompliance	Nature of the Violation	Enforcement Responses

 
l.	Wastewater discharges are inappropriately diluted in lieu of treatment
 
Isolated, non -routine or
infrequent violation




Routine or frequent basis despite rea sonable time to comply after notice by POTW.
 
NA, PC, MTG, IM, NOV, MOD, AO, SCO, CO, CIV




MTG , IM, N OV, MOD, AO, PUB. SCO CO, TSS, TWS, CIV
 


VIOLATIONS DETECTED DURING SITE VISITS


 
1.	Entry Denial	Entry denied or consent withdrawn. Copies of records denied
 
MTG, NOV, AO, SCO, CO,
CIV, CRIM, Including obtaining warrant and return to ru.
 

 
2.		Inadequate record keeping in violation of applicable requirements





3.	Failure  to report
required monitoring data
 
Inspector finds files incomplete to mi ssing (no evidence of intent)

Routine or frequent basis



Inspection finds additional
files

Routine or frequent basis
 
PC, MTG , NOV, MOD




MTG, NOV, MOD, AO, SCO, CIV

NA, PC, MTG, NOV, MOD,
SCO, CIV

MTG, NOV, IM, MOD, AO, PUB, SCO, CO, CIV
 

NOTE:	Townsh ip personnel Initiating Enforcement Responses: Inspector, Pretreatm ent Coordinator, and/or Laboratory , Supervisor: PC, MTG, IM, NOV, MOD, AO, PUB.
Director: SCO, CO, PR, TSS, TWS, CIV, DAM, CRIM, PB/LI, REF.

These activ ities can be delegated as appropriate.










164 Attachment 1:28	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

8. TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
[Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8]

8.1	Introduction [Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]

The  following   sections  present   the  technical   requirement s  for  the  North   Middleton Township Pretreatment Program .


8.2	Wastewater  Discharge  Limitations  for  Borough  of  Carlisle  Treatment  Facility
[Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02)

 




Parameter
 
Exhibit A
 


Local Limit Monthly Average Mass
(pounds per day)
 

 
Arsenic Cadmium Chromium Copper Lead Mercury
Molybdenum Nickel Selenium Silver
Zinc
Cyanide
BOD-5
Total suspended solids Phosphoru s as P Ammonia -- nitrogen Fats, oils and grease Temperature
pH
Total toxic organics Flow
 
0.70
0.37
5.49
2.72
3.42
0.086
1.68
7.3 1
1.41
7.98
2.30
3.44
4,289
6,328
107
741
300 milligrams per liter
60° Celsius
6.0 -- 9.5 standard units
Federal categorical limits may apply
Shall be regulated
 

A.	The wastewater discharge limits listed above reflect the total mass of each pollutant , whi ch cannot be exceeded in the total industrial contribution to the treatment plant influent. These limits are necessary to adequately protect the treatment process, water quality and biosolids quality. In addition, these limits will also protec t worker hea lth and safety and the collection system.

B.	Individual  significant  industrial user permit  limits will be developed in conjunction
with  flow  limits for  each  significant  industria l user. This will  ensure that  the



164 Attachment 1:29	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


allowable ma ss discharge for each user when combined with the other user s' pollutant contribution s  will not exceed the local limits detailed above. Industrial discharge permit limits will be expressed as concentration s  in  specific  SIU wastewater discharge permit s to simplify compliance monitorin g.



8.2	Wastewater  Discharge  Limitations  for the  North  Middleton  Township's  Treatment
Facility [Amended 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]

 
Exhibit B
 


Local Limit
 

Parameter
 
Daily Maximum Concentration (milligrams per liter)
 

 
Arsenic Cadmium Chromium Copper Iron
Lead Manganese Magnesium Mercury Molybdenum Nickel Selenium Silver
Sulfate Sulfide Zinc Cyanide BOD-5
Total suspended solids
Phosphorus as P Ammonia -- nitrogen Fats, oils and grease Temperature
pH
Total toxic organics
Flow
 
0.096
0.024
1.97
0.41
120
0.60
0.24
18
0.042
0.33
0.61
0.43
0.13
600
60
0.37
1.67
500
500
4.86
25
286 milligrams per liter
60° Celsius
6.0 -- 9.5 standard unit s Federal categorical limits may apply
Shall be regulated
 

A.	The wastewater discharge limits listed above are necessary to adequately protect the treatment process, water quality and biosolids quality. In addition, these limits will also protect worker health and safety in the collection system.




164 Attachment 1:30	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


B.	Individual significant industrial user permit limits will be developed in conjunction with flow limits for each significant industrial user.


8.3 Infiltration Prohibition

All waters or wastes discharged into the Sewer System by any User shall not contain any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or any discharges other than Sewage Wastes or Wastewater as herein defined. The sources of excessive infiltration shall be located and corrected by the Director with respect to the Sewer System in order that any Treatment Works capacity shall not be needlessly overtaxed.



8.4	Prohibited  Discharges

No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer or the Sewer System, with or without Pretreatment, any Industrial Wastes, chemicals, or other discharges having any one of the following characteristics:

(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 59 degrees Centigrade, but in no case shall any discharge, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, cause the Wastewater entering the Treatment Works to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Centigrade.

(2)	Any waters  or wastes containing more than 285.60 ppm by weight of fats, oils or grease.

(3)	Any  gasoline,  benzene, naphtha,  fuel  oil,  or  other  flammable  or  explosive liquid,
solid or gas.

(4)	Any ungroun.d garbage, scraps or vegetables.

(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood or metal shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, butcher's offal, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow into  any  Treatment Works or capable of causing injury to any Treatment Works or capable of causing a nuisance or other interference with the proper operation of any Treatment Works.

(6)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other  corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the Treatment Works or to personnel engaged in the operation and maintenance thereof.

(7)	Any waters or wastes containing any Toxic Substance in quantity sufficient to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of any Treatment Works.






164 Attachment 1:31	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


(8)	Any waters or wastes having an average five-day BOD greater than 500 ppm, a Suspended Solids content greater than 500 ppm or of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense shall be required to handle such waters or wastes at the treatment plant, a total phosphorus as PO content greater than 50 ppm or an ammonia nitrogen content greater than 25 ppm, except as may be approved by Director and in accordance with rules and regulations, including charges and fees, adopted or to be adopted by the Township.

(9)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into any sewer or any Treatment  Works  for main tenance and repair.

(10)	No  rates  of  flow  taking  on  the  proportions  of  a  Slug.  This  subsection  applies,
likewise, to Sanitary Sewage.

(11)	Any toxic radioactive isotopes or material s.

(12)	Any drainage from building construction; and any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or any discharges other than Sewage Wastes or Wastewater.

(13)	Any pollutant which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, includin g, but not limited to, waste stream with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

(14)	No discharge  to the POTW  shall result  in toxic gases, vapors or  fumes within  the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

(15)	Any discharge of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.

(16)	Any  trucked  or  hauled  pollutants,  except  at  discharge  points  designated  by  the
POTW.

Nothing contained herein shall be construed as permitting any special arrangement between Carlisle and the Township whereby Industrial Wastes of unusual strength or character may be accepted for treatment as long as such Industrial Wastes do not violate any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement ; provided, however , that the costs incident to accepting and treating such Industrial Wastes shall be borne by the industrial establishment so discharging such Wastes, and further provided, however , that no special arrangement or agreement shall become effective until approved by Carlisle and the Township or their respective municipal authorities, whichever shall operate their respectiv e Sewage Collection Systems.










164 Attachment 1:32	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


9. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND FORMS

9.1 Introduction

This  section   incorporates   all  standard   operating   procedures   and   forms  designed   to
implement this program.








NORTH MIDDLETON AUTHORITY

INDUSTRIAL  PRETREATMENT  PROGRAM

Standard  Operating Procedures

Introduction: Pretreatment Program documentation is now part of the Authority standard operating procedures. This Directive will serve for meeting documentation requirements of the Borough of Carlisle Industrial Pretreatment  Program.

Purpose: The documentation outlined below is critical and must be maintained at all times. It is important that the data management aspect of the pretreatment program be well organized, legible, and detailed to produce documentation/evidence (chain of custody forms and inspection reports, etc.) that would be admissible in the event of court actions.

A.	Master Log

The Master Log serves as a record of all meetings, all correspondence sent and received, all inspections performed, all monitoring dates, and any other information or data pertinent to the pretreatment program , including violations and noncompliance notifications and enforcement actions. Entries in the Master Log shall be the responsibility of all persons engaged in the administrat ion of the program. The Operations Manager shall have a day-to-day responsibility to ensure that the Master Log is being used.

B.	Chain of Custody Forms

These forms provide tracking of samples from the point of sampling to the testing laboratory and shall always be used whenever outside sampling is undertaken.  (A sample form is attached). The Operations Manager shall ensure that the forms are being used .

C.	Telephone Log

All pretreatment program telephone activity is logged , in the official "Industrial Pretreatment Telephone Log". The log includes data, time, person talked to, company, call taken by, a brief description of the conversation, and any message(s). (A sample form is attached). The Operations Manager shall ensure that these forms are being used .




164 Attachment 1:33	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH  MIDDLETON CODE


D.	Inspection Forms

Any per son assigned to conduct an Annua l Pretreatment Inspection visit as required under pretreatment regulation s shall complete, date and sign the forms. A sample form entitled "Annual Inspection Report for Nonresidential  Establishments" is attached.

E.	Industrial User Analysis Results Forms

This form is used to correlate analysis results for each sample taken from industrial/commerc ial establishments. It lists the user name, sample ID number, sample date, and the analysis results which include 27 param eters. (See the attached example of the "Industrial User Analysis Results" forms). These forms will be completed either by the contracted laboratory or the Operation s Manager upon receiving resu lts from the contracted laboratory.

F.	Laboratory Sample Log

The "Laboratory Sample Log" contains information on the date of sample collection, time received at the laboratory, sample ID number , the facility name and address the sample was collected from, and the specific location of the sampl e. This log will be completed by the contracted laboratory or the Operations Manager upon delivering the sample to the contracted laboratory.




































164 Attachment 1:34	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachment 2 Township of North Middleton Industrial Waste Questionnaire
Note: If you feel that any information requested on this form is confidential, such information shall be
submitted on a separate sheet of paper.

A.	GENERAL  INFORMATION
1.	Company Name    	
2.   Mailing Address ---------------------------
3.   Address of Plant --------------------------
4.	Name and Title of Signing Official    	
5.	Contact Official
(a)	Name		__
(b)   Title  -------------------------­
(c)   Address  -------------------------­
(d)   Phone -------------------------

Brief description of your manufacturin g or service activity:








Raw materials used:







Principal product or service:






B.	COMPONENTS OF WASTEWATER

 
I.	Is  your  discharge  into  the  sewer  system  m  a  continua l  flow
concentrated flow	?
 
or  a  short  duration
 

2.	Shifts normall y worked each day (Please Check)






4.   Is any form of electroplating used in your operation?	Yes	No


164 Attachment 2: 1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

lfYes, briefly explain:








5.	Are you considered a Hazardous Waste Producer by either the PA DEP or EPA?
Yes	No	Don't Know

IfYes, please give your Identification No.-------------------

6.	Do you pretreat any of your wastewater	Yes	No
Please explain process:








7.	Please list or describe plant sewer outlets (general location, size, etc. if known:








 
8.	Have you ever had your waste water analyzed?
 
Yes	No
 
IfYes, would you attach a copy of the most recent analytical data.

9.   ls this plant subject to any existing Federal Pretreatment Standards?
Yes	No

IfYes, are Pretreatment Standards being met on a consistent basis?
Yes	No

10. Do you use any of the following in any of your processes?
Copper Nickel Zinc Lead
Chromium
Cadmium


The information contained in this questionnaire is familiar to me and to the best of my Knowledge and
belief, it true, complete and accurate.


Signature of Official	Date



164 Attachment 2:2	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachment  3

Township of North Middleton

Wastewater Survey for Nonresidentia l Establishments

SECTION  A. GENERAL  INFORMATION

1.	Company name, mailing address, and telephone number.



Zip Code	Telephone No. (

2.	Address of produ ction or manufacturin g facility.
(If same as above, check	J



Zip Code		Telephone No. (	 	

3.	Na me, title,  and telephone  number of person authorized  to represent  this  firm  in official dealings with the Sewer Authority and/or City.



4.	Alternate person to contact concerning information provided herein .
Name	Title   ---------------
Telephone No. (	 	

5.	Identify the type of business conducted





Note to Signing Official: In accordance with Title 40 of the Code of Federal regulations, Part 403, Section 403.14, information and data provided in this questionnaire which identifies the nature and frequen cy of discharge shall be available to the public without restriction. Requests for confidential treatment of other information shall be governed by procedures specified in 40 CFR, Part 2. Should a discharge permit be required for your facility, the information in this questionnaire wi ll be used to issue the pennit.


This is to be signed by an Authorized Official of your firm after adequate completion of this form and review of the information by the signing official.

I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and attachments. Based upon my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information reported herein, Ibelieve  that the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. Iam aware that there are significant penalties for submittin g false information, including the possibility of fine and/or imprisonment.


Date                                                                            Signature of Official


164 Attachment 3:1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH  MIDDLETON CODE

6.	Provide a brief narrative description of the manufacturing , production , or service activities your firm
conducts:





7.	Standard Industrial Classification Number(s) (SIC Code) for your facilities. (If unknown , Authority will complete)   -----------------------------



8.	Th is facility generates the following types of wastes. (Check all that apply):
Average Gallons Per Day
l.

2.	( ) Domestic wastes (restroom s
employees showers, etc.)
( ) Cooling water, non-conta ct	
 	(
 	(	
) Estimated
) Estimated	
(  ) Mea sured
( ) Measured
3.	( ) Boiler/tower blowdown	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
4.	( ) Cooling water, contact	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
5.	( )  Process	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
6.	( ) Equipment, facility washdown	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
7.	( )  Air pollution contro l unit	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
8.	( )  Storm water runoff to sewer	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
9.	( ) Other (describe)	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
Total	 	

 
9.	Wastes are discharged to (Check all that apply):
 


Average Gallons Per Day
 
I.	(  )  Sanitary sewer		( ) Estimated	( ) Measured
2.	(  )  Storm sewer		( ) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
3.	(  )  Surface water		( ) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
4.	(  )  Ground water		( ) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
5.   (  )  Waste haulers		(  ) Estimated	( ) Measured
6.	(  )  Evaporation		(  ) Estimated	( ) Measured
7.	(  )  Other (describe)		(  ) Estimated	( ) Measured Provide name and address of waste hauler(s), if used.



10. Is there a Spill Prevention Control and Countermea sure Plan prepared for this facility? (    )Yes	(   )No

NOTE: If your facility did not check one or more of the items listed in Section A.8.4 through A.8.9
above, then you do not need to complete any other sections in this survey/application. If any items
A.8.4 through A.8.9 have been checked, complete the remainder of this survey/application.




164 Attachment 3:2	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
SEWERS AND WATER


SECTION B. FACILITY OPERATION CHARACTERISTICS

I. N umber of employee shifts worked per 24-hour day is----------------

2.	Average number of employees per shift is    	

3.	Starting times of each shift :
1st	a.m./p.m.	2nd	a.m./p.m.	3rd	a.m./p.m .

NOTE: The following information in this section must be completed for each product line.

4.	Principal product produced -------------------------



5.	Raw materials and process additives used :






6.	Production process is:
(  )	Concentrated batch
(  )	Continuous (  )	Both
% batch	 	
% continuous	 	

7.	Hours of Operation:
 	 a.m. to		p.m .	(  ) Continuous

8.	Is production subject to seasona l variation?	(  ) Yes	(  ) No

IfYes; briefly describe seasonal production cycle -----------------



9.	Are any process changes or expan sions plann ed during the next three years?
(  ) Yes	(  ) No

IfYes, attach a separate sheet to this fom1describing the nature of planned changes or expansions.

















164 Attachment 3:3	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

SECTION C. WASTEWATER INFORMATION

l.	. If your facility employs processe s in any of the 34 industria l categories or business activities listed below and any of these processes generate wastewater or waste sludge, place a check  beside the category or business activity (check all that apply).
1.	(  )  Adhesives
2.	( ) Aluminum forming
3.	( ) Auto and other laundries
4.	( ) Battery manufacturing
5.	( )  Coal mining
6.	(  )  Coil coating
7.	( )  Copper forming
8.	( ) Electric and electronic components
9.	( ) Electroplating
10.	( ) Explosives manufacturing
11.	( ) Foundries
12.	( ) Gum and wood chemicals
13.	( ) Inorganic chemicals
14.	( )  Iron and steel
15.	( ) Leather tanning and finishing
16.	( ) Mechanical products
17.	(  )  Nonferrous metals
18.	(  )  Ore mining
19.	( )  Organic chemicals
20.	( ) Paint and ink
21.	( ) Pesticides
22.	( ) Petroleum refi ning
23.	( ) Pharmaceutical s
24.	( ) Photographic supplies
25.	( ) Plastic and synthetic materia ls
26.	( ) Plastic processing
27.	( )  Porcelain enamel
28.	( ) Printing and publishing
29.	( ) Pump and paper
30.	( )  Rubber
31.	( ) Soaps and detergents
32.	( )  Steam electric
33.	( ) Textile mills
34.	( ) Timber
35.	(  )  Other	List:   	

Other Business Activity
(  )  Dairy products
()Slaughter/meatpacking/rendering
( ) Food/edible produc ts processor
( ) Beverage bottler




164 Attachment 3:4	01- 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

2.	Pretreatment devices or processes used for treating wastewater or sludge. (Check as many as appropriate.)
(  )   Air flotation
(  )   Centrifu ge
(  )   Chemical precipitation
(  )  Chlorination (   )   Cyclone
(  )  Filtration
(  )  Flow equalization
( ) Grease or oil separation, type ---------------------­
(  )   Grease trap
(  )  Grit removal
(  )   Ion exchange
(  )  Neutra lization , pH correction (   )   Ozonation
(  )   Reverse osmosis
(  )  Screen
(  )   Sedimentation
(  )   Septic tank
(  )   Solvent separation (  )   Spill protection
(  )  Sump
( )  Biologica l treatment, type -----------------------­
( )  Rainwater diversion or storage ---------------------­
(  )  Other chemical treatment type ---------------------­
( )  Other physical treatment , type ---------------------­
(  )   Other, type  ------------------------­
( ) No pretreatment provided

3.	If any wastewate r analyses have been performed on the wastewa ter discharge from your facil ities, attach a copy of the most recent data to this questionnaire. Be sure to include the date of the analysis, name of laboratory performing the analysis, and location(s) from which sample(s) were taken (attach sketches, plans, etc., as necessary).





















164 Attaclunent 3:5	OJ - OJ - 20J4
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

SECTION D. OTHER WASTES

I.	Are any liquid wastes or sludges from this firm disposed of by means other than discharge to the sewer system?   (  ) Yes	(  ) No

If"No'', skip remainder of Section D. If "Yes'', complete items 2 and 3.

 
2.	These wastes may best be described as:

Type
(  )   Acids and alkalies
(  )   Heavy metal
(  )  Inks/dyes
(  )   Oil and/or grease
(  )   Organic compounds
(   )   Paints
(  )   Pesticides
(  )  Plating wastes
(  )   Pretreatment sludges
(  )   Solvents/thinners
(  )  Other hazardous water (specify)
 


Estimate Gallons
in Pound/Year
 




(  )   Other wastes (specify)





3.	For the above checked wastes, does your company practice: (  )   On-site storage
( )  Off-site storage (  )  On-site disposal
(  )   Off-site disposal

Briefly describe the method(s) of storage or disposal checked above.






















164 Attachment 3:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachment 4

Township of North Middleton

Permit Application
for Wastewater Discharge to the North Middleton Authority

A.	GENERAL  INFORMATION


1.	COMPANY    NAME---------------------

2.	DIVISION NAME (if applicable)    	

3.	MAILING  ADDRESS	 	
Street or P.O. Box


City, State and Zip Code

4.	FACILITY ADDRESS (Site being permitted)


Street Address


City, State and Zip Code


B.	RESPONSIBLE PARTIES

1.	NAME, TITLE, TELEPHONE OF APPLICANT'S LOCAL MANAGER/SUPERINTENDENT

Name Title Telephone

2.	NAME, TITLE, TELEPHONE NUMBER OF THE APPLICANT'S EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACTIVITY OR PROCESS GENERATING THE WASTEWATER FOR WHICH THE PERMIT IS APPLIED.


Name Title Telephone




164 Attachment 4:1	01  - 01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE


3.	NAME, ADDRESS , TELEPHONE NUMBER OF APPLICANT'S CONSULTING ENGINEER

Name of Consu lting Firm


Address


Telephone


Name of Representative



C.	PROCESS  INFORMATION

I.	S.l.C. Classification of the activity or process generating wastewater.



2.	Describe in general both the activity or process generating the wastewater being permitted. Give a general description of the facilities and equipment utilized in such activity or process.
















3.	The information  submitted pursuant to the following questions a toe inclusive, shall include an explanation of any daily, weekly, monthly and seasonal fluctuations or variations.









a.	The days of the week and the hours during such days when such activity or process will be in operation; and the peak day(s) of such operation, and the peak hours of such operation during such days.








164 Attachment 4:2	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

DAY OF WEEK

SUN	HRS. OF OPERATION	PEAK DAYS	PEAK HOURS

MON		

TUES		

WED		

THURS		

FRI		

SAT		

b.	Average number of employee ----------------------

Maximum number of employees ---------------------

Maximum employed during peak hour -------------------

c.	Describe briefly the types of raw materials and/or chemicals utilized in your activity or process, the average quantity or volume and the maximum quantity or volume of such raw materials and/or chemicals utilized per day on the peak days of operation.

d.	Describe briefly the types of finished produ cts produced by your activity or process, the average quantity or volume, and the maximum quantity or volume of such finished products produced per day on the peak day of such operation.










e.	
Average volume of water utili zed per day	
 	gallons
	
Maximum volume of water utilized per day	 	__ gallons

Source of water:    	















164 Attachment 4:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDL ETON CODE

D.  WASTEWATER CHARACTERICS

l. Please enclose an analytical description of the type, constituents, and characteristics of the wastewater generated by your activity or process, including a written report of such analysis made by an EPA or PA DEP approved analytical laboratory.

Note: The procedures for sampling such wastewater and for perform ing such analysis shall be in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the most current regulations promulgated by EPA or PA DEP.

2.	Please describe the nature and concentration of any material, matter, mixture and substance, toxic, hazardous, or otherwise, which  is a constituent of such wastewater.










3.	Please describe the concentration and nature of any pollutant which is a constituent of such wa stewater.










4.	What is the average daily volume of your wastewater which is discharged into the Collection System.                                                                                      gallons

Maximum daily volume of wastewater:			_ gallons

5.	Describe the hours during each day when such wastewater will be discharged into the Collection System, the hours during each day when maximum volumes will be discharged and the duration of each discharge; the hours during each day when peak instantaneous volumes will be discharged into the Collection System; and the volume of each such peak instantaneous discharge and the duration of each such discharge.

















164 Att achment 4:4	01-01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER

E.	PRETREATMENT  FACILITIES

 
1.	Do you have flow equalization  facilities?
Ifyes, please answer the following:
 
Yes	No
 

a.	Describe the location , type, characteristics, and operation of each flow equalization facility, flow equalization process, pretreatment facility and pretreatment process which will be utilized.

















b.	Please define the days and hours during such days when each facility or process will be in
operation .












c.	Please identify the Nationa l, State, or local  pretreatment standards or requirements with which each such facility or process will achieve compliance.












d.	If compliance with any National, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements will not be achieved on a consistent basis, plea se include with  this application a progress compliance schedule.







164 Attachment 4:5	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


e.	Please submit schematic drawings or plans showing by location, size, and elevation:

•	Site of wastewater generating activity or process
•	All existing and proposed floor plan s or designs
•	All existing or proposed water sources
•	All existing and proposed domestic waste and industrial waste pipes
•	Building drains
•	Manho les
•	Sampling manholes
•	Sewers and points of connection to the Collection System
•	All existing and proposed  flow equalization facilities
•	Flow equalization processes
•	Pretreatment facil ities and processes
•	Ex isting and proposed  monitoring facilities

f.	Please describe  all existing and proposed facilities and  operating procedures intendea to prevent accidenta l discharge into the Collection System of any materials which are prohibited by any National, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.












The undersigned applicant for a permit acknowledges that he/she it has reviewed the Pretreatment Program and the adopting municipal ordinance , and accepts the liabilities,  requirements ,  and respon sibilities imposed herein upon users.



This permit application is being submitted on behalf of the following compa ny:



Name of Company


Name of Facility


Authorized Representative of Company












164 Attachment 4:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachment 5

Township of North Middleton

Sampling Record


1. PERSON(S) SAMPLING: --------------------

2.	DATE:-----------	3: TIME:  -----------

4.	FACILITY  SAMPLED:    	

5.	SAMPLING  LOCATION:	 	



 
6.   SAMPLE TYPE:	GRAB (  )
SCHEDULED ( )
 
COMPOSITE ( )
UNSCHEDULED (	DEMAND( )
 

7.	SAMPLE   ID NUMBER:    --------------------
8.	SAMPLE SPLIT WITH FACILITY	YES (  )	NO (  )

9.	NAME OF FACILITY REPRESENTATIVE: ---------------

10.	TITLE OF FACILITY REPRESENTATIVE: ----------------
 

ll. SAMPLE pH:	INITIAL	_ SAMPLE TEMP (DEG. C):	INITIAL	_ TIME/DATE FORpH!fEMP :	/	_

12.	ANLYSIS REQUIRED:
 

FINAL	__
FINAL	__
--/	_
 

 
1.	NUTRIENTS ( )
4. MERCURY ( )
7. TSS ( )
 
2.	BOD-5 ( )
5.  CYANIDE(
8.  ITO (  )
 
3. METALS ( )
6. ARSENIC ( )
9. FIOIG ( )
 

13.	PRESERVATION METHODS:    	




SAMPLE
TIME/DATE	RECEIVED BY	SIGNATURE	TITLE	COMMENTS












164 Attachment 5:1	01-01-2014
 

_)
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Atta chment 6 Township of North Middleton Industrial User Analysis Results
 

SAMPLE                                                        ID                                                        NUMBER:    	 SAMPLE                                                                                                                            DATE:   	 SAMPLE  LOCATION:    	



ANALYSIS  RESULTS



PARAMETER	SAMPLE TYPE GRAB(G) COMP(C)	

VALUE	
DAILY LOCAL LIMIT	VIOLATIONS
				
YES	
NO
Ammonia - nitrogen			25.00 mg/I		
Bod-5			500.00 mg/I		
Total phosphorus			4.86 mg/I as P		
pH - initial			6.0 to 9.5 SU		
pH - final			6.0 to 9.5 SU		
Temp - initial			60 DEG . C		
Temp - final			60DEG. C		
Sulfate			600.00 mg/I		
Sulfide			60.00 mg/I		
Suspended solids			500.00 mg/I		
Arsenic - total			0.096 mg/I		
Cynaide - tota l			1.67 mg/I		
Cadmium			0.024 mg/I		
Chromium - tota l			1.97 mg/I		
Iron			120.00 mg/I		
Lead			0.60 mg/I		
Mangane se			0.24 mg/I		
Magnesium			18.00 mg/I		
Mercury			0.0.42 mg/I		
Nickel			0.61 mg/1		
Silver			0.13 mg/I		
Zinc			0.037 mg/I		
Oils and grease			285.60 mg/I		






164 Attachment 6:l	01-01-20 14
 
 
 
SEWERS AND WATER


164 Attachme nt 7

Township of North Middleton

Annual Inspection Report for Nonresidential Establishments

SECTION A. GENERAL INFORMATION

1.	Company name, mailing address, and telephone number.



Zip Code		Telephone No. (	 	

2.	Address of production or manu facturing facility. (If same as above, check	)



Zip Code	Telephone No. (

3.	Na me, title, and telephone number of person authori zed  to represent  this firm  in official dealings
with the Sewer Authority and/or City.



4.	Alternate person to contact concerning information provided herein.
Name	Title
Telephone No. (	)	_

5.	Identify the type of business condu cted





Note to Signing Official : In accordance with Title 40 of the Code of Federal regu lations, Part 403, Section 403.14 , information and data provided in this questionnaire which identifies the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public without restriction. Requests for confidentia l treatment of other information shall be governed by procedures specified in 40 CFR, Part 2. Should a discharge permit be required for your facility, the information in this questionnaire will be used to issue the permit.


This is to be signed by an Authorized Official of your firm after adequate completion of this form and
review of the information by the signing officia l.

Ihave personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in this document and attachments. Based upon my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information reported herein, I believe that the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and/or imprisonment.


Date                                                                           Signatur e of Official



164 Attachment 7:1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


6.	Provide a brief narrative description of the manufacturing, production, or service activities your fmn
conducts:





7.	Standard  Indu strial Classification Number(s)  (SIC Code) for your  facilities. (If unknown , Autho rity will complete)    	



8.	This facility generates the following types of wastes. (Check all that apply):
Average Gallons Per Day
1.

2.	( ) Domestic wastes (restrooms
employees showers, etc.)
( ) Cooling water, non-contact	
 	(
 	(	
) Estimated
) Estimated	
( ) Measured
( ) Measured
3.	(  )  Boiler/tower blowdown	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
4.	( ) Cooling water , contact	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
5.	( ) Process	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
6.	( ) Equipment , facility washdown	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured
7.	( ) Air pollution control unit	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
8.	( )  Storm water runoff to sewer	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Mea sured
9.	( ) Other (describe)	 	(	) Estimated	( ) Measured

Total

 
9.	Wastes are discharged to (Check all that apply):
 


Average Gallons Per Day
 
1.	(  )  Sanitary sewer			) Estima ted	( ) Measured
2.	( )  Stom1 sewer			) Estimated	( ) Measured
3.	(  )  Surface water			) Estimated	( ) Measured
4.	(  )  Ground water			) Estimated	( ) Measured
5.	(  )  Waste haulers			) Estimated	( ) Measured
6.	(  )  Evaporation			) Estimated	( ) Measured
7.	(  )  Other (describe)			) Estimated	(  ) Measured Provide name and address of waste hauler(s), if used.




10.	Is there a Spill Prevention Control and Countermea sure Plan prepared for th is facility?
(  )Yes	(  )No

NOTE: If your facility did not check one or more of the items listed in Section A.8 .4 through A.8.9 above, then you do not need to complete any other sections in this survey/application. If any items
A.8.4 through A.8.9 were checked, complete the remainder of this survey/application.




164 Attachment 7:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


SECTION B. FACILITY OPERATION CHARACTERISTICS

1.	Number of employee shifts worked per 24-hour day is----------------

2.	Average number of employees per shift is    	

3.	Starting tim es of each shift:
1st	a.m./p.m .	2nd _	a.m./p .m .	3rd	_ a.m./p.m. NOTE: The following information in this section mu st be completed for each product line.
4.	Prin cipa l  product  produ ced    -------------------------



5.	Raw materials and process additives used:






6.	Production process is:
(  )	Concentrated batch
(  )	Continuous
(  )	Both
% batch	 	
% continuou s	 	

7.   Hours of Operation:
 	_ a.m. to	_ p.m.	( ) Continuous

8.  ls production subject to seasonal variation?	(  ) Yes	(  ) No

If Yes; briefly describe seasonal production cycle -----------------



9.	Are any process changes or expansions plann ed during the next three years? (   )Yes	(   )No

IfYes, attach a separate sheet to this form describing the nature of planned changes or expansions.

















164 Attachment 7:3	Ol-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


SECTION C. WASTEWATER  INFORMATION

1.	If your facility employs processes in any of the 34 industrial categories or business activities listed below and any of these processes generate wastewater or waste sludge, place a check beside the category or business activity (check all that apply).
1.	(  )  Adhesives
2.	(  )  Aluminum forming
3.	(  )  Auto and other laundries
4.	(  )  Battery manufacturing
5.	(  )   Coal mining
6.	(  )   Coil coating
7.	(  )   Copper fonning
8.	(  )  Electric and electronic components
9.	(  )   Electroplating
l 0.  ( )  Explosives manufacturing
11.	(  )  Foundries
12.	(   )   Gum and wood chemica ls
13.	(  )  Inorganic chemicals
14.	(  )   Iron and steel
15.	(  )  Leather tanning and finishing
16.	( )  Mechanical products
17.	(  )  Nonferrous metal s
18.	(  )   Ore mining
19.	(  )  Organic chemica ls
20.	(  )   Paint and ink
21.	(  )  Pesticides
22.	(  )  Petroleum refining
23.	( )  Pharmaceuticals
24.	( )  Photographic supplies
25.	(  )   Plastic and synthetic materials
26.	(  )  Plastic processing
27.	( )  Porcelain enamel
28.	(  )  Printing and publishing
29.	( )  Pump and paper
30.	(  )   Rubber
31.	(   )   Soaps and detergents
32.	(   )   Steam electric
33.	(  )   Textile mills
34.	(  )  Timber
35.	(  )   Other	List:   	

Other Business Activity
(  )   Dairy products
(  )  Slaughter/meat packing/rendering (  )  Food/ed ible products processor
(  )  Beverage bottler




164 Attachment 7:4	0 1- 01-2014
 
SEWERS AND WATER


2.	Pretreatment devices or processes used for treating wastewater or sludge. (Check as many as appropriate.)
( ) Air flotation
( ) Centrifuge
( ) Chemica l precipitati on
( ) Chlorination
( ) Cyclone
( ) Filtration
( ) Flow equalization
( )  Grease or oil separation , type   	
( ) Grease trap
( ) Grit removal
( ) Ion exchange
( ) Neutra lization, pH correction
( ) Ozonation
( )  Reverse osmosis
( ) Screen
( ) Sedimentation
(  )  Septic tank
( ) Solvent separation
( ) Spill protection
( )  Sump
(                       )                       Biological                        treatment,                        type  	 (               )               Rainwate               r               diversion               or               storage   	  (               )               Other               chemica               l               treatment               type    	 (                  )                  Other                  physical                  treatment,                  type    	  (                                     )                                      Other,                                        type    	  ( ) No pretreatment provided

3.	If any wastewater analyses have been perform ed on the wastewater discharge from your facilities, attach a copy of the most recent data to this questionnaire. Be sure to include the date of the analysis, name of laboratory perfom1ing the analysis, and location(s) from which sample(s) were taken (attach sketches, plans, etc., as necessary).





















164 Attachment 7:5	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

SECTION D. OTHER WASTES

I .   Are any liquid wastes or sludges from this finn disposed of by means other than discharge to the
sewer system?   (  ) Yes	(  ) No

If"No", skip remaind er of Section D. If"Yes", complete items 2 and 3.

 
2.	These wastes may best be described as:

Type
(  )   Acids and alkalies
(  )  Heavy metal (  )   Inks/dyes
(  )  Oil and/or grease
(  )  Organic compounds (  )   Paints
(  )  Pesticides
(  )  Plating wastes
(  )   Pretreatment sludges
( )  Solvents/thinners
(  )  Other hazardou s water (specify)
 

Estimate Gallons
in Pound/Year
 




(  )   Other wastes (specify)





3.	For the above checked wastes, does your company practi ce:
(  )  On-site storage
(  )   Off-site storage
(  )   On-site disposal (  )   Off-site disposal

Briefly describe the method( s) of storage or disposal checked above.






















164 Attachment 7:6	0 I - 01 - 20 14
 
Chapter 170

SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING

 
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions

§ 170-1.   Title.
§ 170-2.	Purpose.
§ 170-3.	Definitions .


ARTICLE II
Establishment of Program; Preparation and Storage

§ 170-4.	Recyclable materials.
§ 170-5.		Preparation, storage and collection .


ARTICLE III
Collection Practices and Disposal

§ 170-6.   Participation required; billing systems.
§ 170-7.	Collection practices for
residential buildings.
§ 170-8.	Collection practices for
apartment buildings,
townhouse complexes, condominium  complexes, and similar complexes.
§ 170-9.	Collection practices for
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
§ 170-10. Points of collection.
§ 170-11. Hazardous waste disposal.
 
§ 170-12. Collection by unauthorized persons.
§ 170-13. License or contract required to collect, haul or dispose of solid waste and/or recyclables.
§ 170-14. Unlawful disposition of recyclables .
§ 170-15. Unlawful disposition of solid waste.
§ 170-16. Donations or sale of recyclables.
§ 170-17. Exclusions.
§ 170-18. Incorporation of bidding documents and contract.


ARTICLE IV
Violations and Penalties; Enforcement

§ 170-19. Violations and penalties.
§ 170-20. Enforcement.


ARTICLE V
Recycling Awareness  Program

§ 170-21. Establishment of program.


ARTICLE VI
Burning

§ 170-22. Burning of recyclable materials prohibited.
§ 170-23. Burning of nonrecyclable waste.
 

[IDSTORY : Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3; amended in its entirety 8-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-2. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]






170:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 170-3

GENERAL R EFERENCES
 

Brush , grass and weed s -Sec Ch .76. Outdoor burning -See Ch. 92.
 

Junkyard s -See Ch. 120.



ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions
 

§ 170-1. Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance of 2003."


§ 170-2. Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of North Middleton Township by regulating the collection, storage, transportation, removal, dumping, deposit, disposa l and recycling of solid waste by instituting a comprehensive solid waste management progr am and establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reducti.on Act• and any amendments  thereto.


§ 170-3. Definitions.

The  following  words  and  terms, when  used  in  this  chapter,  shall have,  unless  the context
clea rly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this section.

ALUMINUM - Lightweight ductile and malleable meta llic substance or element commonly known as "aluminum" and shall include all aluminum food and beverage cans. This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plat es, and miscellaneous aluminum product s.

APARTMENT BUILDING - A bui lding used for residential purposes with four or more dwelling unit s, and any a nd all other multiresidentia l units, including condominium units, excepting hotels, motels, tourist cabins and dormitories .

ASHES - The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials
for the purpose of heating and cooking.

BULKY WASTE - Large items of solid waste requiring special handling, including but not necessarily being limited to large household applianc es, such as stoves and refrigerators, plumbing fixtures, furniture, large crates, mattresses, tools, machinery or parts thereof (large bulky items may be no larger than can be lifted by two employees of the Township collector/hauler).

COMMERCIAL ESTABLIS HM ENTS - Establishments engaged in nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurant s, shopping centers and theaters.



I.	Editor's Note : Sec 53 P.S. §4000.101 et seq.


170:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-3                                SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                                 § 170-3

COMMINGLED - Refer s to placement of recyclable material s as defined herein, except newspaper, corrugated cardboard, junk mail and glossy paper , in a special recycling container for the purpose of collection without their having been segregated by color or type.

COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES - Events that are sponsored in whole or in part by the Township, or conducted within the Township and sponsored privately , which include, but are not limited to, fairs, ba zaars, socials, picnics, craft fairs, and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or more individuals per day.

CORRUGATED CARDBOARD - Layered paper or cardboard in which one or more layers are pressed into parallel grooves or ridges and which is normally used for wrapping, packing, shipping and/or storage of dry material s. Specifica lly excluded from this definition are pressboard and cardboard commonly known as "Asian board" or "Asian cardboard ," as well as any corrugated cardboard containing a shiny finished side or sides or which is contaminated with food or other material.

COUNTY LICENSEE - A person licensed by the county to collect, haul and/or dispose of solid waste, bulky waste and/or recyclables within North Middleton Township.

DWELLING UNIT - One or more rooms in a residential buildin g, which room or rooms have fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one or more persons living together or one family. "Dwelling unit" shall also be deemed to mean "unit" as set forth in this .chapter.

GARBAGE - All table refu se, animal and vegetable matter, offa l from meat, fish and fowl, fruits, vegeta bles and parts thereof, and all other articles and materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or which are for any reason discarded.

GLASS - The hard, brittle, transparent or partially transparent substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture of glass; and shall for the purpose of this chapter include all materials commonly known as "glass bottles or containers." This includes all food and beverage containers made of glass of one gallon or less capacity. Excluded are blue glass, ceramics, pottery, and flat glass commonly known as "window or plate glass," light bulbs, headlights, and mirrors.
 

GLOSSY  PAPER
advertisements.
 

Magaz ines   and   shiny   newspaper   inserts   commonl y   u sed   in
 

HAULER - The solid waste and recyclables collection company authorized to collect solid waste and recyclables in Nort h Middleton Township pursuant to the contract with the Township.

HAZARDOUS WASTE - Any chemical, compound mixture, substance, or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate agency of the state to be "hazardous" as the term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state Jaw, and, for the purpose of this chapt er, includes "residual waste" as that term is defined by or pursuant to the Environmental Protection Agency and/or state or federal law or regulation.

HDPE - High-density polyethylene.





170:3	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 170-3                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 170-3

HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER - Printed or unprinted sheets, shavings or cuttings of sulfite or sulfate ledger , bond , writing, or other paper having similar fiber or filler content, including but not limited to stationery, copy paper and computer paper, and excluding treated , coated , and padded stock.

INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHM ENTS - Those facilities that house or serve groups of
people for a common purpose, such as hospitals, schools and nursing homes.

LEAF WASTE - Leaves, garden residues, shrubb ery, tree trimmin gs and similar materia l,
but not including grass clippings.   (Amended 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8)

MANDATORY PARTICIPATIO N - Every hou sehold in the Township participating in the solid waste collection and recyc ling program initiated by the Township with the authorized hau ler.

MOBILE HOME - See definition for "dwelling unit."

MOBILE HOME PARKS - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been so designat ed and i mproved to contain two mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mob ile homes.

MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS - Public facilities operated by the Township and any
other goverrunental and quasi-governmental authorities.

MUNICIPALITY or TOWNSHIP - North Middleton Township .

NEWSPAPER - Types of paper made from wood pulp and/or other fibrous materials mixed together , whether with or without chemicals, to produce thin sheets of the product s customarily and primarily used for the production of newsprint ; "newspaper" does not include maga zines or glossy paper insert commonly used in advertisements.

PERSON - Every natural person, firm, corporation , partnership, association, institution or other entit y. In any prov ision of thi s chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or other penalty, the term "person" shall include the individual partners of a partnership and the individual officers and directors of any corporation, association or other entity having officers and/or directors.

PET - Polyet hylene terephthalate.

PROCESSING CENTER - Any facility maintained for the purpose of storing, preparing,
and/or consolidating recyclable materials (as defined herein) for sale.

PUBLIC NIBSANCE - Any premises which is capable of being a fire, health or safety hazard due to but not limited to accumulation of any flammable materials, solid waste, recyclabl es, hazardous waste; or any premises which contains unauthorized accumu lation of solid waste and/or recyclabl es.

RECYCLABLE  MATERIALS /RECYCLABLES  Includes  clear   and   colored   glass, aluminum cans, plastic No. l (PET), such as soda bottles, and plastic No. 2 (HDPE), such as milk and water jugs, newspaper, steel, tin and bim etallic, cans, corrugated cardboard, glossy paper, high-grade office paper and  such other materials  as the Township may designate from time to time.


170:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-3                                    SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                                     § 170-3

RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES - Those services to be performed by the
Township hauler as follows:

A.	The collection and conveyance of recyclable materials;

B.	Processing of recyclable materials as applicable; and

C.	Marketing of the recyclable materials.

RECYCLING CONTAIN ERS - Sturdy plastic containers having a minimum capacity of 18 gallons, being of one color.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING or RESIDENTIAL UNIT - Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling having fewer than four dwelling units per structure.

RUBBISH - Branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shavings, wood, woodenwa re, leather , rags, grass, straw, manure, and all solid combustible materials not included in this section under the term "garbage."

SOLID WASTE - All matter and materials which are discarded or rejected by the owners or producer s thereof as offensive or useless, or which by their presence or accumulation may injuriou sly affect the health, comfort and safety of the citizens of North Middleton Township; it shall include ashes, garbage, trash, and other refuse material s, but exclude human body waste, debris from household renovation s, whether interior or exterior, dirt, rock, lead pipes, leaf waste and recyclab les, tree trunks and large branches greater than four inches in diameter, haza rdou s wastes, and recyclable items as defined herein. [Amended 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]

SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES Those services  to  be  performed  by  the Township collector(s) which includes the collection of solid waste from locations specifically designated by the Township,  Township  collector(s),  transportation  of solid  waste  in trucks, and disposal of solid waste at a facility licensed by the Pennsylva nia Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) in accordance with the Cumberland County Municipal Waste Management  Waste Plan.2

TOTER CART - The ninety- to ninet y-nine-ga llon container to be distributed by the hauler
and will remain the property of the hauler.

TOWNHOUSE - A single-family dwelling attached to another dwelling and separated by a common wa ll wh ich shall include duplex, fourplex and similar dwellings.

TOWNHOUSE COMPLEX - Any group of four or more townhou se units under common ownership , manag ement or control, whether by one or more individuals or a homeowners' association.

TOWNSHIP   COLLECTION  SERVICE     A  service  for  the  collection  of  solid  waste, recyc lable and leaf waste in accordance with this chapter.





2.	Editor's Note: Amend ed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


170:5	01 -01- 20 14
 
§ 170-3                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 170-4

TOWNSHIP COLLECTOR - A person contract ed by the Township by means of an independent contract to ha ve the right and privilege, subject to certain limitations, to collect, hau l and/or dispose of solid waste and recyclables within the Township of North Midd leton, but shall not be construed as meaning that such person is an agent, employee, official, or representat ive of the Township.

TRUCK(S) - A vehicle u sed for the collection of solid waste and/or recyclables which has mounted thereon an approved type, watertight sanitary body, or which has a standard truck body made watertight and equipped with means of covering to prevent loss of material.


ARTICLE II
Establishment of Program; Preparation and Storage

§ 170-4. Recyclable materials.

A.	Residential uses. On or after October 1, 2003, It shaII be mandatory for all persons who are   owners, lessees,  and  occupants  of  residentia l  units  or  buildings  within  North Middleton Township to separate and  store  recyclable materials  and solid  waste and provide for the proper disposal and/or recycling of said material s in accordance with the method s provided by this chapter as follows:

(1)	To be recycled:

(a)	Clear glass.

(b)	Colored glass (green, brown, and amber).

(c)	Aluminum cans.

(d)	Bimetallic, tin, and steel cans.

(e)	Plastic No. l (PET), such as soda bottles.

(f)	Plastic No. 2 (HDPE), such as plastic milk water j ugs.

(g)	Newspapers.

(h)	G lossy paper.

(i)	Corrugated  cardboard.

U)	Junk  mall.

(2)	To be disposed of by licensed collector or contractors:

(a)	All solid waste, as defined by this chapter.

(3)	To be disposed of by Township or designated Township collector(s):

(a)	Leaf waste.

B.	Commercial, municipal,  or  institutional establishments and  commu nity  activities. On or
after October  1, 2003, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and


170:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-4	SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING	§ 170-5

occupants of commercial, municipal or institutional establishments, and for community activities within North Middleton Township,  to  separate  and  store  recyclable  materials and solid waste and provide for the proper disposal and/or recycling of said materials in accordance with the method s provided by this chapter as follows:

(1)	To be recycled:

(a)	High-grade  office paper.

(b)	Aluminum  cans.

(c)	Corrugated cardboard ;

(d)	Newspaper.

(e)	Glossy paper.

(2)	To be disposed of by licensed collector or contractors:

(a)	All solid waste, as defined by this chapter.

(3)	To be disposed of by Township or designated Township collector(s):

(a)	Leaf waste.

C.	Modification of  recyclable materials collected. The Township  of North  Middleton  shall have  the right to designate, by resolution, additional recyclable material s and to change recyclable   materials  to  be  collected  depending   on  feasibility   and  marketability   of recyclable  materials and requirements of Pennsylvania state law, rule or regulation.


§ 170-5. Preparation, storage and collection.

A.	Preparation of solid waste,  recyclables and ashes for collection.

(1)	All solid waste shall be drained of liquid s before being deposited for collection and
shall be separated and stored apart from recyclab le materials.

(2)	Glass and plastic containers shall have caps and lids removed .

(3)	Glass, cans, and plastics shall be rinsed free of contaminants.

(4)	Newspapers  shall be stacked and placed  in paper bags (plastic bags prohibited) or
tied with twine for recyclable collection.

(5)	Ashes shall be stored in a noncombu stible container until cool.

(6)	Magazines , glossy and/or colored circulars/advertisements normally found within newspaper shall be removed and placed in paper bags (plastic bags prohibited)  or tied  with twine for recyclab le collection.

(7)	All  materials  shall  be  otherwise prepared  for  collection  in accordance with  such regulations  as are established by the Township.




170:7	01-01-2014
 
§ 170-5	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 170-5

B.	Containers.

(1)	Containers to be collected by the Township contractor or hauler.

(a)	A ll solid waste, to be regu larly collected by the Township  contractor  or hauler shall be placed in thirty- to thirty-three-gallon plastic bags  purchased by individual residents for such use or trash can be placed in ninety- to ninety-nine -gallon toter, as provided by the hauler without the use of bags.

(b)	Recyclables to be regularly collected  by the Township contractor  or hauler, with the exception of newspaper, glossy paper and corrugated cardboard shall be   comming led and  placed  in  a  recycling  container  which  is  clearly distinguis hable from the bags used for collection of solid waste. The initial container s for residential customers shall be provided by the contractor at no cost; a charge  may  be  made  for  additional  containers  and  replacement  of containers for reasons  other than defects therein.

(c)	Newspaper to be regular ly  collected  by  the  Township  contractor  or  hauler shall  be tied together  in bundles weighing no more than 40 pound s, or shall be placed  in paper grocery bags, and such newspap ers shall be placed next to or on top of  the recycling containers.

(d)	Cooled ashes shall be pla ced in a bag for collection, provided the bag weighs less than 40 pounds, and disposed by either placing the bag in the toter cart, or by placing a tag on the bag.

(e)	One item of bulky waste shall be included in the weekly residential collection of  solid waste. The Township collector/hauler will pick up one item of bulky waste  on the same  day as  the regularly scheduled  solid  waste  pickup  is to occur.  It  shall be unlawful for any  person  to  place bulky  waste  on  any property other  than on the property at which it was generated or from which it was directly associated.

(f)	Glossy paper (magazines and shiny newspaper inserts) shall be stacked and placed in paper grocery bags (plastic bags  are prohibited)  or tied with twine in bundles not to exceed 40 pound s and placed next to or on top of the recycling containers for collection.

(g)	Corrugated cardboard shall be cut into sections three feet by three feet and placed in paper grocery bags (plastic bags are prohibit ed) or tied with tw ine in bundles not to exceed 40 pou nds and placed next to or on top of recycling conta iners for collection.

(h)	All solid waste placed for collection shall be enclosed entirely within the thirty- to thirty-three-gallon plastic bag purcha sed by the individual resident for such use, except for toter use or into the toter provided by the hauler in which no bags are required . Solid waste placed in the bag shall be in such a quantity that the pla stic bag can be tied closed and all contents thereof completely  confined  within  the bag. Taping  and/or  cutting  of  bags for  the





170:8	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-5	SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING	§ 170-6

purpose of depositing therein solid waste in an amount of excess of the bag's intended capacity is prohibited.

(2)	Ninety- to ninety-nine-gallon solid  waste  carts  (toter carts) shall  be delivered  by the hauler to those residents selecting the flat rate  system. Such toter carts shall remain the property of the hauler.

(3)	All solid waste and  recyclables  shall be maintained  for  collection and pickup by the hauler in a manner that shall not be unnecessarily offensive to the senses. Furthermore, approved metal bulk containers, with watertight  and  tight-fitting covers, may  be used for the collection and pickup of solid waste and  recyclables by commercial establishments, institutional establishments, apartment buildings, townhouse complexes, and mobile home parks. Approved containers shall not be required for the collection of bulky waste which cannot be placed in said containers.

C. Storing of solid  waste,  recyc lables and  leaf waste.  No person  shall store or place any solid waste or recyclable in any street, alley or public place or upon any private property , whether owned by such person or not, with the Township except in proper containers for collection or under an express  approval of the Township as designated by the Board of Supervisors. No person shall throw or deposit any solid waste or recyclables along roadsides, in any stream or other body of water. Leaves fallen from trees shall not  be placed or allowed to remain upon or collected in piles upon any street or sidewalk, but will be collected by the Townsh ip or Township collector(s), on dates schedu led therefor, if prepared and placed by the method as directed by the Township .


ARTICLE  III
Collection Practices and Disposal

§ 170-6. Participation required; billing systems.

A.	All owners of property within the Township shall provide for the regular preparation , collection and removal  of all municipal waste and  recyclables generated  at  such properties  in one of the approved manners set forth herein.

B.	On or after October 1, 2003, solid waste, recyclables and bulky waste from all residential bui ldings within the Township shall be collected by the authorized Township hau ler. Recyclable materials shall be collected by the hauler on at least a weekly basis, on the same day as the collection of solid waste. Solid waste  shall be collected by the hauler from residential buildings as often as necessary, and not less often than weekly.  Solid waste shall be collected either on a per-bag system (persons or households  pay for each bag of solid waste collected, each bag containing a tag, or other distinguishing marker to be purchased from the hauler) or on a flat-rate system (persons or households shall pay a fixed price on a quarterly basis and shall place all solid waste in the toter cart distributed by the hauler).

C.	All residential  buildings  shall  participate  in  the  solid  waste  and  recycling  program initiated by the Township with the hauler. All residential  buildings  shall participate by selecting and continu ing in one of two alternative systems for collection: flat-rate system



170:9	01-01  -2014
 
§ 170-6                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 170-8

or the per-bag system. Failure to participate, or termination of service for nonpayment to the hauler, shall be a violation of this chapter and punishabl e as hereinafter described in Article IV hereof.

D.	Those persons, hou seholds and/or residential buildin gs selecting the flat-rate service shall be billed  a  fixed charge by the hau ler and payable directly to the hauler. Billing by the hauler  on  a  quarterly  basis may  be  in  advance  of  service.  Participa nts  in  the  flat-rate system  shall receive ninety- to ninety-nine-gallon toter cart to be distributed  by,  and remain  the  property  of  t he  hauler.  Solid  waste  generated  in  excess  of  the  ninety-  to ninety-nine-gallon capacity shall be placed in trash bags identified with tags or other distinguishing marker sold by the hauler. Any such  bags  in  excess  of  the  ninety-  to ninety-nin e-gallon capacity of the toter cart shall be subject to an additional charge by the  hauler. Such charge shall be the  same per-bag cost as  the per-bag  cost  under  the per-bag  system of collection.

E.	Those persons, household s and/or residential buildings selecting the  per-bag collection service sha ll purchase tags, or other distinguishing marker directly from the hauler. Participant s in the per-bag system  shall be required to purchase a minimum of 18 tags per year.


§ 170-7. Collection practices for residential buildings.

On or after October 1, 2003, solid waste, recyclables and bu lky waste from all residential buildings within the Township of North Middleton shall be collected by the Township hauler. Solid waste shall be collected by the Township hauler from residential buildings as often as necessary, but not less often than weekly . Recyclable materia ls shall be collected on a weekly ba sis, on the same day as the solid waste.


§   170-8. Collection    practices    for    apartment    buildings ,   townhouse    complexes,
condominium  complexes,  and similar complexes.

A.	On or after October l , 2003, the owner, landlord or an authorized agent of an owner or landlord of an apartment buildin g, townhouse  complex,  condominium  complex,  or similar complex shall establish a collection  system  for  solid  waste  and  recyclables  at each property by contract ing with a county-licensed  hauler for collection of said items. The contract shall provide for a practical system of separation, storage, and collection of residents' solid waste and recyclables. The collect ion system must provide containers that are suitable for collecting and sorting material s, be easily accessible, and include written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collect ion system. Owners, landlords, and agents of owners or landlords shall not be liable for the noncomplianc e of occupants of their  buildings.

B.	Recyclab les shall be collected for apa rtment buildings as often as necessary, and not less than  once a month. Solid waste shall be collected for  apartment  buildings  as often as necessary,  and not less than weekly.







170:10	01 • 01 • 2014
 
§ 170-8	SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING	§ 170-10

C.	Failure of the owner or occupier of property to provide for the collection of solid waste and  for recyclable materials as set forth in this article shall constitute a violation subject to  penalty  and enforcement as provided by Article IV.

D.	While it is recogni zed that individual contract/homeowners' agreements exist  that may preclude participation by October 1,  2003,  mandatory  participation  will  become necessary  at the expiration of said agreements/contracts.

E.	Recyclables shall be reported to the Township on a quarterly basis. The hauler , on behalf of  the apartment building s, townhouse complexes, and condominium complexes, shall complete the report and file with the Township by the 15th of the month following the end of the quarter.


§ 170-9. Collection practices for commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.

A.	On or after October 1, 2003, commercial , institutional and municipal establishment s shall provide for the collection of solid waste and recyclables by contracting with a county licensee. A failure by said establishments to do so shall constitute a violation of tills chapter subject to enforcement and penalty as provided in Article IV.

B.	Recyclab les shall be collected from commercia l,  institutional   and  municipal establishments as often as necessary, and specifically at least once a month. Solid waste shall  be collected from commercial, municipal, and institutional establishments as often as necessary, and specifically at least weekly.

C.	Recyclables shall be reported to the Township on a monthly basis . The hauler, on behalf of  the commercial, institutional and municipal establishments, shall complete the report and file with the Township by the 15th day of the following month.


§ 170-10.  Points  of collection.

A.	Collection by county licensee(s), Township contractor or hauler.

(1)	Points of collection of solid waste and recyclables are a matter for agreement between the private parties involved; provided , however, that such points shall be subject to the power of regulation of the Township, that  no  cartway of  a  road, street, or alley shall be employed as a point  for  the placing  of waste containers, and that such points shall not constitute a nuisance, health or safety peril , or unnecessary  offense to the senses.

(2)	No material shall be placed for collection earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day preceding a  scheduled collect ion day. Licen sed haulers shall not collect residential municipal waste from properties within the Township limit s on Sunday.

B.	All   bags   containing   solid   waste   shall   be   tied   shut   as   described   in  Article   II,
§ 170-5B(l)(h), herein .

C.	Recyclable materials and solid waste that has been scattered or spilled from recycling containers or bags, other than through the negligence of the collector, shall be replaced



170:11	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-10                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 170-13

promptly  in the recycling container or bag, as the case may be,  by the property owner,
lessee and/or resident.


§ 170-11. Hazardous waste disposal .

Hazardous waste shall not be placed in containers or bags for regular collections but shall be handled and disposed of in an alternate and safe manner and in accordance with aU applicable federa l, state, and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.


§ 170-12. Collection by unauthorized persons .

It shall be unlawful for any person unauthorized by the Township to collect or remove solid waste or recyclable items from any other person's property. Any and each collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and dist inct offense punishable as hereinaft er provided.


§ 170-13. License or contract required to collect, haul or dispose of solid waste and/or
recyclables.

A.	Licenses.

(1)	Any person(s) wishing to collect, transport, and dispose of solid waste and recyclables generated in the Township is required to obtain  a license from Cumberland County. The license shall be issued by the Cumberland County Solid Waste Department, Cumberland  County, Carlisle, PA,  17013.

(2)	The collection, transport  and disposal of solid waste and recyclables generated  by sources other than commercial , municipal and  institutional  establishments, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, shall be on an exclusive basis awarded to the hauler  pursuant   to  a  contract  between  the  Township  and  the  hauler  after  the submission of bids.

(3)	It shall be  unlawful for any person, other than a county licensee to collect, haul and/or dispose of solid waste,  bulky waste, or recyclables  in the  Township  of North Middleton or to perform or engage in solid waste and/or recycling collection services unless a license to collect, haul and/or dispose of such solid waste, bulky waste and recyclables shall have been first obtained. Any collection, hau l ing and/or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclables in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.

(4)	Noth ing herein shall limit the right of the Township to implement public collection of solid waste, whether  by entering into contracts or by engaging in any collection practice permitted by law.

B.	All Township contractor(s) shall provide proof to the Township that each vehicle covered by  the license is registered and permitted in accordance with the regulations of the Solid Waste Authority/Department  of Cumberland  County.




170:12	01 - OJ - 2014
 
§ 170-13                                  SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                                   § 170-15

C.	To the extent permitted by law, the Township  shall:

(1)	Use reasonable efforts to inform residents of the benefits which may be obtained from recycling, and the types of waste which are recyclable.

(2)	Use reasonable efforts to enforce the rules and regulations relating to containers for recyclables and proper preparation of recyclables _ by residents for collection by the Township  contractor(s).

(3)	Use reasonable efforts to obtain the cooperation of the private  solid  waste collection hauler(s) with respect to mailing or deHvering notices  to  residents, placing recycling stickers or signs on collection vehicles, or in other ways.

D.	Subject to the exception in the case of a vehicle carrying bulky waste having no capacity to escape in any form by reason of the vehicle not being watertight, no vehicle employed by the Township or any person in the collection or hauling of solid waste under  this chapter shall be other than a watertight one. All vehicles employed in the collection or hauling of solid waste under this section must be provided with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom and solid waste from being blown, dropped , or spilled.

E.	The Township contractor(s) shall report any violation of this chapter observed by them to the Township.

F.	The Township contractors shall, on a monthly basis, by the 15th day of the following month, provide a recycling report to the Township which shall be submitted in the form requested by the Township, and shall include complete information with respect to the amounts of each recyclable material collected during the preceding quarter.


§ 170-14. Unlawful disposition of recyclables.

It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any recyclable material or item as defined herein by commingling said recyclables with other solid waste not required  to be recycled or to dispose of such items in other places that will not ensure that said items are recycled. Such action shall be a violation of this chapter subject to enforcement  and penalty as set forth in Article  N hereof.


§ 170-15. Unlawful disposition of solid waste.

It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit  for collection any solid waste, including  bulky items, not generated from the address from which collection is made or to bring any solid waste into the Township or from one address to another in the Township for the purpose of taking advantage of the collection service or to avoid the cost of collection. Such action shall be a violation of  this chapter subject to enforcement and penalty as set forth in Article IV hereof.








170:13	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-16                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 170-19

§ 170-16. Donations or sale of recyclables.

Notwit hstanding any provision herein to the contrary, any Township resident or owner of property in the Township ma y donate or sell any recyclable item  or  material  to any  other person or properly permitted and licensed processing center, whether  or not for a profit. The donated or sold recyclable items or material, however, shall not be collected by the recipient or purchaser thereof from the location where it is placed  for  collection  unless  with  prior written permission from the Township.


§ 170-17. Exclusions.

A.	Normal farming operations . Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer, or anyone engaged in what is commonly referred to as "farming practices," including composting or spreadin g of manure or other produ ced agricultural wastes not otherwise prohibited or regulated for land applications, from continuing such operations.

B.	Hazardous or residu al wastes. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to anything but the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, recyclables and bulky waste and do not apply therefore to hazardou s or residual wastes as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning , Recycling and Waste Reduction Act and its amendments.3 All hazardous or residual waste mu st be disposed of in compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations.


§ 170-18. Incorporation of bidding documents and contract.

The Township  wi ll enter into an exclusive contract for the collection of municipal waste and recyclables, the terms and conditions of said contract, as well as the  bidding  documents relating thereto, shall apply  to the owner of property and every person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within  the Township where municipa l waste is generated and accumulated.


ARTICLE IV
Violations  and Penalties; Enforcement

§ 170-19. Violations and penalties.

A.		Any person, including the exclusive hauler and any other haulers operating within the Township, who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who assists in the violation of any provisions of this chapter, shall be liable, upon conviction for the first offense and upon summary conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000, together with the cost  of prosecution , including reasonable attorneys' fees, in each case. Every violator of the provisions of th.is chapter shall be deemed guilty  of  a  separate offense each and every day such violation continues and sha ll be subject to the penalty imposed by th.is section for each and every separate offense. Fines and costs imposed under  the provisions  of this chapter shall  be enforceable and recoverable in the manner



3.	Editor's No te: 53 P.S. §4000.101 et seq.


170:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-19                              SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                               § 170-22

and at the time provided by applicable law. Upon judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by summons  on default  of the payment  of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, such person may be sentenced and committed to the jail  of Cumberland County for a period not exceeding 90 days .4

B.	It sha ll also be in violation of this chapter for any person to interfere with a Township contractor or hauler in its performance of collecting,  transporting  and/or  disposing of recyclable materials and/or solid waste.

C.	Any premises on which conditions of waste exist causing it to be a public nuisance is prohibited. Failure  to  resolve or remedy said public nuisance after receiving  written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable as herein provided.

D.	The presence of any articles containing a person's name among solid waste or recyclables shall  create a rebuttable presumption that said solid waste or recyclables are the property of the  person whose name is found therein . This presumpti on can only be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.

E.	Nothing herein is intended  to  preclude  the  Township's  exercise  of  any  additional remedies in law or equity, for noncompliance with this chapter, all in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act and the Second Class Township Code.


§ 170-20. Enforcement.

The Township Manager, Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer, or any other agent designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton shall have the authority to enforce the provisions  of this chapter.


ARTICLE V
Recycling  Awareness  Program

§ 170-21. Establishment of program.

The Township  of North Middleton shall establish a comprehensive and sustained public information and education program concerning the recycling program, features and requirements in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.


ARTICLE VI
Burning

§ 170-22. Burning of recyclable materials prohibited.

No burning of recyclable materials shall be done or permitted by any owner, occupier, or user of property.


4.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. 11).


170:15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 170-23                                       NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE                                       § 170-23

§ 170-23. Burning of nonrecyclable waste.

Burnin g of nonrecyclable solid waste shall be done and permitted only as authorized by law or regu lation of the Township and the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania or its regulatory agencies.



























































170:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter 175

STORMWATER   MANAGEMENT

 
ARTICLE I
General Provisions

§ 175-1.	Short title.
§ 175-2.	Statement of findings.
§ 175-3.	Purpose.
§ 175-4.	Statutory authority.
§ 175-5.	Applicability.
§ 175-6.  Compatibility with other requirements .
§ 175-7.  Waiver procedure.


ARTICLE II
Terminology

§ 175-8.	Word usage.
§ 175-9.  Definitions.


ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management  Standards

§ 175-10. General requirements.
§ 175-11. Exemptions.
§ 175-12. Volume controls.
§ 175-13. Rate controls (see Section 8.3 of the most current version of the SWM Manual).
§ 175-14. Additional SWM and drainage requirements.


ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site
Plan Requirements

§ 175-15. Plan requirements .
§ 175-16. Plan submission.
§ 175-17. Plan review.
 
§ 175-18. Modification of plans.
§ 175-19. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management site plans.
§ 175-20. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
§ 175-21. As-built plans; completion certificate; final inspection.


ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance

§ 175-22. Responsibilities of developers
and landowners.


ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses

§ 175-23. General.


ARTICLE  VII
Prohibitions

§ 175-24. Prohibited discharges and
connections.
§ 175-25. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 175-26. Alteration of SWM BMPs.


ARTICLE  VIII
Enforcement and Penalties

§ 175-27. Right of entry.
§ 175-28. Inspection.
§ 175-29. Enforcement.
§ 175-30. Suspension and revocation .
§ 175-31. Violations and penalties .
§ 175-32. Appeals.





175:1	01-01-2014
 
§ 175-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 175-2

 
ARTICLE IX
References

§ 175-33. List of references.
 
Appendix A, Disconnected Impervious  Area

Appendix B, Cumberland County Release Rate Maps
 

[IDSTORY: Adopted  by the Board  of Supervisors  of the Township of North Middleton
7-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Uniform construction codes -See Ch. 95. Floodplain management -See Ch. 112. Sewers and water -Sec Ch. 164.
 
Subdivision and land development -See Ch. 180.
Zoning -See Ch. 204.



ARTICLE I
General Provisions
 

§ 175-1. Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Stonnwater
Management  Ordinance."


§ 175-2. Statement of findings.

The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed increases flows and velocities, contributes to erosion  and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, increases the cost   of  public   facilities   to   carry   and   control   stormwater,   undermines   floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge , threatens  public  health  and  safety,  and  increases nonpoint  source pollution  of water  resources.

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwat er mana gement, including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health , safety and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources and the environment.

C.	Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides  groundwater  recharge  for water supplies and ba se flow of streams, which also protects and ma intains surface water quality.

D.	Federal and state regu lations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain  a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate  storm sewer systems under the National  Pollutant Discharge Elimination  System (NPDES) .





175:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-3                                  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT                                  § 175-3

§ 175-3. Purpose.

This chapter was created pursuant to and under the authority of the Second Class Township Code, Sections 1506 and 1517.1 The purpo se of this chapter is to minimize the harms and maximize the benefits described in § 175-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed to:

A.	Meet  legal water  quality  requirements  under  state law,  including  regulations  at 25 Pa.
Code Chapter  93  to  protect,  maintain,  reclaim  and restore  the existing  and designated
uses of the waters of this commonwealth .

B.	Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.

C.	Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.

D.	Provide procedures  and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.

E.	Maintain  groundwater   recharge,   to  prevent   degradation   of  surface  and  groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.

F.	Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.

G.	Provide  proper   operation  and  maintenance  of  all  permanent  stormwater  management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the municipality.

H.	Require proof  of NPDES permit acquisition, when applicable.

I.	Meet general water quality and soil disturbance goals by implementing measures to:

(1)	Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes  over  15%,  and existing  native vegetation.

(2)	Maintain or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested  buffers.  Provide trees and wood lands adjacent to impervious areas whenever feasible.

(3)	Establish and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.

(4)	Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction . Replace topsoil to a depth equal to or greater than  the depth prior to the start of construction. Use tracked equipment for grading when feasible.

(5)	Disconnect impervious surface s by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.

(6)	Where applicable, incorporate the techniques for low-impact development practices described in the most current version of "The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management  Practices Manual"  (SWM Manual)'.

(7)	Minimize thermal  impacts to waters of the commonwealth.






I. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 66506 an d 66517.


175:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-4                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 175-5

§ 175-4. Statutory authority.

A Primary authority:

(1)	North Middleton Township and the Board of Supervisors is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" and the Second Class Township Code.

(2) Hereafter, all earthmoving activities and land development within North Middleton Township, including without limitation the location, design and construction within the watershed of stormwater management systems, flood control projects, subdivisions and major land development s, highway s and transportation facilities, facilities for the provision of public utility services and facilities owned or financed in whole or in part by funds from the commonwealth, shall be in full compliance w ith the requirements of the Cumberland County Stormwater  Management  Plan and shall be conducted in a manner consistent therewith. Any inconsistency with the Cumberland County Stormwater Management Plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter.

B.	Secondary authority. North Middleton Town ship and the Board of Supervisors are also empowered to regulate land use activities t hat affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipali t ies Planning Code, as amended.2


§ 175-5. Applicability.

A ll regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwa ter runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regula tion by this  chapter  as  is reasona bly necessary to prevent , among other things, injury to health, safety or other property. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall be subject to the provisions  of this chapter (unless otherwise exempted by§ 175-11):

A Land development and/or redevelopment.

B.	Subdivision.

C.	Construction  of new  or  additional  impervious  or senuperv1ou s surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).

D.	Construction  of structures  or  additions  to  existing  structures,  as  determined  by  the
municipality.

E.	Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.

F.	Installation  of stormwater manageme nt facilities or appurtenances thereto.

G.	Forest  management/t imber  operations that  include logging road  construction and  timber
harvesting.


2.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.


175:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-6                                     STORMWATER MANAGEMENT                                      § 175-9

§ 175-6. Compatibility with other requirements.

Approva ls issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the applicant of  the respons ibility to secure required permits or approva ls  for  activities  regu lated  by  any other code, law, regu lation or ordinance.


§ 175-7. Waiver procedure .

A.	The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Board of Supervisors may wa ive any mandatory provision of these regu lations to the benefit of the applicant, provided the waiver:

(1)	Is consistent with the purpose of the chapter as described in § 175-3;

(2)	Will remove or reduce an unreasonable standard or undue hardship as it applies to the particu lar property , which is grossly disproportion ate to  any  benefit  derived from the standard, or when an alternative standard provides equal or better resu lts.

(3)	Is consistent with § 175-1OC when involving water quality requirements.

B.	It  sha ll  be  the  burden  of  the  applicant  to  demonstrate  compliance  with  the  above conditions.


ARTICLE II
Terminology

§ 175-8. Word usage.

For the purposes  of this chapter, certain  terms and words  used herein  shall be interpreted  as
follows:

A.	Words used in the present  tense  include the future tense;  the singular  number  includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words  of  mascu line  gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include mascu line gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The  words  "shall"  and  "must "  are  mandatory ;  the  words  "may"  and  "should"  are perm1ss1ve.


§ 175-9. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings  indicated:

AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY  - The  work  of  producing  crops,  including  tillage,  land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, pasturing  and  raising  of livestock,  and  installation  of  conservation  measures.  Construction  of  new  buildings  or impervious area  is  not  considered  an  agricultura l  activity.


175:5	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 175-9                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 175-9

APPLICANT - A landowner , developer or other person who has filed an application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the municipality.

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) - Activitie s, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from  regulated activities, to meet state water qua lity requirement s, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of thi s chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or mea sures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist  of  a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention pond s and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration faci lities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretenti on, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffer s, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are  permanent  appurtenances  to  the project site.

CONSERVATION DISTRICT - A conservation district , as defmed in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 85l(c)], which has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department to administer and enforce all or a portion of the erosion and sediment control program in this commonwealth.

DESIGN STORM - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g. a five-year-storm) and duration (e.g. 24 hour s), used in the design and evaluation of storrnwater mana gement system s. Also see "return period."

DETENTION VOLUME - The volume of runoff that is captured and then infiltrated, evaporated, reu sed, or relea sed into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.

DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) - See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) - An impervious or impermeable surface which has its stormwater runoff disconnected from any stom1water drainage or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increa sed time of concentration as specified in Appendix A, Disconnected Impervious Area.3

DISTURBED AREA - An unstabiliz ed land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.

EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY - A construction or other human activity which disturbs or exposes the underlying soil, including but not limited to clearing and grubbing;




3.	Ed itor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.


175:6	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 175-9                                  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT                                   § 175-9

grading;  excavations;  embankments;  road  maintenance;   building  construction;  the  moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials .

EROSION - The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind or chemical action.

EXISTING CONDITION - The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed
construction.

FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.

FLOODPLAIN - The lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland and coastal waters, including, at a minimum, that area subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

FLOODW AY - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area  where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.

FOREST MANAGEMENT /TIMBER OPERATIONS - Planning and actlVlhes necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.

HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) - Refers to soils grouped according to their runoff-producing characteristics. The chief considera tion is the inherent capacity of soil bare of vegetation to permit infiltration . Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS de.fines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS3.4).

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but not be limited to, roofs used to cover indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they allow for in.filtration.

KARST - A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions , sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.






175:7	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-9                                         NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                         § 175-9

LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) - Inclusive of any of the following activities:

A.	The improvement  of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:

(1)	A group of two or more buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the  number  of occupa nts or tenure; or

(2)	The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more ex isting or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets , common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,  building groups, or other  features;

B.     Any subdivision of land;

C.	Development   in  accordance  with  Section  503(1.1)  of  the PA  Municipalities  Planning Code.4

MUNICIPALITY - Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.

NRCS - USDA Natural Resources Conservat ion Service (previou sly SCS).

PEAK DISCHARGE - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm
event.

PERVIOUS AREA - Any area not defined as impervious.

PROJECT  SITE - The specific  area of  land  where  any  regulated  activities m the
municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.

QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL - Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this chapter.

REGULATED ACTIVITIES - Shall include but not be limited to any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff as specified in § 175-5.

REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY - Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92a, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.5

RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF - The volume of ru noff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this commonwealth during or after a storm event.

RETURN PERIOD - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way,


4.	Editor's No te: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).

5.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoptio n of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Ar t . II).


175:8	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-9                                  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT                                  § 175-9

the probability of a twenty-five-yea r storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent  chance).

RIPARIAN BUFFER - Vegetated areas that are adj acent to water resources that protect water resources from nonpoint source pollution , provide bank stabi l ization, and provide aquatic and wildlife habitat.

RUNOFF - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT - Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion. STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS - The regulatory requirements to protect ,
maintain,  reclaim,  and restore water quality  under Pennsylvania  Code Title 25 and the Clean
Streams Law.

STORMWATER - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherw ise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration facilities.

STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - The Cumberland County Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by the County of Cumberland as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES - Is abbreviated
as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout  this chapter.

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN - The plan prepared by the developer, municipality, or other entity indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM site plan throughout this chapter.

SUBDIVISION - As defined in the Penn sylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of Ju ly 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.

TOWNSHIP - North Middleton Town sh ip, Cumberland County, Pennsy lvania and/or its Board of Supervisors, agents, employees and designees.

USDA - United States Department of Agricu lture.

WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH - Rivers, stream s, creeks, rivulets , impoundments , ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wet lands, pond s, spring s and other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or part s thereof, whether natura Ior artificial, within or on the bounda ries of this commonwea lth.

WATERSHED - Region or area drained by a river , watercourse or other surface water of
the commonwealth.




175:9	01 - 01 - 20.14
 
§ 175-9                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 175-10

WETLAND - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.


ARTICLE III
Stormwater  Management  Standards

§ 175-10. General requirements.

A.	For  all  regulated  activities,  unless  preparation  of  a  SWM  site plan  is  specifically
exempted in § 175-11:

(1)	Preparation and implementation of an approved  SWM site plan is required.

(2)	No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues written approval of an SWM site plan , which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

B.	SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with § 175-20, shall be on site throughout  the duration of the regulated activity.

C.	The Township, after consultation  with DEP,  may approve measures for meeting  the state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter, provid ed that they meet the minimum  requirement s of, and do not conflict with, state law,  including but not limited to the Clean Streams Law.

D.	For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained  during the regu lated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of an erosion and  sedimentation control plan tha t has been deemed adequate by the Cumberla nd County    Conservation    District   and/or   Pennsylvania   Department   of   Environmental Protection.

E.	For  all  regulated  activities  not  exempted  by  §  175-11,  implementation  of the  volume
controls in § 175-12 is required.

F.	For all new development projects,  the measurement  of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages. Similarly, for new development projects taking place in stages, the entire proposed new development plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.

G.	Stormwater flows and/or direct discharges shall not be created, increased, decreased, relocated , or otherwise altered in a manner which would affect any adjacent, contiguous or nearby properties without demonstrating that the owners  of  the  such  affected propertie s have been made aware of the  flow/direct  discharge which  is in  intended  to enter upon their property.





175:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-10	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	§  175-11

H.	The design of all facilities over karst topography shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 7.4 (Special Management Areas - Karst Areas) of the most current version of the SWM Manual'.

I.		Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities within 72 hours from the end of the design storm subject to site conditions.

J.	The design storm precipitation depth estimates to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20910. NOAA's Atlas 145 can be accessed at Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa .gov/hdsc/pfds/.

K.	For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented , operated, and maintained to meet  the purposes and requirements of this chapter. In addition, the BMPs shall meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act as required and enforced by the governing agencies.


§ 175-11. Exemptions.

A.	Regulated activities resulting in less than or equal to 1,000 square feet of new imperviou s surface  are exempt  from  Article  IV  SWM site plan  preparation  requirements, including
§§ 175-12 and 175- 13 of this chapter. Regulated activities greater than 1,000 square feet
and less than or equal to 5,000 square feet of new impervious area may be exempt from the SWM site plan preparation requirements, including §§ 175-12 and 175-13 of this chapter, when justification is provided with the application that stormwater impact is minimal.*

B.	Regulated activities that create new disconnected  impervious areas greater than  1,000 square feet and less than or equal to 5,000 square feet that are proven to meet the seventy-five-foot minimum pervious flow path requirem ent outlined in. Appendix A6 are exempt from the SWM site plan preparation  requirements,  including  §§  175-12 and 175-13 of this chapter.*

C.	Regulated activities meeting the following parcel size and square footage requirements are exempt from the peak rate control requirements, but not the volume control or SWM site plan  preparation requirement s of this chapter.  These criteria shall apply to the total proposed  development even if development is to take place in phases. The date of the municipal  ordinance adoption  shall be the starting point  from which to consider tracts as "parent  tracts"  in which  future subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively  considered.*






6.	Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.


175:11	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-11	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 175-12

New Impervious Area Exemption Criteria for Peak Rate Control
Total Parcel Size	Total Parcel Size	New Impervious Area Exemption
(acres)
<0.25	(square feet)
<10,890	(square feet)
1,500
0.25 to 0.5	10,890 to 21,780	2,500
>0.5	>21,780	5,000

D.	Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from  the  SWM  site plan  requirement s, including §§ 175-12 and 175-13 of this chapter, provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.

E.	Forest management and timber operat ions are exempt  from the rate control  and  SWM site plan  preparation  requirements  of  this chapter, provided  the  activities are performed according  to the requirement s of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.


*The muni cipality has, at its discretion, the ability to deny exemption from any requirements  of this chapter. Exempt ion from any requirements of this chapter does not convey exemption  from any requirements of any other applicable local codes or ordinances (i.e.,  local building permit  requirements).



§ 175-12. Volume controls.

Water volume controls sha ll be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below for all regu lated activities not otherwise exempted by § 175-11. For regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that  do not require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preferenc e for either methodology; therefore, the appli cant may select either methodology  on the ba sis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitat ions on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other factors.

A.	The Design Storm Method (see Section 8.7 of the most current version of the SWM ManuaP) is applicable to any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling  based  on site conditions:

(l)	Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or
less than the two-year twenty-four-hour  duration precipitation.

(2)	For  modeling purposes:

(a)	Existing  (predevelopment)   nonforested  pervious  areas  must  be  considered meadow or its equivalent.

(b)	Twenty   percent   of   existing   impervious   area,   when   present,   shall   be
considered meadow in the model for existing conditions.






175:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-12	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	§ 175-13

(3)	For modeling purposes, calculate existing (predevelopment) stormwater runoff and infiltration volumes based on existing site conditions, as verified  through  design phase  soil infiltration testing.

B.	The Simplified Method (see Section  8.7  of  the  most  current  version  of  the  SWM Manual') provided  below  is  independent  of  site conditions  and  should be used  if the Design Storm Method   is  not  followed.  This  method  is  not  applicable  to  regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects  that require design of stormwater detention or rate control facilities. For new impervious surfaces:

(1)	Stormwater facilities shall be sized to capture at least the first two inches of runoff
from all new impervious surfaces.

(2)	At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration , and infiltration.

(3)	Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the permanently  removed runoff should be infiltrated.

(4)	The second one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces should be detained using structural and nonstructural BMPs (as outlined in the most current version of the SWM Manual) and relea sed at a controlled rate.

(5)	Regulated activities eligible under this method are exempt from the requirements of§  175-13, Rate controls.


§ 175-13. Rate  controls  (see  Section  8.3 of  the  most  current  version  of  the  SWM Manual).

A.	Areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan: postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, three-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.

B.	Areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan (see Appendix B)7 : For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five- , fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms, the postdevelopment peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps (see Appendix B). For any areas not shown on the




7.	Editor's Note: The Release Rate Maps are on file in the Township offices.


175:13	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-13                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 175-15

release	rate   maps ,   the   postdevelopment	discharge   rates	shall   not	exceed	the
predevelopment discharge rates.


§ 175-14. Additional SWM and drainage requirements.

The SWM site plan shall also satisfy the stormwater management and design  criteria  in Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, of the  Code of the Township of North Middleton for projects meeting the definition of "land development"  as  defined  in  that chapter.


ARTICLE TV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements

§ 175-15. Plan requirements.

The following items sha ll be included in the SWM site plan:

A.    Appropriate sections from  Chapter  180, Subdivision  and Land  Development,  and other
applicab le local ordin ances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.

B.	The Township sha ll not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be deficient, the Township may either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies the Township may accept submission of modifications.

C.	Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements as determined necessary by the municipality for all physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration struct ures, to implement the operation and maintenance plan discussed below.s

D.	The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:

(1)	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

(2)	Stormwater runoff design compu tations and documentation as specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that mea sures have been taken to meet   the  requirements   of  thi s  chapter,  including  the  general  requirements  in
§ 175-10.

(3)	A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, that has been prepared for, submitted to, and determined to be adequate by the Cumberland County Conservation  District.

(4)	The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on surrounding properties and adjacent aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project.




8.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


175:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-15                                STORMWATER MANAGEMENT                                § 175-18

(5)	Construction  detail  drawings  of  all  SWM  BMPs,  including  drainage  structures,
pipes,  open channel s, and swales.

(6)	SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater
facilities and water supply wells.


§ 175-16. Plan submission.

A.	Four copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows :

(1)	Two copies delivered to the Township for the Township's use.

(2)	One copy delivered to the Township for the Township Engineer (when applicable).

(3)	One copy delivered to the Cumberland County Conservation District.

B.   Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township.


§ 175-17. Plan review.

A.	The SWM site plan shall be reviewed by a qualified professional for the Township for consistency with the provisions of this chapter. After review, the qualified professional shall provide a written recommendation for the municipality to approve or disapprove the SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the SWM site plan, the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The qualified professional also may recommend approval of the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan review and recommendations shall be completed within the time allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code for reviewing subdivision plans.

B.	For SWM site plans that do not require subdivision and land development approval, the Town ship shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 45 calendar days from the date of submission whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification period is 90 days. If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Township.  If the Township  disapproves  the  SWM plan, the Township  shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.


§ 175-18. Modification of plans.

A modification to a submitted SWM site p lan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques , or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.







175:15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-19                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 175-22

§ 175-19. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management site plans.

A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted , with the revisions addressing the Township's concern s, in accordance with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmi ssion of a disapproved SWM site plan.


§ 175-20. Authorization to construct; term of validity.

The Township's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approva l. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Township signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is not completed according to§ 175-21 within the term of validity, then the Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permit s issued by the Township. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 175-19 of this chapter.


§ 175-21.  As-built plans;  completion certificate; final inspection.

A.	At its discretion, the Township may require an as-built plan be provided to the Township, and the applicant shall be respon sible for providing as-built plans of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Township.

B.   After receipt of the as-built plan, the Township may conduct a final inspection.


ARTICLE  V
Operation and Maintenance

§ 175-22. Responsibilities of developers and landowners .

A.	The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance and inspection responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan. The Township may require a dedica tion of such facilities as part of the requirements for approva l of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.

B.	Notice of facilities, areas, or structures u sed as stormwater management BMPs shall  be provided to all future owners throu gh the use of proper notations  contained  upon  the stormwater  management  plan  to  be  publicly  recorded.  Such  notations  shall  advise  the future owners of all rights, obligation s and responsibilities with regard to said facilities, areas or structures and this chapter.

C.	The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy
the provisions of this article.

D.	The owner of all facilities,  areas, or  structures  u sed as stormwater  management  BMPs shall  be  responsible  for  the proper  operation  and  maintenance in  accordance with  the


175:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-22	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	§ 175-24

approved/recorded plan. Should an owner  fail to properly  maintain  such facilities,  areas or structures, the municipality  may  perform  the services necessary  in order to maintain the proper functioning and operation of the stormwater management BMP and, thereafter, charge to the owner appropriate fees and/or place a lien against the property until such fees are collected and paid by the owner.


ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses

§ 175-23. General.

A	The Township may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to an applicant.

B.	The review fee may include but not be limited to costs for the following:

(1)	Administrative/clerical processing  and/or solicitor fees.

(2)	Review of the SWM site plan.

(3)	Attendance at meetings.

(4)	Inspections.


ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions

§ 175-24. Prohibited discharges and connections.

A		Any dra.in or conveyance, whether  on the surface or subsurface, which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including but not limited to, sewage, process wastewater, wash water, ammonia, chlorine, petroleum products (gasoline,  fuel  oil,  etc.)  pesticides, pollutants and other hazardous materials to enter the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	Hand ling and disposal of all materials and wastes shall comply with all federal and state requirements. Structural and nonstructural BMPs, in accordance with Chapters 5 and 6 of the most current version of the SWM Manual, shall be implemented where necessary to preserve the quality of stormwater runoff.

C.	Discharges   to   waters   of   the   commonwealth   which   are  not   composed   entirely   of
stormwater shall be prohibited , except:

(1)	As provided  in Subsection D below; and

(2)	Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.

D.	The following discharge s are authorized unless they are determined  to be significant
contributors  to pollution to the waters of this commonwealth:






175:17	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 175-24	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 175-26

(1)	Discharges from firefighting activit ies.

(2)	Potable water sources, including water line flushing.

(3)	Irrigation drainage.

(4)	Air-conditioning  condensate.

(5)	Springs.

(6)	Water from crawl space pumps.

(7)	Pavement wash waters where spills or  leaks of toxic  or hazardou s materials have not occurred (unless all spill material bas been removed) and where detergents are not  used.

(8)	Flows from riparian habitat s and wetlands.

(9)	Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.

(10)	Lawn watering.

(11)	Dechlorinated swirruning pool discharges.

(12)	Uncontaminated  groundwater.

(13)	Water from individual residential car washing.

(14)	Routin e  external  buildin g  wash  down  (which  does  not  use  detergents  or  other compounds).

E.	In the event that the Township or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in Subsection D, significantly contribute to pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Township or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.


§ 175-25. Roof drains and sump pumps.

Roof  drains and  sump  pump s shall not  discharge  to  any  impervious  area,  if  site conditions
permit.


§ 175-26.  Alteration of SWM BMPs.

No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, grades, or structures, without the written approval of the Township.












175:18	01-01-2014
 
§ 175-27	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	§ 175-30

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement  and Penalties

§ 175-27. Right of entry.

Upon presentation of proper credentia ls, the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.


§ 175-28. Inspection.

A.	The landowner must not ify the Township seven days prior to starting construction on improvements proposed by an approved SWM site plan. At that time, a schedule for inspection of the construction activities  shall be confirmed  by the landowner/contractor and the Township.

B.	Any BMPs that will have backfill  placed over them will need to be observed by the
Township prior to being backfilled.

C.	As per§ 175-238(4), the applicant will be required to pay all fees for inspections that are associated with constructing the improvements proposed by the approved SWM site plan.


§ 175-29. Enforcement.

A.	It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an approved SWM site plan , unless specifically exempted in§ 175-11.

B.	Inspections regarding  compliance with the SWM site plan during project  construction are
to be conduct ed by the Township or their designee.


§ 175-30. Suspension and revocation.

A.	Any approva l or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or revoked for:

(1)	Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM site plan.

(2)	A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance,
rule or regu lation relating to the regu lated activity .

(3)	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a  hazard or nuisance, pollution , or which endangers the life or property of others.

B.	A su spended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:

(1)	The Township  has  inspected  and  approved  the corrections  to the violations  that
cau sed the suspension.

(2)	The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.



175:19	01 - OJ - 2014
 
§ 175-30	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 175-33

C.	An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this chapter.

D.	If a violation causes no immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare, life, public health, or loss of property, the Township may, in its sole discretion , provide a limited time  period  for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the Township will provide  the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period  allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violat ion  within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this chapter.


§ 175-31. Violations and penalties.

A.	Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation , recoverable with costs, and, in default  of such fine and costs,  to imprisonment of up  to 90 days. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.9

B.	In addit ion, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunction s, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.


§ 175-32. Appeals.

A.	Any  person  aggrieved  by  any  action  of  the Township  or its designee, relevant  to  the
provisions of this chapter, may appea l to the Township within 30 days of that action.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township, relevant to the above appeal of this chapter,  may appeal to the Cumberland County Court Of Common Pleas within 30 days of the Township's decision.


ARTICLE IX
References

§ 175-33.  List of references.


Number	Reference Title
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). No. 363-0300-002 (2006), as amended and upda ted. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management  Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.





9.	Editor's Not e: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch . I , General Provisions, Art. II).


175:20	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 175-33	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT	§ 175-33

Number	Reference Title
2	The   Pennsylvania	Department	of  Environmental  Protection  (DEP).
363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Contro l Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA
3	United States Department of Agriculture {USDA), National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). Nationa l Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering Handbook,	Section  4:  Hydrology.  Available  online  at: http://www.wcc .nrcs.u sda.gov/hydro/hydro-techref-neh-630.htrnl.
4	United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington , D.C.
5	US Department of Commerce (USDC), Nationa l Oceanic and Atmospheric Administratio n (NOAA), Nationa l Weather Service (NWS), Hydrometeorological	Design Studies Center. 2004-2006 . Precipitation-Frequ ency Atlas of the Un ited States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20910.  Internet  address : http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov  /hdsc/pfds/.








































175:21	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT


175 Attachment 1

Township of North Middleton

Appendix A Disconnected Impervious Area (DIA)

A.	I.	Rooftop Disconnection

When rooftop downspouts are directed  to a pervious area that allows for infiltration , filtration, and increased time of concentration, the rooftop may qualify as completely or partially disconnected impervious area (DIA) and a portion of the impervious rooftop area may be excluded from the calculat ion of total impervious area.

A rooftop is considered to be completely or partially disconnected if it meets the requirements listed below:

•	The contributing area of rooftop to each disconnected discharge is 500 square feet or less, and

•	The soil, in proximity  of the  roof  water  discharge  area,  is not  designated  as
hydrologic soi l group "D" or equivalent, and

•	The overland flow path from roof water discharge area has a positive slope of 5% or less.

For designs that meet these requirements, the portion of the roof that may be considered
disconnected depends on the length of the overland path as designated in Table A. 1.

Table A.I: Partial Rooftop Disconnection
Length of Pervious Flow Path* (feet)	Roof Area Treated as Disconnected
(% of contributing area)
0 to 14	0
15 to 29	20
30 to 44	40
45 to 59	60
60 to 74	80
75 or more	100

*	Flow  path  cannot  include  impervious  surfaces and  must  be  at  least  15 feet  from  any
impervious surfaces.

A.2.	Pavement  Disconnection

When pavement runoff is directed to a pervious area that allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration, the contributing pavement area  may qualify as a DIA that may be excluded from the calculation  of tota l impervious area. This applies generally only to small or narrow pavement structures such as driveways



175 Attachment 1:1	01-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


and narrow pathways throu gh otherwise pervious areas (e.g., a walkway or bike path
through a park).

Pavem ent is disconnected if the pavement, or area adjacent to the pavement , meets the
requirements below:

•	The contributing flow path over impervious area is not more than 75 feet, and

•	The length of overland flow is greater than or equal to the contributin g length, and

•	The soil is not designated as hydrologic soil group "D"or equivalent, and

•	The slope of the contributing imperviou s area is 5% or less, and

•	The slope of the overland flow path is 5% or less.

If the discharge is concentrated at one or more discrete points, no more than 1,000 square feet may discharge to any one point. In addition, a gravel strip or other spreading device is required  for concentrated discharges. For nonconcentrated discharges along the edge of the pavement, this requirement is waived; however, there must be a provision for the establishment of vegetation along the pavement edge and temporary stabilization of the area until vegetation becom es stabilized.

REFERENCE

Philadelphia  Water  Department.  2006.  Stormwater  Management   Guidance  Manual.
Section 4.2.2: Integrated Site Design. Philadelphia, PA.






























175 Attachment 1:2	01-01-2014
 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT


175 Attachment 2
Township of North Middleton Appendix B
Cumberland County Release Rate Maps

[The Cumberland County Relea se Rate Map is on file in the Township office.]






















































175 Attachment 2: 1	Ol-01-2014
 
 
 
Chapter 180

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


ARTICLE I	ARTICLE IV
Title and Purpose	Voluntary Sketch Plan Submission

§ 180-1.	Title.	§ 180-20.	Developer 's option to submit
§ 180-2.	Purpose .	sketch plan; requirements.
§ 180-3.		Approval authority	§ 180-21.	Suggested  information to be designated.		submitted.
§ 180-4.	County review required.	§ 180-22.	Site meetings.
§ 180-5.	Application of regulations.	§ 180-23.	Fees.
§ 180-6.	Time limits on jurisdiction.
ARTICLE V
§ 180-7.	Interpretation.	Preliminary Plan Submission
§ 180-8.	Compliance with zoning
required.	§ 180-24.	Plan requirements.
§ 180-25. Supporting documentation.
ARTICLE II	§ 180-26.    Review procedure. Terminology

§ 180-9.	Word usage.	ARTICLE VI
Final Plan Submission
 
§ 180-10.  Definitions.
 


§ 180-27.	Plan requirements.
 
ARTICLE III	§ 180-28.	Supporting  documentation.
General Procedures; Minor Plans; Fee
Schedules	§ 180-29. Review procedure.
§ 180-30.	Additions to existing lots and
§ 180-11.	Copies of chapter; general	lot line adjustments .
submission requirements.	§ 180-31.	Time period for filing final
§ 180-12.   Preparation of plans.	plan.
§ 180-13.   Effect of changes in chapter.
§ 180-14.	Recording plans and deeds.	ARTICLE VII
Design and Construction Standards
§ 180-15.	Minor subdivision plans.
§ 180-16.	Additions to existing lots and	§ 180-32.	Application; interpretation.
lot line adjustments.	§ 180-33.	General standards.
§ 180-17.	Fees.	§ 180-34.	Streets.
§ 180-18.	Disputes over fees.	§ 180-35.	Blocks and lots.
§ 180-19.	Right to appear and comment	§ 180-36.	Easements.
before contiguous
municipalities .



180:1	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE

§ 180-37.   Access.	§ 180-64.	Parking requirements.
§ 180-38.	Standards for sidewalks.	§ 180-65.	Storage sheds, extensions and
§ 180-39.	Curbs and gutters.	additions.
§ 180-40.	Outdoor lighting.	§ 180-66.	Electrical distribution system.
§ 180-41.   Recreational land; fee	§ 180-67.	Structural requirements for requirements.		service buildings and other community service facilities.
 
§ 180-42.	Monuments and markers.
§ 180-43.	Sewers and water.
§ 180-44.	Traffic impact studies.
 
§ 180-68.	Refuse disposal.
§ 180-69.  Fire protection.
§ 180-70.	Responsibilities of park
 
§ 180-45.  Road access control.	management .
§ 180-71.	Revocation of permit .
 
ARTICLE  VIII
Mobile Home Park Regulations
 


ARTICLE IX
 
§ 180-46.   Additional rules and	Floodplain Regulations regulations established.
ARTICLE X
§ 180-47.	Permits required.	Stormwater Management Plan and
§ 180-48.   Application for initial permit.	Design Criteria
§ 180-49.	Action on final plan by
Township Supervisors; term	§ 180-72.	Scope.
of permit.	§ 180-73.	Township  liability.
§ 180-50.	Renewal permits.	§ 180-74.	Content.
§ 180-51.		Compliance of existing mobile	§ 180-75.	 Computations for determining home parks.		runoff and design facilities.
§ 180-52.	Individual mobile homes.	§ 180-76.	Compliance with Department
§ 180-53.   Fees.	of Environmental Protection
§ 180-54.	Site location.	regulations.
§ 180-55.   Soil and ground cover	§ 180-77.	Floodplain management in requirements.		wetlands.
§ 180-56.	Areas for nonresidential use.	§ 180-78.	Erosion and sedimentation.
§ 180-57.		Water and sewer service for	§ 180-79.	Ownership; maintenance lots in mobile home parks.		program .
§ 180-58.	General design requirements.	§ 180-80.	Stormwater management
construction standards; basic
§ 180-59.	Required setbacks; buffer	construction criteria.
strips.
§ 180-60.	Proposed street system.	ARTICLE XI
§ 180-61.	Walks.	Grading and Site Planning Requirements
§ 180-62.	Open space requirements.
 

§ 180-63.	Water and sewer service.
 
§ 180-81.	Grading.
 



180:2	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-1	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-1

 
§ 180-82.	Excavations and fills.
§ 180-83.	Grading plans.
§ 180-84.	Steep slope protection overlay.
§ 180-85.	Stream protection overlay.
§ 180-86.	Surface water protection
overlay.
§ 180-87.  Wetland protection overlay.


ARTICLE XII
Landscaping Requirements

§ 180-88.	Purpose and compliance.
§ 180-89.	Specific requirements .
§ 180-90.		Recommended plant materials.


ARTICLE XIII
Improvements and Construction
Assurances

§ 180-91.	Guarantee of required
improvements as prerequisite
to final plan approval.
§ 180-92.  Inspection during
construction.
 
§ 180-93.   As-built plan.
§ 180-94.  Release from financial
security.
§ 180-95.  Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 180-96.  Fees for inspection of
improvements.
§ 180-97.	Disputes over fees.


ARTICLE XIV
Modification of Requirements

§ 180-98.	Special conditions.
§ 180-99.	Applications for modification.
§ 180-100. Modification action by Board
of Supervisors.


ARTICLE XV
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties;
Amendments

§ 180-101. Administration and
enforcement.
§ 180-102. Amendments .
§ 180-103. Violations and penalties.
 

[HISTORY : Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton
6-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Build ing const ru ction -See Ch.80. Numberi n g of bu ildings -See Ch . 86. Unifor m con struction codes -Sec Ch. 95. Floodplai n management -Sec Ch. 112.
 
Sewers and water -Sec Ch. 164. Stormwatcr management -See Ch. 175. Zonin g -See Ch. 204.



ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
 

§ 180-1. Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordin ance."






180:3	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-2                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 180-5

§ 180-2. Purpose.

This chapter is adopted by the North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors to provide for the harmoniou s development of the Township by ensuring equitable handling  of  all subdivisions or land development plans by providing uniform standards and procedures; to provide for the general welfare by providing and protecting cultural facilities; by guiding the development and growth of structur es, types and locations of streets, open spaces and public grounds, recreations, proper traffic flows, light and  air, and the proper distribution of population to ensure conditions favorable to the health , safety and general  welfare  of  the citizens of the Township.


§ 180-3. Approval authority designated.

The Planning Commission is hereby designated by the Board of Supervisors as the agency which shall review and make recommendations on all preliminary and final plans as required herein. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to approve all preliminary and  final plans as required herein for the Township.


§ 180-4. County review required.

Applications for review of subdivision and land development within North Middleton Township must be forwarded to the Cumberland County Planning Department along with the required fee for review and report, and the Township shall not approve such applications until the county report is received , or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the county.


§ 180-5. Application of reguJations.

A.	No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract , or parcel of land located in North Middleton Township shall be affected; no street , sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon unless and until a final subdivision or land development plan has been approved by the Board of Supervisors and publicly recorded in the manner prescribed herein ; nor otherwise except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All improvements, whether they may be considered public or private, shall comply with the terms of this chapter.

B.	No lot in a subdivision may be sold ; no permit to erect or alter any building upon land in a  subdivi sion or land development may be issued; and no building may be erected or altered  in a subdivi sion or land development, unless and until a final subdivi sion plan has been  approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded , and until construction of the improvements required in connect ion therewith has been guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.







180:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-6	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-6

§ 180-6. Time limits on jurisdiction .

A.	This  chapter  shall  apply  to  all subdivision  and land development  plans  submitted  after
the effective date of this chapter.

B.	From the time an application for approval, whether preliminary or fina l, is duly filed, as provided in this chapter, and while such application is pendin g approval or disapprova l, no change or amendment of the zoning, other governing ordinance, or plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary application has been duly approved, the applicant sha!J be entitled to fmal approval in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary application, as hereinafter provided. However, if an application is properly and fmally denied, any subsequ ent application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.

C.	Time limits on approvals.

(1)	When an application for approval, whether preliminary or final, has been approved w ithout condit ions or approved by the applican t's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.

(2)	Where fmal plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan approval, the aforesa id five-yea r period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approva l. In the case of any doubt  as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the tin1e when the appli cation for such approval was duly filed.

(3)	Where the landowner has substantia lly completed the requ ired improvements, as depicted upon the final plan w ithin the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board of Supervisors, no change of governing ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plan shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plan pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or utility location.

(4)	In the case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation  of  improvements beyond the five-year period , a schedule shall be filed with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed  sections,  as  well  as deadlin es within  which  applications for final plan approva l of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annua lly on or before the anniversary of the preliminary plan approva l, until final plan approva l of the last section has been granted. Any modification in the aforesa id schedule shall be subject  to approval  of the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.

(5)	Provided  the  land owner  has not  defau lted with regard to or violated any of the
conditions  of  the  preliminary  pla n  approva l,  including  compliance  with  the



180:5	01 - 0 1 - 20 14
 
§ 180-6                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 180-8

schedule for submission of final plans, then the aforesaid projections afforded by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plan with.in five years shall apply and for any section or sections,  beyond  the  initial section, in which the required improvements have  not  been  substantially  completed  within said five-year period. This extended protection shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years from the date of final plan approval for each section.

D.	Th.is chapter shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or  to  be  instituted,  to enforce any provision of previous subdivision and land development ordinances of North Midd leton Township or an act done, contract executed, or liability incurred prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor shall  any provisions of th.is chapter be construed to waive the obligations imposed upon an applicant to complete a previously approved preliminary or fina 1 plan , including the installation of all improvements required hereunder, in strict compliance with the requirements of the effective North Middleton Township Subdivision and Land Development  Ordinance.


§ 180-7. Interpretation.

A.	In interpreting and applying the prov1s1ons of th.is chapter, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare of the Township and its citizens. It is not intended by  th.is chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations previously adopted  or  permits  previously issued by the Township which are not in conflict with any provi sions of th.is chapter.

B.	Nor is it intended by th.is chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, building restrictions , or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the buildings or premises or upon the height of the building, or requires a larger open space than is imposed or required by such ordinances, rules, regulations , or perm its, or by easements, covenants, bui lding restrictions or agreements, the provisions of  th.is chapter shall control. Where, due to inherent ambiguity, vagueness or Lack of clarity in the language of th.is chapter, a reasonable doubt exists as to the meaning of any restriction upon the use of land, said doubt shall be resolved in favor of the property owner and against any implied extension of a restriction.


§ 180-8. Compliance with zoning required.

Nothing contained in thi s chapter shall relieve the owner or developer from complying with the applicable provisions of Chapter 204, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North Midd leton. It is the expressed intent that this chapter and Chapter 204, Zoning, be coenforceable and together foster the stated planning goals and objectives of the Township. Subdivision and land developmen t plans, in addition to meeting the standards of this chapter, shall conform in all respect s to the lot size and land use requirements of Chapter 204, Zoning .









180:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-9                           SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                         § 180-10

ARTICLE II
Terminology

§ 180-9. Word usage.

The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of the chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate officers. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,  for  the  purpose  of  these regulations , have the meanings indicated:

A.	Words in the singu lar include the plural and those in the plural include the singular.

B.	Word s used in the present tense include the future tense.

C.	The words "person," "subdivider," "developer," and "owner" include a corporation , unincorporated association and a partnership, or other legal entity, as well as  an individual engaged in the subdivision of land and/or land development.

D.	The word  "building" includes structure and shall be construed  as if followed by the
phrase "or part thereof."

E.	The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run, spring, stream and river.

F.	The  words   "should"  and   "may"  are  permis sive;   the  words   "shall"  and   "will"  are mandatory and directive.

G.	The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."

H.	The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to includ e the words "intended , arranged or designed to be used or occupied ."


§ 180-10. Definitions.

Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:

ABUT - Areas of contiguous lots that share a common property or lot line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street or a waterway. See Diagram 180-1OA. See also definition of "adj acent."



















180:7	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-10

Diagram 180-lOA














ABUT	ADJACENT


ACCELERATED EROSION - The removal of surface material by the action of natural
elements caused by man's manipulation of the landscape.

ACCESS DRIVE - A private improved surface other than a street or driveway designed and constructed to provide for vehicu lar movement from a street to a parking area, garage, dwelling, building or other structure within a lot or property containing any use other than one single-family dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, access drives shall be required for all nonresidential and multifamily uses, and all other uses not served by a driveway as defined in this chapter.

ACCESS SPACING - The distance required to encoura ge small speed differentials between vehicles moving in the traffic stream and vehicles entering the traffic stream from a stop condition. Said spacing is recommended by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) as a guideline for location of nonsignalized access, and is based upon American Association of State Highwa y and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) acceleration distances for passenger cars on level grades.

ACREAGE, NET - The total land area contained within a property or proposed site, exclusive of lands within a public or private street right-of-way. (Note: one acre equals 43,560 square feet.)

ADJACENT - Two or more lots that share a common property or lot line, or that  are separat ed only by a street or waterway from each other. See Diagram 180-1OA. See also definition of "abut. "

ALLEY (OR SERVICE DRIVE) - A strip of land over which there is a public or private right-of-way intended to provide vehicu lar access to the side, rear, or both, of properties with frontage on a street. An a lley is not intended for genera l traffic circulation .

APPLICANT - A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an
applicat ion for development , including his heirs, successors and assigns.

APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT A written applicat ion, whether preliminary , tentative  or  final,  required  to  be  filed  and  approved  prior  to  start  of  construction  or




180:8	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                      SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-10

development, including, but not limited to, an application for a building permit , for the
approval of a subdivision, plat or plan or for the approva l of a development plan.

APPOINTING AUTHORITY - The Township Board of Supervisors.

AUTHORITY - A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945
(P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."1

BERM - An earthen mound designed to create a visual and sound barrier between a use and adjoining properties, streets, and adjacent uses.

BLOCK - An area bounded by streets or other barrier to the continuity of development. See
Diagram 180-lOF.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS or SUPERVISORS - The Board of Supervisors of North
Middleton  Township.

BUILDING - Any structure, either temporary or permanent , having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or u sed for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind, including porches, decks, awnings, or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes stated above. For the purposes of this section, the word "building" shall include gas or liquid storage tank. See Diagram 180-1OB.

A.	ATTACHED BUJLDING -A building which is connected to another by two or more party walls in common, except for end unit s. For purposes of this definition, attached buildings shall each have one front yard and one rear yard, and two party walls in common with, and attached to two other buildings, except for end unit s which shall each have one party wall in common and one side yard.

B.	DETACHED BUJLDING - A building which is completely surrounded by permanent open  space. For pur poses of this definition, detached buildings shall have two side yards, one front  yard and one rear yard.

C.	SEMIDETACHED BUILDING -A building which is connected to another building by only one party  wall  in common . For purposes of thi s definition, semidetached buildings shall each have one side yard, one front ya rd, one rear yard, and one party wall  in common with, and attached to another building.
















I.	Ed itor's Note :The Municipality Au thori t ies Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repea led by Act 22 of 2001 (June
19, 200 1, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the M uni cipality Auth orities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §5601 et seq.


180:9	01-01  -2014
 
§ 180-10	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-10

Diagram 180-lOB

.,	IOI' UNIS

 
 

ATIMJtED DIOUNIT
 
.	.	.
: ATTACHED ; ATTACHED :
 

ATTACHED  '
SEMl·OFTACHEO:       !>EMl-ClETACHE0  °
 



BUILDING SETBACK LINE - The line within a property defining the required distance between any enclosed building or structure and the abutting right-of-way, or otherwise, front, rear, and side lot lines. In the case of a lot where a front and/or rear lot line does not coincide with a recorded right-of-way, the building setback line shall be measured from the associated recorded right-of-way. See Diagram 180-lOC.

CAPPED SEWERS - Sanitary sewerage facilities which are installed and capped where existing sanitary sewerage facilities are not available, but are proposed in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan of the Township. Such facilities shall include sanitary sewers, force mains, pumping stations, and all other appurtenances necessary to serve the entire subdivision and/or land development.

CARTWAY or ROADWAY - The improved surface of a street , access drive, driveway or alley available for vehicular traffic, including travel lanes and parking lanes, but not including curbs, sidewalks or swales.

CENTRALIZED SEWAGE SYSTEM - A public or private utility system designed to collect, centra lly treat, and dispose of sewage from customers, in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmenta l Protection regulations or regulations of the Township, whichever may be more stringent.

CERTIFICAT ION - A signed statement appended to a plan or other document whereby the signer represents that to the best of his or her knowledge and belief said plan or document is true and correct and that the Township may rely upon the accuracy thereof.

CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE - An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street center lines.

COMMON OPEN SPACE - Any area of land or water, or a combination of land and water, within a development site designed and intended for use by all residents of the development or the general public. Land included within the right-of-way lines of streets and storrnwater detention basins with impervious surfaces shall not be classified as common open space. Common open spaces shall not include required setbacks between buildings and street rights-of-way, driveways, access drives, parking areas and lot Jines of the development. No dwelling u nit, residential accessory buildings or parking or loading areas may be located within common open spaces.



180:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                       SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                       § 180-10

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The most recent version of the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan, including any amendments.

CONDOMINIUM - A form of property ownership providing for individual ownership of a specific dwelling unit or other space, together with an undivided interest in the land or other parts of the structure in common with other owners.

COUNTY - Cumberland County, Penn sylvania.

 
COUNTY   PLANNING   COMMISSION
County.
 
The  Planning  Commission  of  Cumberland
 

COUNTY  PLANNING   DEPARTMENT	A  Department   of  Cumberland  County  that provides staff support to the Cumberland County Planning Commission.

CROSSWALK - A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to furnish access for pedestrians.

CUL-DE-SAC A dead-end  street  equipped  with  a  circular  vehicle  turnaround  at  its terminus measured from  the edge of the intersection of a street which is not a cul-de-sac  to the end of the improved cartway at the end of the cul-de-sac street.

CURB - The raised edge of a pavement designed to protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic and to confine surface water.

DEDICATION - The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public or limited public use, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted.

DEVELOPER - Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permi ssion of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or land development.

DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filing, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations.

DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provision s for development , including a planned residential development, a plat of subdivi sion, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phra se "provisions of the development plan," when used in the chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.

DRAINAGE - The flow of water or liquid waste and the method s of directing such flow.

DRIVEWAY - A private improved surface designed and constructed to provide vehicular movement from a street to a parking area, garage, dwelling, building or structure within a lot or property containing one single-family dwelling unit or an agricultural activity. See Diagram 180-IOC.





180:11	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-10

Diagram 180-lOC
A	Driveway
B	Frontage
C	Lot Line
D	Lot Depth
E	Lot Width
F	Setback Lin e
G	Setback Front
H	Setback R ear Setback, Side
Right-o f-Way  (ROW)
K	Yard, Front
L	Yard, Rear
M	Yard, Side
N	Structure, Accessory
0	Structu re, Principal R ights-of-way, Setbacks and Other Lines N ot Drawn to Scale


DWELLING - Any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including those listed below, but not including hospitals, hotels, motels, boarding rooming and lodging hou ses, institutional houses, tourists courts, and the like, offering overnight accommodation s for gu ests or patient s. In addition, all dwellings shall be properly connected to approved and permanently designed public or on-lot sewer, public or on-lot water, electrical and other utility systems. See Diagram 180-100.

A.	MULTIFAMILY DWELLING - A detached building, or a group of attached or semidetached buildings containing three or more dwelling units for housing three or more families or hou sekeeping units.

B.	SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING - An attached build ing containing one dwell ing unit for hou sing one family or housekeeping unit. For purposes of this definition , row house and townhouse are considered single-family attached dwellings.

C.	SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING - A detached building containing one dwelling unit for hou sing one family or hou sekeeping unit. For purposes of this chapter, recreational vehicles, as defined herein, shall not be construed as dwellings.

D.	SINGLE-FAMILY  SEMIDETACHED  DWELLING - A semidetached building
containing one dwelling unit for housing one family or housekeepin g unit.

E.	TWO-FAMILY DWELLING - A detached building containing not more than two
dwelling units for housing not more than two families or hou sekeeping unit s.















180:12	01 - 0 1 - 20 14
 
§ 180-10	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-10

 


DWELLING· MULTI-FAMILY


 

I
 
Diagram  180-lOD
DWELLING - SINGLE FAMILY
ATTACHED
 


DWELLING - SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED




.....-
 

 
DWELLING ·SINGLE FAMILY
SEMI-DETACHED

FAMILY1
 
DWELLING TWO FAMILY
 

FAMILY 1 FAMILYZ



SIDE BY SIDE OR VER/UNDER
 
-;--
 
---
 

FAMILY 1
FAMILY 2
 
.........



DWELLING UNIT - A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation .

EARTH DISTURBANC E - An activity, including but not limited to construction, mining, farming and timber harvesting, which alters, disturbs, or exposes the existing land surface.

EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY - Any construction or other activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including but not limited to excavations, embankments, land development , subdivision development, minera l extraction and the moving, depositing or storing of soil, rock or earth, excluding the tilling of the soil.

EASEMENT - A right granted for the use of private land for certain public, quasi-public, or
private purposes ; also the land to which such right pertains.

ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS - The engineer ing specifications of the municipality regulating the installation of any required improvement or for any facility installed by any other, subject to public use.

ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL - A per son duly registered as a professiona l engineer by the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania.

ENGINEER , TOWNSHIP - The Township Engineer, who will be a registered professional
engineer, or any registered professional  engineer or any consultant designated by the Board of



180:13	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-10

Supervisors to review a subdivi sion plan and perform the duties of engineer on behalf of the Township.

EROSION - The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind or chemical actions .

EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN - A plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and prevent sediment pollution to the waters of the commonwealth.

EXCAVATION - Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed , displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

FILL - Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the surface elevation of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkhead s, dikes, jetti es, embankments and causeways.

FRONTAGE - The linear mea surement taken along a property 's common boundary with an adjoin ing street right-of-wa y, other than that of a limited access highway. See Diagram 180-lOC.

FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY -

A.	Right-of-way   width  required   for  the  expansion  of  existi ng  streets  to  accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.

B.	A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through undeveloped land.

GUARANTEE, COMPLETION - The financial security that may be accepted by the Township as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for subdivision and/or land development are completed to the satisfaction of the Township. The methods acceptable for posting such fmancial security shall include, but are not limited to, performance bonds, federal or commonwealth chartered lendin g institution irrevocable letters of credit, and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions.

GOVERNING BODY - The North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors.

IMPERVIOUS AREA - Any portion of a lot covered by material impenetrable by
precipitation, including building s, structures and paved areas.

IMPERVIOUS COVER - Any natural or man-made material utilized to cover, pave or resurface any portion or area of a lot, whether permeable or impermeable, excepting only soil, plants or vegetative coverings. Impervious cover shall include, among other materials, any form or mixture of concrete, stone, asphalt, tar, porous pavement, or other substance designed and intended to alter the natural state of the land.

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - Any material that covers the land which inhibits the percolation of stormwater directly into the soil, including but not limited to buildings, pavement and stormwater facilities that discharge stormwater off the site.





180:14	01   -01-2014
 
§ 180-10                      SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-10

IMPROVEMENTS - Those physical changes to the land necessary to produce usable and desirable lots from raw acreage, includi ng, but not limited to, grading, paving, curb, gutter, storm sewers and drains, improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks, crosswalks, street signs, monuments, water supply facilities, and sewage disposal facilities.

JOINT USE ACCESS DRIVE - An access drive shared by and constructed to provide
vehicular access between multiple nonresidential  or multifamily uses and a street.

JOINT USE DRIVEWAY - A driveway shared by and constructed to provide access to two
or three properties.

LAND DEVELOPMENT -

A.	Any of the following activities:

(1)	The improvement  of one lot or two  or more contiguous  lots, tracts or parcels  of
land for any purpose involving :

(a)	A group of two or  more  residential  or  nonresidential  buildings,  whether proposed  initially or cumu latively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or

(b)	The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between  or among two or more  existing  or prospective  occupants by  means of,  or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiu ms, building groups or other features.

(2)	A subdivision of land.

B.	Excluded from this definition of land development are the following:

(1)	The conversion of an existing single-famil y detached dwelling or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three residentia l units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium.

(2)	The addition of an accessory building, including farm building s, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building.

C.	For the purposes of stormwater management planning, the  definition  of  "land development " shall also include any subdivision or new construction or expansion of any residential, commercial, industrial, accessory or other improvement that creates an area of impervious	material on the parcel of 1,000 square feet or more. The one-thousand-square-foot requirement applies on individual large projects, projects which exceed a cumulative total of 1,000 square feet after the effective date of this chapter, and any projects occurring after the one-thousand-square-foot  level has been reached, either initially or cumulatively. See Chapter 175, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of North Middleton.

D.	Where an addition  of  no  more  than  15% of  the square footage  is being added  to  an ex isting building, but in no case of an addition of more than 2,000 square feet, a building permit  and a site plan approva l is required to be obtained from the appropriate officer of




180:15	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-10                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180- 10

the Township,  but  submission  of a  land development plan and review  by the Planning Commission and approval by the Board of Supervisors may be waived, only when:

(1)	The building is added to the existing structure and is not separated; and

(2)	There is no change to any street or public way; and

(3)	There is no interference or substantial change to drainage or the flow of water; and

(4)	When the appropriate building  officer of the Township determines that the same is otherwise in compliance with all zoning and land development requirem ents.

LANDOWNER - The lega l  or  beneficial  owner  or owners  of  land, including  the  holder  of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to  any condition), a  lessee  if  he  is  authorized  under  the lease to exercise the  rights  of the landowner, or other person  having  a  proprietary  interest  in land.

LANDSCAPE  ARCHITECT,  PROFESSIONAL  - A  person  duly  registered  as a
professional  landscape architect by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

LANDSCAPING - The planting of turf, trees, shrubs, and other appropriate vegetative materials and ground cover within the open areas of a lot other than for agricultural purposes, and including the maintenance and replacement thereof , for the purposes of erosion control, retention of precipitation , protection against the elements and promotion of human comfort and welfare.

LIGHTING-RELATED TERMS AND PHRASES - Unless specifically defined elsewhere herein, the following words and phra ses when used  in § 204-37 of Chapter 204, Zoning, relating to the outdoor lighting, shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. See Diagram 180-1OE.

A.	FOOTCANDLE -Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be horizontal unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance meter, a.k.a., light meter.

B.	FULL CUTOFF - Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is emitted at or above a horizonta l plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than 10% of the lamp's intensity is emitted at or above an angle 10° below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture.

C.	FULLY SHIELDED - Attribute of a lighting fixture provided with internal and/or external shields and louvers to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles.

D.	GLARE -Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently greater than the brightnes s to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance or loss in visual perfonnance and visibility, so as to jeopardize health , safety or welfare.

E.	ILLUMINANCE -Quantity of light, measured in footcandles.

F.	LIGHT TRESPASS -Light emitted by a lighting fixture or installation which is cast
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the lighting installation is sited.



180:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-10

G.	LUMEN -As used in the context of this chapter, the light-output rating of a lamp (light bulb).


Diagram 180-lOE
......
• ........ • .. ,.•• .. .... .........
- ....................... .....







FUU CUTOFF UGHTINO	FULLY SHIELDED LIGHTING



LOT - Any parcel, plot or tract of land intended as a single unit for purposes of ownership, transfer of ownership , use, rent, improvement or development. Contiguous nonconforming lots of record under single and separate ownership shall be considered one lot for the purposes of this chapter.  A lot, as herein defined, may or may not coincide with a lot of record. See Diagram 180-1OF.

A.	LOT, CORNER -A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of two street lines . A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the  tangents to the curve at the points of intersections of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°. Corner lots shall have two front yards (abutting  the street), one side yard and one rear yard. For purposes of this chapter, the front lot line of the street in which the lot is addressed shall be the primary front lot line, and the other  front lot line shall be the secondary front lot line. The rear lot line shall be the lot line direct ly  opposite of the primary front lot line. The side lot line shall be the lot line directly opposite the secondary front lot line.

B.	LOT, FLAG - A lot whose frontage does not satisfy the mmunum lot width requirement s for the respective zone but that does have sufficient lot width away from the lot's frontage.

C.	LOT, INTERIOR -A lot, other than a comer lot, the sides of which do not abut a street right-of-way.

D.	LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE , THROUGH OR REVERSE FRONTAGE -A lot having
frontage on two or more para llel or approximately parallel streets. In such cases, the front yard setback will be determined by the street address, which yard along the addressed street shall be considered the front yard. The yard along the opposite  parallel or approximately parallel street will be considered the rear yard for determining the minimum required rear setback. The minimum required rear setback line shall be used for all principal , accessory and temporary structures.







180:17	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 180-10	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-10

 


BLOCK
 
Diagram 180-lOF
 

 


LOT AREA - The area contained within the lot lines of individua l parcels of land, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but including the area of any easement.

LOT COVERAGE - That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious cover or surface.

LOT LINE - A line of record which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private road (right-of-way) or any other public spa ce. Where a lot abuts a public or private right-of-way, the lot line for regu latory purposes shall be the right-of-way line; also known as "road or street line." See Diagram 180-1OC.

LOT OF RECORD - A lot identified on a subdivision plan or on a deed or other instrument of conveyance recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.

LOT WIDTH - The horizonta l distance measured between side lot lines at the minimum front setback line for the district in which the lot is located. On corner lots, lot width shall be measured between the right-of-way line for the nonaddress street and the directly opposite lot line. Unless otherwise noted, lot width shall be measured at the building setback line and the street frontage. For purposes of determining compl iance with required lot width standards of this chapter , in calcu lating required lot width , the term shall mean the contiguous or unbroken horizontal distance measured between side lot lines. See Diagram 180-1OC.

MANUFACTURE D HOME - See "mobile home."






180:18	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                     SUBDIVlSION AND LAND DEVELOPME NT                     § 180-10

MOBILE  HOME  A  transportable,  single-family  dwelling  intended   for  permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable again of being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations. Mobile homes placed in parks shall meet the requirements for mobile home parks provided in Article VIII, Mobile Home Park Regulations, of this chapter, as may be amended. Mobile homes placed on individual lots shall be considered dwellings and be bound  by the requirements there imposed.2

MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.

MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been so designated and improved that they contain two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.

MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY ENGINEER - The Municipal Authority Engineer or any registered profess ional engineer designated by the North Middleton Authority to perform the duties of engineer on beha lf of the Municipal Authority.
MUNICIPALITY - North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania. OBSTRUCTION - Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection , excavation, channel, rectification , culvert , building , fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water,  or is placed  where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and propert y.

PADEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

PERCOLATION TEST - A procedure to determine the absorption rate of the soil in an area proposed as the installation site for an on-lot septic system. Such a test will be carried out according to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection .

PLAN - The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or
final.

PLANNING CODE - The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, Act 247, as reenacted and amended.3

PLANNING COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of North Middleton Township.

PLAT - See "plan."

PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR - An individual licensed and registered under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the practice of land surveying.


2.	Editor's Note: Amended  at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. 11).

3.	Ed itor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 ct seq.


180:19	01   -01-2014
 
§ 180-10                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 180-10

PUBLIC GROUNDS - Includes the following:

A.    Parks,  playgrounds,   trails,  paths,  open  space,  and  other  recreational  areas  and  other
public areas;

B.	Sites for schools, water  and sewage treatment,  refuse disposal and other publicly owned
or operated facilities;

C.	Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.

PUBLIC HEARING - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission (as applicable), intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action on zoning-related matters.

PUBLIC NOTICE - Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. Public notice for rezoning, special exception , variance, or any combination thereof, requests shall also include the posting of a sign(s) at a conspicuous location(s) upon the site to notify potentially interested citizens; this sign(s) shall be posted at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the nature, date, time and location of the hearing.

RECREATION, ACTIVE - Leisure-time activities, usually of a more formal nature and performed with other individuals , often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, site or fields. Such areas usually require physical alteration to the area before they can occur and are intensively used, such as playgrounds, ball courts and swimming pools.

RECREATION, PASSIVE - Leisure-time activities, u sually of an informal nature and which can be carried out with little alteration or disruption to the area in which they occur, such as hiking and picnicking.

RECREATIONAL  VEHICLE  A  portab le  structure,  primarily  designed   to  provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel purposes. In addition to the above, any of the following attributes are characteristic of a travel trailer:

A.	The unit is of such size or weight as not to require a special highway movement permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when self-propelled or when hau led by a standard motor vehicle on a highway.

B.  The unit is mounted or designed to be mounted on wheels.

C.    The unit is designed to be loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck.

D.   The unit contains or was designed to contain temporary storage of water and sewage.

E.	The unit contains some identification  by the manufacturer as a travel trailer.

RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE - Any method, process or substance whose supply is rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to those natural proces ses, remains relatively constant, including but not limited to biomass conversion , geothermal energy, solar



180:20	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-10                     SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-10

and wind energy and hydroelectric energy and excluding those sources of energy used in the
fission and fusion processes.

REPORT - Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any body , board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom . Any report u sed, received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.

RESERVE STRIP - A narrow parcel of ground separating a street from other adjacent
properties.

RIGHT-OF-WAY - A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, street, crosswalk, railroad , electric transmi ssion lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary, storm sewer, and other similar uses, whether public or private (see also "street line"). See Diagram 180-lOC.

ROAD - An improved street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway , lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways u sed or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrian, whether public or private.

ROAD ACCESS POINT - An intersection of any combination of two or more streets, roads, driveways, or access drives.

SAFE SIGHT DISTANCE -

A.	DESIRABLE -Sight distance that is desirable for safe operation of a driveway or street intersection.

B.   MINIMUM - Sight distance less than desirable, but which is the minimum acceptable
for safe operation of a driveway or street intersection.

SCREENING - The provision of a barrier to visibil ity, air borne particles, glare and noise between adjacent properties, uses , and/or zoning districts composed of a mixture of landscaping , trees, berms , shmbs, fences, wa lls and/or other similar type materials, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts, such as visual and noise, of the more intense use on the less intense use or zoning district.

SCREEN PLANTING - A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to conceal from the view of passing motorists and propert y owners on abutting and/or adjacent properties the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting is located.

SEDIMENT - Soils or other surface materials transported by surface water as a product of
erosion.





180:21	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-10

SEDIMENT BASIN - A barrier , dam, detention or retention basin designed to retain
sediment.

SEDIMENT  POLLUTION  The  placement,  discharge  or  any  other   introduction   of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control measure s and control facilities in accordance with 25 Pa. Code Chapter  102 (Ei:osion and Sediment Pollution Control).

SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH - An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or
similar material and into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground .

SEPTIC TANK - A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down into solid, liquid, and gaseous pha ses to facilitate further treatment and final disposal.

SETBACK - The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a property or
street right-of-way line. See Diagram  180-lOC.

A.	SETBACK, FRONT -The distance between the street line and/or private  right-of-way line and the front line of the principa l building and/or structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front setback shall be measured between the front line of principal building and/or structure and the street right-of-way line. Attached porches and decks, whether covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of principal building and/or structure and shall not project into a required front setback.

B.	SETBACK, REAR -The distance between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the principal building and/or structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear setback shall be measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the principal bui lding and/or structure. Attached porches and decks, whether covered or uncovered , enclosed or u nenclosed, shall be considered as part  of  principal  building and/or structure and shall not project into a required rear setback.

C.	SETBACK, SIDE -The distance between the side  line of the lot  and extending from the front lot  line to the rear lot line. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side l ine. Attached porche s and decks, whether covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed , shall be considered as part of principa l building and/or structure and shall not project into a required side setback.

SETBACK LINE - A line within a property and paralle l to a property or street right-of-way line which delineates the required distance between some particu lar use of property and that property or street right-of-way line. See Diagram 180-1OC.

SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (ON-SITE) - Any structure designed to eliminate sanitary sewage within the boundaries of the lot.

SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (PUBLIC) - A sanitary sewage collection method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant.








180:22	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-10                      SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                       § 180-10

SIGHT DISTANCE - The length of roadway visible to the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic.

A PASSING SIGHT DISTANCE - A line of unobstructed vision from the height of a
driver's eye 3.5 feet high.

B.	STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE -A line of unobstructed vision from the height of a driver's eye 3.5 feet above the surface of a roadway to see an object on the roadway at a height of 0.5 foot high.

SK.ETCH PLAN - A voluntary, nonbinding schematic plan submitted for informational purpose s only.

SLOPE - The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.

SOIL STABILIZATION - Chemica l or structura l treatment designed to increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve its engineering properties.

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - A plan or design for controlling stormwater so that it will preclude erosion or flooding and/or the adverse effects of stormwater from impervious areas, as required by Article X of this chapter.

STREET - Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, viaduct and any other dedicated and adopted public right-of-way or private right-of-way, used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic, pedestrians, or both.

STREET LINE or STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE - A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or lots. The street line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line currently in existence, a dedicated right-of-way, or a reserve right-of-way. See Diagram 180-1OC.

STREET, PRNATE - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, but not intended to be dedicated for public use.

STREET, PUBLIC - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended to be
dedicat ed for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation by the public.

STRUCTURE - Any man-made obj ect having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. See Diagram 180-lOG.

A	STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY - A structure customarily incidental and subordinate to and detached from the main or principal building or structure on the same lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal building or structure on the lot. An accessory structure shall exclude any vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehic le Code, and cannot be constructed without a principal structure on the property.

B.	STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL -The main, primary, or predominant structure on a given lot, tract, or parcel. Any structure that is physica lly attached to a principal structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.


180:23	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-10

C.	STRUCTURE , TEMPORARY - A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period , activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.


Diagram 180-lOG
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES


/	--
/'	DETACHED	"'
POOL	GARAGE	SHED







PRINCIPAL
STRUCTURE
i
HOUSE-+---•1




STREET R.O.W.



SUBDIVIDER - See "applicant" and "developer."

SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract or pa rcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose , whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the su bdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. A subdivision shall also include the consolidation of two or more lots into a single lot.

SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED - Where, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to Article XITI) of those improvements required as a condition for final approva l have been completed in accordance with the approved plan , so that the project will be able to be u sed, occupied or operated for its intended use.

SURVEYOR - See "professional land surveyor."

SWALE - A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to carry surface
water runoff.



180:24	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-10                      SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-10

TILE DISPOSAL FIELD - A system of open jointed or perforated pipes laid in the upper
strata of the soil for absorption.

TOPSOIL - Surface soils and subsurfa ce soils which presumably are fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humu s debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A Horizon."

TOWNSHIP - The Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, Board of Supervisors, its agents or authorized representatives.

UNDEVELOPED LAND - Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been graded or in
any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.

UNIT - A part of the property , structure, or building designed or intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public street or way, or to a common element or common elements leading to a public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public  street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common element s, which is assigned to the propert y, structure or building s.

USABLE OPEN SPACE - Same as "common open space."

WATERCOURSE - A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook , run, creek, channel, swa le, pond , lake or other body of surface water carrying or holding surface water, whether natura l or artificial.

WATER FACILITY - Any waterworks , water supply works, water distribution system, or
part thereof designed , intended or constructed  to provide or distribute potable water.

WATERSH ED - All the land from which water drains into a particular watercourse.

WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses , storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.                                                                                                       ·

WATER SURVEY - An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of groundwater
and surface water resources within a municipality .

WETLANDS - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficien t to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the United States Environ mental Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)

ZONING ORDINANCE - The current version of the North Middleton Township Zoning
Ordinance.





180:25	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-11                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-13

ARTICLE III
General Procedures; Minor Plans; Fee Schedules

§ 180-11. Copies of chapter; general submission requirements.

A.	Copies of this chapter shall be available on request, at cost, for the use of any person who desires information concerning subdivision and land development standards and procedures  in effect within the Township.

B.	Applicants are encouraged to utilize the sketch plan provisions set forth in Article IV of
this chapter.

C.	No application, requiring a decision thereon, shall be deemed filed until all requirement s of  this chapter have been met, including the proper filing with the Township of all supporting documentation and other data required by this chapter, and all fees and costs therefor are paid in full.

D.	In addition, all applications, fees and supporting documentation must be submitted to the Township by the first day of the month in order to be on the following month's Planning Comm ission agenda. If the first day of the month falls on a non-workday, the submission date shall be pushed to the first workday following the non-workday( s).


§ 180-12. Preparation of plans.

All plans are to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 204, Zoning, all other plans as adopted and amended, and  the applicable profes sional registration law.


§ 180-13. Effect of changes in chapter.

A.	No subsequent amendment of Chapter 204, Zoning, or  this chapter  would  affect  the terms of approva l of a plan, whether preliminary or final, within five years of the date of such approval.

B.	The five-year period shall be extended for the duration of any litigation directly resulting from  the grant or disapproval of a  subdivision  or  land development  plan initiated by  a party	directly   involved   with    the   plan,   including    appeals,   which   prevent    the commencement  or completion  of the development  and for the duration of any sewer or utility moratorium or prohibition , which was imposed subsequent to  the  filing  of  an application for preliminary approva l of a plat. In the event of an appeal filed by any party from  the approval or disapproval of a plat, the five-year period shall be extended by the total time  from the date the appeal was filed until a final order in such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded and any period for filing appeals or requests for reconsideration  have expired; provided, however, that no extension shall  be based upon any water or sewer moratorium which was in effect as of the date of the filing of a preliminary application.

C.	Each phase  in any residential  subdivision or land development,  except for the last phase,
shall contain a minimum  of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as depicted on the



180:26	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-13	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-14

preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the Board of Supervisors in its discret ion, provided the landowner has not defaulted wit h regard to or violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plan approval, including compliance with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of fina l plans for the various phases, then the aforesaid projection s afforded by substantially completing the  improvements  depicted  upon  the final plan within five years shall apply and for any phase or phases, beyond the initial phase, in which the required improvement s have not been substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesa id projections shall apply for an additiona l term or terms of three years from the date of final plan approval for each phase section.

D.	Failure of the landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedu le of submission of final plans for  the various phases shall  subj ect any such  phase to any and all changes  in zoning, subdivision and  other  governing  ordinance enacted  by the Township  subsequ ent  to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.

E.	Before acting on an application, the Board of Supervisors may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.

F.	Expiration of preliminary plan approval. Preliminary plan approva l shall expire if final plans are not submitted within five years of filing of the approved preliminary plan.

G.	Effect of preliminary plan approval.  Approval  of  the  preliminary  plan  constitutes approva l of the proposed subdivision or  land development in respect  to general design, the approx imate dimensions and other planned features. Preliminary plan approval binds the applicant to the general scheme of the plan as approved and permits the applicant to begin preparation of the fina l plan. Preliminary plan approval does not authorize the recording, sale or transfer of lots, or the commencement of any site improvements unless specific approval has been requested and approved by the Board of Supervisors.


§ 180-14. Recording plans and deeds.

A.	Upon approva l of the final plan, the Township shall, within 90 days of such approva l or 90 ·days after the date of delivery of an approved plan signed by the Township following completion of conditions imposed for such approva l, whichever  is later, record such plan in the Office of Recorder of Deed s of Cumberland County. The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording  unless such plan officially notes the approval of the Board of Supervisors and review by the Cumberland County Planning Department. The applicant shall bear any costs required to prov ide the Recorder of Deeds with a recordable  plan.

B.	Within 10 days after recording, the Township shall  furnish  the applicant  a  recorder's certificate for the plan certifying that sa id plan is properly recorded.

C.	Streets, public grounds , easements and other public improvements may be offered for dedication to the Township by formal notation on the fmal plan, or the applicant may note that any such improvements  have not been offered for dedication to the Township.







180:27	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-14	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-16

D.	Streets and public grounds shown on a recorded final plan shall be deemed private until offered for dedication to the Township and accepted by ordinance or resolution, or until legally adopted for use by the public.

E.	The recordfog of the plan shall not constitute grounds for assessment increases until such time  as lots are sold or improvements are installed on the land included with the subject plan.

F.	With respect to plan s requiring conditions of approvals, the following statement shall be
attached to all final plan approvals:


Approved by North  Middleton Township Board of Supervisors and all conditions
 
imposed   wit h  respect   to   such   approval  were  completed   on  this   	
 	,20 	
 
day  of
 


G.	Effect of plan approval on Official Map. After a plan has been approved and recorded as provided  in this article, all streets and public grounds on such plan shall be, and become a part of the Official Map of the Township without public hearing.


§ 180-15. Minor subdivision plans.

A.	Any subdivi sion or land development which contains no more than 10  lots may be reviewed and acted upon as a final plan without the necessity of prior preliminary plan approval.  Such determination  shall  be made by the Board  of Supervisors after receipt of a written request for waiver of the requirement for a preliminary plan ba sed upon the following  considerations:

(1)	The   proposed	subdivision	or	land  development  does  not	involve  public
improvement s.

(2)	The  proposed  subdivision  or  land  development  complies  with  the  app licable
provisions of this chapter.

B.	When the total of all lots subdivided or space occupied from a parcel or tract of land exceeds 10 lots within the last five yea rs, the applicant shall be required to file a preliminary plan for any further proposed subdivision or land development.

C.	All  applicable  information and approvals  as required by Articles V and VI shall be
shown on the plan and acquired unless waived by the Board of Supervisors.


§ 180-16. Additions to existing lots and lot line adjustments.

Any subdivision consisting solely of a parcel or parcel s of land to be added to an existing contiguou s recorded lot or lots for the sole purpose of increasing  the lot size or correcting a lot line may be reviewed and acted upon as a final plan without the necessity of prior preliminary plan approva l as provided in § 180-15 above. Such lot and addition(s) shall be conveyed  to the applicant  by  a deed of consolidation, in a form  acceptable to the Board  of




180:28	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180- 16                        SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                         § 180-18

Supervisors,  which  recording shall occur contempora neously with the recordation of the final
subdivision plan.


§ 180-17. Fees.

The Board of Supervisors shall set fees, payable in advance, for review of plans. Such review fees may include rea sonable and necessary charges by the Township's professional consultants or engineer  for review and report thereon to the Township. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinar y and customary charges by the Township Engineer or consultant s for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. Such fees shall be based upon a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors upon enactment of this chapter, or as such schedule may be amended. A copy of said fee schedule shall be available for review at the Township office.


§ 180-18. Disputes over fees.

A.	If the applicant disputes  the amount of any such review fees, the applicant  shall , within 14 days of the applicant's receipt of the bi ll, notify the Township that such fees are in dispute,  in  which  case  the  municipality  shall not  delay  or  disapprove  a  subdivision  or l and development application due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.

B.	In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of review fees  which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township  shall follow the procedure for dispu te resolut ion as set forth below:

(1)	If within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which is reasonable and necessary, provided that the profess ionals resolving such dispute shall be of the same  profession  or discipline as the consulta nts whose fees are being disputed, then the applicant and Township shall jointly , by mu tua l agreement, appoint another  professional consultant or engineer licensed as such in the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania to review such expenses and make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary, provid ed that the professionals resolving  such  disput e shall be of the same profession or discipline  as  the  consultants  whose fees  are being disputed.

(2)	The profes sional consultant or engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as he, in his sole opinion, deems necessary, and shall render a decision within 50 days from the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.

(3)	In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the aforesaid professional consultant or engineer to be appoint ed within 20 days of the billing date, then upon petition of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Plea s of Cumberland County (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the senior active ju dge then sitting) shall appoint such person, who, in



180:29	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-18                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 180-20

tha t case, shall not have been retained by, or performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the preceding five years.

(4)	The fee of the  appointed  professional  consultant  or  engineer  in  determining rea sonable and necessar y expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or greater than the original bill; if the amount of payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pa y the fee of the appointed person; otherwise, the Township and the applicant shall each pay 112 of the fee of the appointed person.


§ 180-19. Right to appear and comment before contiguous municipalities.

The Board of Supervisors, or its designated and authorized representative, may appear and comment before a contiguous municipality and the va riou s elected and appointed board s and commissions of the contiguous municipality considering  a proposed subdivision,  change of land use or land development.


ARTICLE IV
Voluntary  Sketch Plan Submission

§ 180-20. Developer's option to submit sketch plan; requirements.

A	Prior to the submission of a preliminary or final plan, applicant s, at their option, may submit a sketch plan to the Township for advice, suggestions and nonbindin g opinions from the Township staff and the Township Plall1in g Commission, staff and the Board of Supervisors. While submission of a sketch plan is optional, the Township strongly recommends  the  submission  of  sketch  plans.  Submission  of   sketch  plan s  affords appli cants the opportunity for meaningful discussion with Township officials prior to incurring the expense of preparing preliminary or final plans. See Diagram l80-20A for the sketch plan review process.

B.	At the option of the applicant/developer, sketch plans are to be first submitted for review by the Township staff. Along with the sketch plan, the applicant/developer shall submit a Jetter advising the Township staff as to specific areas for which comments are requested or su ggestions solicited. Township staff will complete its review and offer its comments in a timely manner. Thereafter, the applicants, at their option, may submit the sketch plan to the Township Planning Commission. Said sketch plans are to be submitted to the Township Mun icipal Office in accordance with § 180-1 lD in order to be placed on the next month's Planning Commission meeting agenda.

C.	Any and all options, discussions and/or representations made by the Township staff, and the Township Plannin g Commi ssion or the Board of Supervisors shall not be binding or considered as nonbindin g upon the Board of Supervisors when acting upon any subsequently submitted preliminar y or final plans. Applicant s submittin g sketch plans acknow ledge the nonbinding nature of such discussions, opinions and/or representation s. All preliminary and final plans must comply with the requirements of the Township ordinances and all other applicable laws and regulations. Discussions, opinions and/or representation s  made  during  the  review  of  a  sketch  plan  shall  not  be a  basis  for



180:30	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-20	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-20

noncompliance with the applicable requir ements for  plan  approval.  In addition, discu ssions with and/or opinions or representations by the Township staff or the Township Planning Commission shall not be binding upon the Board of Supervisors when taking action on a plan.

D.	Although  the Township  encourages the submission of sketch plans  and submission of as much technical data as possible, such submission  and review of a sketch plan shall not constitute an official submission of a plan to the Township which requires action by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the terms of the Municipalities  Planning Code.


Diagram 180-20A - Sketch Plan Review Process
•	- Pre-application  review is optional

Contact Township to Disruss Sketch Plan Review Process



Submit Sketch
Plan




Pre-application Review• & Staff/Consultant Review


Planning Commission
Meeting to Review




Governing Body Workshop Meeting to Review



End

(See Preliminary Plan Process, FinalPlan Process or Minor Plan Process)











 
180:31
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 1 80-21                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-24

§ 180-21. Suggested information to be submitted.

The following information is suggested to be submitted for review under this article:

A.   A plan  drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals I 00 feet. This plan must be
designated  "sketch plan" thereon.

B.	An approximate  key  map  showing  the  genera lized  location  of  the  tract  and  adjacent
street s.

C.	Tract boundaries with approximate dimensions.

D.	North point , topography,  swales, major tree stands and other significant existing site features.

E.    Proposed street and lot layout with information as to the kinds of uses contemplated.

F.   The name and mailing address of the property owner and date.

G.   Such other information necessary for a meanin gful discussion .


§ 180-22. Site meetings.

The appl icant may, subject to availabil ity, obtain meetings with Township officia ls, including the Board of Supervisors, Pla1U1ing Commission, the  Township Manager, the Township Engineer, the  Township  Solicitor,  and  others. Meetings  with the Board  of  Supervisors  and P lanning Comm ission sha ll occur at a properly advertised meeting. Such meetings are purel y voluntary, and no particular Township officer or his representative may be  compelled  to attend.


§ 180-23. Fees.

Sketch plans reviewed by the Township shall be subject to all fees and costs incurred by the Township pursu ant to its efforts arising out of this article, including but not limited to engineer and solicitor fees and administrative costs. The cost to review the sketch plan shall be paid by the applicant.


ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plan Submission

§ 180-24. Plan requirements.

A.	All new plan s to be reviewed by the Planning Commission shall be received by the Township by the first day of the month in order to be on the following month's Planning Commission agenda , if the first day of the month falls on a non-workda y, the submi ssion date shall be pu shed to the first workda y following the non-workd ay(s). The developer shall submit  11 copies  of  the prelimin ary  plan  and  three copies  of  all  supporting
documentation to the Township. In addition, the developer should submit three copies of
all subsequent filings that include revisions to the prelimin ary plan. Should the Plannin g



180:32	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-24	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-24

Conunission determine that certain revisions need to be made to the preliminary plan and supporting documentation , the developer shall make those revisions and resubmit the preliminary plan and supporting documentation to the Township for Planning Commission review by the 15th of the month to be placed on the following month's Planning Conunission meeting agenda. Whenever the 15th day of the month falls on a non-workday, the submission date shall be pushed to the first workday following the non-workday(s). Should the Planning Commission require certain revisions be made to the preliminary plan and supporting documentation as a condition of the Planning Commiss ion recommending to the governing body that the preliminary plan be approved, the developer shall submit the revised preliminary plan and supporting documentation to the Township by 4:00 p.m. on the Tuesday following the Planning Commission's meeting to be placed on that month's Board of Supervisors' workshop meeting. Plans tabled at the Board of Supervisors' workshop meeting shall be revised and returned to the Township by the second Tuesday of the following month for review at the following month's workshop meeting . Plans that are tabled at the Board of Supervisors' regular meeting shall be revised and returned to the Township by the second Tuesday of that month , for review at the workshop meeting of the same month. Plans will not be reviewed at the regular Board of Supervisors' meeting until the plan has been reviewed by the Board of Supervisors at the previous workshop meeting. Additionally, the developer shall deliver the preliminary plans to the Cumberland County Planning Depa1iment.

B.	The submittal shall contain the following specifications:

(1)	Plans shall be on sheet sizes no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equa ls 100 feet. If the plan requires more than one sheet, each sheet shall be numbered and sheet layout index shall be provided. A digital copy of the plan shall also be submitted in  a PDF format, and a format compatible with the Township's or County's GIS platform.

(2)	The designation "preliminary plan" and the name of the development.

(3)	Proposed project  name  and  municipality  or  municipalities and  county  in  which located.

(4)	North point, graphic scale,  written  scale, and date, including  the month,  day, and year  that  the original  drawing  was  completed,  and  the month,  day, and year  for each revision , if any.

(5)	The name( s), address(es) and phone number(s) of record owner(s) and subdivider(s).

(6)	The name, address, seal, registration number, and signature of the registered engineer and/or surveyor or landscape architect responsible for preparation  of the plan, in whole or in part , certifying that the preparer of the plan has been to the site and observed the present condition and that the plan indicates the actua l condition of the site, all as required by the applicable standards of their respective licensing  boards.






180:33	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
§ 180-24	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-24

(7)	The names  of all abutting property  owners, respective deed reference, instrument number or any other  proper  recording  references  for  the  Cumberland  County Recorder of Deeds, and Cumberland County tax identification number.

(8)	Signature(s) of the owner(s) [or equitable owner(s)] certifying approval of the plan.
If the proposed subdivision involves  a proposed  conveyance of a nonconforming lot to an adjoining property , lot addition, or a lot line adjustment the owner of said adjoining property shall also sign the proposed plan.

(9)	A  location  map,  for  locating  the  property  being   subdivided,   showing   the relationship of adjoining property to all streets, roads, and municipal boundar ies and drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.

(I0) If construct ion is to occur in phases, a plan showing the progression of pha ses, how each pha se relates to completed and future phases, and a time schedule indicating when each phase is to be commenced and completed. The time schedule shall be updat ed in accordance with the provisions of§ 180-13 herein.

(11)	Boundaries of the property being  subdivided  showing  bearings  and  distances,  a statement of total acreage of the property, the total number  of lots being proposed and  the location of municipal bound aries; deed, plan book, instrument number or any other  proper  recording  references  for  the  Cumberland  County  Recorder  of Deed s appropriate for the subject plan, including any immed iate prior subdivisions, phases, and deed conveyances from and to the subject tract.

(12)	Purpose for which sites other than buildable lots are dedicated or reserved.

(13)	All applicable zoning data , including any changes in the existing zoning to be requested by the subdivider and identifying the limits of any zoning district s or overlay zoning districts affect ing the site.

(14)	All  existing  buildings,  sewers,  water  mains,  culvert s, utility  lines, petroleum  or
petroleum product  lines, fire hydrant s, and other significant man-made features.

(15)	All existing watercourses and bodies, tree masses, locations of outstanding, rare, threatened and endangered and historic trees, rock outcropping s, wetlands, floodplains and other significant natural features.

(16)	Existing (from actual field or aerial survey) and proposed contours of the site at vertica l intervals of two feet for areas with an average slope of 4% or less and at interva ls of five feet for areas with an average slope exceeding 4%. Extrapolated USGS contours shall only be accepted where no public improvements are proposed. Where public improvements are proposed , contours must be field verified with a two-foot minimum interval.

(17)	) The location and elevation of the datum to which the contour elevations refer  shall be an established USGS bench mark, National Geodesic Survey (NGS) or  other datum acceptable to the Township Engineer.

(18)	Land  which  is  flood-prone,  or  located  within  the  flood  hazard  area  defined  in
Chapter  204,  Zoning , shall be identified  on the plan. Information  as set  forth  in



180:34	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-24	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-24

Article  IX  of  this  chapter  relative  to  floodplain  area  regulations  shall  also  be provided .

(19)	The typical cross section , names, and w idths of right-of-way, cartway and paving of proposed streets, alleys and easements.

(20)	The   layout   of  lots  showing  dimensions,  lot  numbers,  and  area  of  each   lot,
including the residual or remaining lot or parcel.

(21)	Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved  for  schools,  parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other public, semipublic or community  purpose.

(22)	All existing or proposed streets, driveways or private rights-of-way within or adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way width, cartway widt h, and distances shown between all access points , and whether they are intended to remain private or are to be dedicated to public use. All streets or driveways, whether public or private, will be permitted only insofar as they are in conformit y with the specifications provided on the plan. Further, all driveways subsequently built or installed shall only be permitted as specified and as located on the subdivision plans regardless of the identity of who performed the construction or installation , regardless of the identity of the person who completed the approved subdivision or land development plan, or the original developer , contractor or landowner.

(23)	Profiles showing proposed street center  lines, including  ex1stmg  and proposed gradient s. The profile datum shall  indicate  the  existing  and  proposed  grade elevation at each station.

(24)	The location of curbs,  sidewalks  and  streetlights,  if required.  Al so, the location, type  and  size of all  required  stop  signs,  or other traffic control pav ing markers, signs,  devices or signage including street names. The developer is responsible  for specification s and installat ion of all such traffic controls as hereinabove related as shown  on the  plan, which shall, in all cases, meet design standards as established by PennDOT or the Township, as appropriate.

(25)	Clear sight triangles at street intersections, as set forth in § 180-34 of this chapter and as further provided in Chapter 204, Zoning.

(26)	A copy of any deed rest rictions imposed on the property as a condit ion of sale by the former, present or former and future owners.

(27)	Front, side and rear building setback lines shall be shown on all lots, and residua l
or remaining lots or parcels.

(28)	When on-site sewage disposal systems are proposed, the locations of satisfactory percolation test sites and probe holes, including failed probes required for the planning modul e, shall be shown. A one-hundred-foot no-well-zone should be depicted on the plans around any  proposed septic system drain field and/or any existing septic system drain field. A primary and secondary site will be shown.




180:35	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
§ 180-24	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-24

(29)	Location,  size,  and  invert  elevation  of  propo sed  sanitary  and  storm  sewers, the
location and size of proposed water mains and fire hydrant s.

(30)	For land development plans, proposed building locations and respect ive parking areas.

(31)	Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of  the  subdivider's  holdings,  or where developm ent is to occur in pha ses, a sketch shall be submit ted of the prospective street layout for the remaining area.

(32)	Signature block and date space for approva l by the Township Board of Supervisors and review by the Cumberland County Planning Departmen t and Nort h Middleton Township Planning Commission.

(33)	The  owner  will  prov ide  for,  install  and  maintain  any  necessary  traffic  safety devices as he may  deem  necessary  or  as  may  be  required  by  the Township Engineer, until such time as the  roads  in  question  are  accepted  for  public ded ication.

(34)	Where an applicant proposes a subdivi sion or land development within an area which is or may be served by the existu1g sewer system, the applicant shall provide estimated volumes, and strength of sewage, and proposed method for connection to the existmg sewer system.

(35)	When a proposed project, whether because of its location, topography, specia l man-made or natura l features, or because of its poten t ial in1pact on the Township or its environment , is deemed by the Planning Commission or the Board  of Supervi sors to require additional detail, information , data, studies, specification s and/or tests, not otherwise required in th.is chapter, the Planning Commission shall recommend and the Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to submit such information, by an agreed upon time, in no case later than approval of the final plan.

(36)	A note shall be included on the plan  listing  any  special  zoning  decisions, variances, conditiona l use approva ls, special exceptions, waivers wruch  were granted for the project , which shall also include applicable case designations.

(37)	When   a  developer  propo ses  a  subdivision/land  development  for  a  commercial and/or  mdustrial  use,  residentia l   subdivision   with   more   than   10  units,  or multifam ily residentia l use, the developer must provide informat ion that adequate fire,  police and ambulance protection facilities are available to serve the proposed u se/development.

(38)	The following note  sha ll be included on all subdivision and/or land development plans:










180:36	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-24	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-24

AGRICULTURAL  NUISANCE  DISCLAIMER
The lands depicted on this plan may be located adjacent to or involved in a normal agricultural operation  as defined  by Pennsylvania  Act  133 of 1982, as amended , the "Right to Farm Law." If you purchase land that is depicted on this plan and said lands are located or involved as described above, you may be prohibited from filing a nuisance action against the operators of a normal agricultural operation. In addition you may be subjected to inconvenience, discomfort and the possibility of injury to property and health arising from normal and accepted agricultural practices and operations, including but not limited to noise, dust, odor,  and the operation of machinery of any kind, including aircraft,  the storage and disposal of manure, and the application of fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides and pesticides.



Diagram  180-24A - Preliminary Plan Process

Start
(See Sketch Plan Process  Optional)



Optional  Pre-Application Mtg/Submit Preliminary Plan Application


Completeness Determination




 
Staff/Consultant Review
 
Planning Commissio n Review
 
Outside Entity/Agency Review
 



Governing  B<xly Meelingto Review & Action



Applicant Notified




Applicant Complies with Any Conditions



Plan Certification by Governing Body





180:37	01 • 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-25	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-25

§ 180-25. Supporting documentation.

A.	If water is to be supplied by means other than on-site wells maintained and operated by individual	lot owners, a copy of a certificate of public convenience from  the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) or an application for  such  or  a cooperative agreement or corrunitment must accompany the plan as evidence that the proposed development  will be supplied with an adequate, reliable and safe water supply.

B.	All applicable filings  required  by  the  PA  DEP  in  accordance  with  the  Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966, as amended.4

C.	Groundwater supply report. Unless waived by the Board of Supervisors, a groundwater supply report shall be required to be submitted for a ll residential and nonresidential land development plans, nonresidential subdivi sions, and all subdivision plans proposing 11 or more residential lots.

(1)	The applicant shall submit a report concerning the source of water to serve the proposed subdivision or land development. Said report shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and  be  submitted  in  conjunc tion  with  the preliminary plan or when a community wat er system is proposed for review by the Township and the applicable authority.

(2)	Prior to initiating the preparation of a water service feasibility report the applicant shall provide a description of the methodology to be used to complete the report. The description shall include the location and size of the tract, the intended use, including amount of daily water usage and general terrain and geologic features. The exact methodology of the study area should be based on engineering judgment and an underst anding of existing geologic conditions at the site. In all instances, however, the study methodolo gy must be mutually agreed upon by the applicant , their engineer, and the Township.

(3)	All lots created, and any land development plan that proposes flows equa l to or greater than 400 gallons per day within any area that the Act 537 Plan identifies to be served by public utilities, shall be served by public water where available.

(a)	If connection to an existing public  water  supply  system  is  proposed,  the applicant or developer  shall  submit an agreement  committ ing an authority or public utility to provide such water as will be utilized by the subdivision or land   development  for  such   period   of  time   and   under   such   terms  and condition s  as an authority or public  utility  provides water  service elsewhere in its service area, including but not limited to the following:

[l] The locations and kind of fire hydrants shall be in accordance with the specifications of an authority or public utility that operat es such water system in concert with the local fire department thread requirements. A copy of the approval of such system by an authority or the public utility shall be submitted.




4.	Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.


180:38	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-25	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-25

[2] The final plan application shall include a statement from an authority or the public utility indicating the approval of the plans for design, installation and possible financial guarantees.

[3] The installation and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications of an authority or the public utility. An authority or the public utility shall esta blish requirement s for the ownersh ip and maintenance  of such system.

(4)	If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots wit hin the subdivi sion or land development , the applicant shall present evidence that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owner s or by an authority. A copy of a certificate of public convenience or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.

(5)	If community water systems are proposed, these systems shall be in comp liance w ith the plan s offered for dedication to an authority.

(6)	If the water supply system propo sed involves the utilization of water obtained from the tract being subdivided or developed (irrespective of whether that water is being distributed as a part of a community water supply system), the report shall include certification by the applicant's engineer that a water supply system exists upon all lots created and upon any land development plan, which supply is capable  of supplying potable water as follows:

(a)	Minimum residential  yield  and  demand  requirement.  The report  shall show that  the proposed well(s) is (are) capable of supplying potable water at the minimum  rate of 315 gallons per day per u nit of residentia l occupancy at a demand rate of not less than two gallons per minute for one hour , either with or without the use of a storage system.

(b)	Minimum principa l nonresidential yield and demand requirement. The report shall show that the proposed well(s) is (are)  capable of  supplying  potable water at the minimum rate of 200 gallons per day per unit of nonresident ial occupancy at a demand rate of not less than two gallons per minute for one hour, either with or without the use of a storage system.

(c)	Rechar ge req uirement. The report shall show that  the groundwater  recha rge on the tract in question after development will exceed the anticipat ed water usage. Water usage shall be based upon Departm ent of Environmental Protection sewage flows provided by  Department  of  Envirorunenta l Protection .

(d)	Nonresidential uses. When industrial, agricu ltura l or commercial use is intended , the report shall set forth the proposed nature of the u se, the proposed number of employees and whether or not water will be used for cleanup and/or processing or otherwise in connection with the use. Additionally, the applicant  shall set forth the proposed allocation of available



180:39	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 180-25		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-25

water supply between or among the proposed uses and shall set forth a plan
		or proposal  pursuant  to which such  allocation  can reasonably  be monitored and enforced by the Township or authority.
	(e)	Aquifer test required. Prior to installation of any new water supply system or the subdivision of land  into lots which would  be served by individual wells in areas of, or in proximit y to areas of, known groundwater contamina tion or inadequate yields of potable supplies, aquifer and water quality tests shall be performed . Areas of known  groundwater problems shall be mapped and such
		information  shall  be  maintained  in  the Township  offices. Areas  of  known
groundwater problems shall include, but are not limited to:
[1]   Areas  in  proximit y  (one mile)  of  sinkholes,  ghost  lakes,  or  drainage
entering  the ground.

[2]  Contaminated aquifers, including designated cleanup sites.

[3]   Other   areas  with   documented   water   quantity  or   quality  problems,
including pollutant s in excess of federa l safe drinking water standards.

(f)	Aquifer test standard s and  procedures. No  person  shall develop  land within an area of known groundwater quantity problems without administering and passing on said land the aquifer test required by this section. Prior to conducting the required testing, the applicant shall provide the Township and the Township Engineer with the proposed test  methodo logy that shall demonstrate compliance with  the following objectives and standards:

[l] To obtain sufficient ·data for the calculations of aquifer performance, including the coefficients of transmissibility and storage, permeability, and specific yield.

[2]   To determine the location and character of geologic boundaries.

[3]   To ascerta in the effects of well interference.

[4]   To provide  a  guide in  the  spacing  of wells for  the development  of a
well field.

[5] In all cases the applicant shall demonstrate that the water to be supplied shall be potable and shall meet all applicable standards of DEP or the United  States Environmenta l Protection Agency.

(g)	Criteria for a  request  of  exemption.  A  proposed  land  development  or subdivision which intend s to use a groundwater source to supply water to the property may be exempted from these requirements by the Township  if one or more of the following criteria are satisfied:

[l] The proposed project is located 1/4 mile or less, in the same geologic unit , from a previous aquifer test, within the past two years, and the previou s test showed transmissibility (T) values greater than 1,000.




180:40	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-25	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-26

[2] The proposed project has had two aquifer tests on different sides of the proposed project within 1/2 mile  in the same geologic  unit within the past two years, with T values greater than 1,000.

[3] The proposed land development or subdivision is recommended for exemption by a qualified geologist based upon certified hydrogeological information.

D.	A stormwater management plan prepared in accordance with the standards established in Article X of this chapter.

E.	An  erosion  and  sedimentation  control  plan  prepared  in  conformance  with   the requirements of the Cumberland County Conservation District.

F.	In the event that the plans propose extension of service into the project by any authority or jurisdiction other than the Township, a statement from the applicable authority or jurisdiction  regarding the adequacy of such extension shall be submitted.

G.	A preliminary grading plan for the site in accordance with Article XI of this chapter.

H.	A preliminary landscaping plan for the site in accordance with Article  XII  of  this chapter.

I.	A preliminary traffic impact study in accordance with § 180-44 of this chapter.

J.	The developer shall provide the LeTort Regional Authority written notice and a copy of any plan or application for the development of land within the designated watershed or any tributary of LeTort Spring Run.

K.	In the opinion of the Township Engineer adequate studies to establish speed limits for all streets within or bordering on the proposed subdivision or land  development. Said requirement shall apply to each such street that currently has no legal speed restriction posted or to such streets identified by the Board of Supervisors which maintain a speed restriction that may be changed due to the impact of the proposed subdivision or land development.


§ 180-26. Review procedure.

A.	Optiona l preapplication meeting.

(1)	The purpose of the preapplication meeting  is to:

(a)	Introduce the applicant to the Township's plan review procedures;

(b)	Discuss the applicant's objectives;

(c)	Schedule site inspections, meetings,  and plan submissions;

(d)	Foster an informal review between the applicant and the Township;

(e)	Reduce  subdivision   and  land   development   plan  design  and  construction
improvement costs for the applicant;



180:41	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 180-26	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-26

(f)	Expedite the Township's review and approval process.

(2)	The preapplication meeting shall be held with the applicant, the applicant's site designers and/or professional consultants, applicable Township staff, and Township Engineer  and/or other professional consultants hired by the Township.

(3)	The applicant shall submit the preliminary plan in accordance with § 180-24B.

(4)	The preapplication  meeting  shall  be scheduled  not  less than  15 days prior  to the
required submission date for plan to be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

(5)	The applicant will be charged  for  reasonable  fees  for  the preapplkation  services for the Township Engineer and/or other professional consultants hired by the Township to assist with the review of the plan.

(6)	Due to the informal nature of the preapplication meeting, the applicant and the Township shall not be bound by the discussion at and determination of the preapplication meeting. Comments made by the Township staff, Township Engineer and/or other professional consultants hired by the Township shall be interpreted as being suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the preapplication  meeting.

B. The plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, the Township Solicitor, and other representatives of the Township as deemed necessary by the Township Manager and/or the Board of Supervisors. All fees and costs incurred by the Township for plan reviews and meetings shall be paid by the applicant. If, during the course of this review, the plan is found to be lacking material information required by the Board of Supervisors to make its determination, the applicant will be requested to withdraw the plan pursuant to the provisions  of this chapter and make revisions thereto by providing the required data. If the applicant refuses to voluntarily withdraw the plan, the plan will be subject to rejection by the Board of Supervisors due to its incompletenes s. See Diagram l 80-24A.

C.	At a regular or special Planning Commission meeting following receipt of reports from the  Township Engineer and  other  agencies  listed  above,  prior  to consideration  of the pr eliminary  plan  by  the  Board  of  Supervisors   as  provided  herein ,   the  Planning Commission may:

(1)	Review the applicant's submission.

(2)	Review all reports issued.

(3)	Discuss submission with the applicant or agent.

(4)	Evaluate the plan, reports, and discussion.

(5)	Determine whether  the preliminary  plan meets  the objectives and requirement s of
this chapter and other ordinances of the Township.

(6)	Recommend approval, disapproval or conditional approval of the preliminary plan.
Conditional approval shall set forth the conditions to be satisfied by the applicant.




180:42	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-26	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-26

(7) Submit its reports to the Board of Supervisors. When the Planning Commission recommends disapproval in terms as filed, the decision should specify the reasons for disapproval.

D.	Revisions to preliminary plans. During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the preliminary plan and prior to any action by the Board of Supervisors within the required ninety-day period, the preliminary plan may be revised by the applicant. Eleven copies of any revised preliminary plan shall be submitted by 4:00 p.m. on the Tuesday following the Planning Commission's meeting in order to be placed on the next month's Planning Commission meeting agenda. The revised preliminary plans shall be reviewed as provided in § 180-26 above, with the exception of§ 180-26A, Optional preapplication meeting. Plans shall note the dates of any and all revisions and a summary of the nature thereof. A written response letter shall be provided to address each comment provided by the Township Engineer.

E.	Within 90 days calculated  in  accordance  with  Section  508  of  the  Pennsylvania Municipa lities Planning Code, as amended,5 or unless said 90 days is extended in writing by agreement of the applicant, following submission of the completed preliminary plan to the Township, the Board of Supervisors shall:

(I)	Evaluate    the    applicant's	submission,	presentation	and   any   other	relevant
information.

(2)	Determine  whether  the preliminary  plan meets the objectives  and  requirements  of
this chapter and other ordinances of the Township.

(3)	Approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve, the preliminary plan.

(4)	Inform the applicant, in writing, communicated to the applicant personally  or mailed to him at his last address appearing on the application  not  later  than  15 days following the decision . When the application is not  approved  in  terms  as filed, the decision shall specify  the defects found  in the application  and describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions  of the ordinance relied upon.

(5)	Failure of the Township Board of Supervisors to render a  decision  and communicate it to the applicant within  the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application on terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change  in  the prescribed manner or presentation of communication of  the  decision,  in  which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of commun ication shall have like effect.










5.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.


180:43	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-27	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-27

ARTICLE VI
Final Plan Submission

§ 180-27. Plan requirements.

A.	If a preliminary plan precedes a final plan submission, application of said final plan will not be accepted until the preliminary plan has received approval by the Boa rd of Supervisors. The developer is to submit  the final plan  and supporting documentation to the Township by the first day of the month in order to be on the following  month's Planning Commiss ion agenda. If the first day of the month falls on a non-workday, the submission date shall be pushed to the first workday following the non-workday(s). The developer shall submit 11 copies of the final plan and three  copies of all supporting documentation to the Township. In addition, the developer should submit three copies of all subsequent filings that include revisions to the final plan. Should the Planning Commission determine that certain revisions need to be made to the final plan and supporting documentat ion, the developer shall  make  those revisions  and  resubmit  the final plan and supporting documentation to the Township for  Planning  Commission review by the 15th of the month to be placed on the following month's Planning Commission agenda. Whenever the 15th day of the month falls on a non-workday, the submission date shall be pushed to the first workday  following  the  non-workday(s). Should the Planning Commission require certain revisions be made to the final plan and supporting documentation as a condition of the Planning Corrunission recommending to the governing body that the fmal plan be approved, the  developer  shall  submit  the revised final plan and supporting documentation to the Township by 4:00 p.m. on the Tuesday following the Planning Commission's meeting to be placed on the  following month's Board of Supervisors' workshop agenda . Plans tab led at  the  Board  of Supervisors' workshop meeting, shall be revised and returned to the Township by the second Tuesday of the following  month for review at the following month's workshop meeting. Plans that are tabled at the Board of Supervisors'  regular  meeting  shall  be revised and returned to the Township by the second Tuesday of that month, for review at the workshop meeting of the same month. Plans will  not  be reviewed  at  the  regu lar Board of Supervisors' meeting until the plan has been reviewed by the Board of Supervisors at the previous workshop  meeting.  Additionally , the developer shall deliver the preliminary  plans to the Cumberland County Planning Department.

B.	Final plans shall conform in all respect s with preliminary plans as previous ly approved, and any conditions specified in the approval of preliminary plans shall be incorporated in the final  plans. Final plan s shall show the following:

(1)	Sheet sizes shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches and shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet unless a larger  scale  has  been required as a condition of preliminary approval. Where more than one sheet is required , an index sheet of the  entire subdivision or land development shall be included on the cover  sheet. The final plan shall be formatted so that it is legible when reduced to a size of 18 inches by 24 inches for recording. A digital copy of the plan shall also be submitted in a PDF format and a format compatible with the Township's or Count y's GIS platform.

(2)	The designation  "final plan" and date submitted.



180:44	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-27	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§  180-27

(3)	Proposed and existing tract boundary lines, right-of-w ay lines of street s, easements, and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions, bearings, or internal angles, and radii, arcs, and deflection angles; all mu st be shown, and certified by a profes sional land surveyor. This requirement applies to both subdivision and land development plans. The error of closure shall not be more than one part in 5,000.

(4)	The information  required  to  be shown  or provided  with the preliminary  plan  as li sted  in  §§  l 80-24B  and  180-25.  All  information  submitted  as  required  by  this section  shall be submitted  in final format, including all final engineering details.

(5)	Statement by owner dedicating  streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public  uses
which are to be dedicated.

(6)	Signature block and date for acknowledgment of Cumberland County Planning Department and North Middleton Township Planning Commission review and approval by the Board  of Supervisors of North Middleton Township.

(7)	A  notation  on  the  plan  relating  to  the  confonnance  with  the  requirement  for  a
highway occupancy permit  from the Pennsylvania Department  of Transportation.

(8)	PA DEP code number referencing the approval of the sewage plan  revision module.

(9)	Certification by a professional land surveyor, engineer, or landscape architect  as
defined by Article II of this chapter.

(10)	Certification of qualified professional that wet lands have been invest igated and delineated for the site under review.

(11)	In addition to any zoning approvals, a list of waiver s granted or requested, shall be noted on the plan.


























180:45	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-27
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE

Dia ram 180-27A - Final Plan Process

Start
(See Preliminary Plan Process or Submit Waiver of Preliminary Plan Request) or (Sketch Plan Process Optional)



Submit Final Plan
Application



Completeness Determination/Optional Preapplication Meeting
 
§ 180-27
 



 
Staff/Consultant
Review
 
Planning Commission Review
 
Outside Entity/Agency Review
 



Governing Body Meeting to Review & Action



Applicant Notified



Applicant Complies with Any Conditions



Plan Certification by Governing Body



 

Plan Certification by Cumber land County Planning Department












180:46
 
Plan Recorded at County Recorder of Deeds
 















01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-27	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

Diagram 180-27B - Additions to Existing Lots or Lot Line Adjustment

Submit Additions to existing lots or lot line
adjustment Plan



Completeness Determination
 
§ 180-27
 


 
Staff/Consu ltant
Review
 

Planning Commission Review


Governing Body Meeting to Review & Action



Applicant Notified



Applicant
Complies with
Any  Conditions




Plan Certification by Governing Body



Plan Certification by Cumberland County Planning Commission



Plan Recorded at County Recorder of Deeds











180:47
 
Outside Entity/Agency Review
 




















































01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-28	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-29

§ 180-28. Supporting documentation.

A.	Whenever any improvements are proposed in connection with a subdivision or land development , it shall be the responsibility of the  applicant  to  provide  adequate engineering and relat ed designs, construction specifications, performance guarantees, and ownership and maintenance responsibilities in accordance with the standards and requirement s set forth in this chapter, as applicable.

B.	Final sewage planning  module for subdivision or land development.

C.	Final stormwater management plan.

D.	Final erosion and sedimentation control plan and/or Na tional Pollution Discharge Elimination System approved by  the Cumberland  County  Conservation  District  and/or the Department of Environmental Protection. In the case of minor subdivision plans as defined in this chapt er, Cumberl and County Conservatio n District approval may not be required .

E.	A notarized certificate of ownership.

F.	An overall grading plan in accordance with Article XI.

G.	Suitable documentation  that  the applicable plan s are in conformity  with ordinances  and
regulation s governing the extension of utility services.

H.	Verification of compliance with floodplain area regulations as set forth herein.

I.	Such  other  certificates,  affidavits,  endorsements,  conditions,  or  dedications  as  may  be
required  by the Board of Supervisors in the enforcement of these regu lations.

J.	A  draft  deed  of  consolidation  for  parcels  or  lots  being  proposed as  lot  additions  for review and approval by the Township Solicitor.

K.	Public   improvement   guarantees   with  construction   cost  estimates  for  review  by  the Township Engineer in accordance with Article XIII of this chapter.

L.	Copies  of  all  permit s/approvals  received  from  all  utilities,  governmental  agencies,  or
department s reviewing the plan.

M. The developer shall provide the LeTort Regional Authority written notice and a copy of any plan or application for  the development of land within the designated watershed or any tributary of LeTort Spring Run.


§ 180-29. Review procedure.

A.	Optional preapplication meeting.

(1)	The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to:

(a)	Introdu ce the applicant to the Township's plan review procedures;

(b)	Discuss the applicant's objectives;



180:48	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 180-29	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-29

(c)	Schedule site inspections,  meetings,  and plan submi ssions;

(d)	Foster an informal review between the applicant and the Township;

(e)	Reduce  subdivision  and  land  development  plan  design  and  construction improvement costs for the applicant;

(f)	Expedite the Township's review and approval process .

(2)	The preapplication meeting shall be held with the applicant, the applicant's site designers and/or professional consultant s, applicable Township staff, and Township Engineer and/or other professional consultant s hired by the Township.

(3)	The applicant shall submit the final plan in accordance with§ 180-27B.

(4)	The preapplication meeting shall be scheduled not less than 15 days prior to the
required submission date for plan to be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

(5)	The applicant will be cha rged  for  reasonable fees  for  the preapplication  services for the Township Engineer and/or other professional consultants hired by the Township to assist with the review of the plan.

(6)	Due to the informal nature of the preapplication meeting, the applicant and the Township shall not be bound by the discussion at and determination of the preapplicat ion meeting. Co1mnents made by the Township staff, Township Engineer and/or other professiona l consultants hired by the Township shall be interpreted as being suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the preapplication  meeting.

B.	The plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, the Township Solicitor, and other  representatives of the Township as deemed necessary by the Township Manager and/or the  Board of Supervisors. AU fees and costs incurred by the Township for plan reviews and  meetings sha ll be paid by the applicant. If, during the course of this review, the plan is found  to be lack ing material information required by the Board of Supervisors to make its determination, the applicant will be requested to withdraw the plan pursuant to the provisions  of this chapter and make revisions thereto by providing the required data . If the applicant  refuses to voluntarily withdraw the plan, the plan will be subject to rejection by the Board of  Supervisors due to its incompleteness . See Diagram 180-27A.

C.	Copies of the final plan  and  supporting  documentation  shall  be  distributed  by  the Township to the Township Engineer and appropriate reviewing and advisory bodies for comment  and  report.  Add itionally,  the  Township  will  deliver   the   final  plan  and supporting  documentation  to  the  Cumberland  County  Planning  Department   and  to adja cent municipalities and governmenta l agencies and authorities that may be affected by  the  plan. Upon  permission  granted  by  the Township, the developer may deliver  the final plan and supporting documentation to those entities.

D.	All  plans   shall  be  reviewed  by  the  Township  staff,  Township  Engineer,  and  when
appropria te, by the Board of Supervisors. The Engineer's report shall be made available




180:49	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-29	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-29

to the Township Planning Commission and the Township Board of Supervisors  prior to
their action thereon. (See Diagram  180-27A)

E.	At a regular or special Planning Commission meeting following receipt of reports from the Township staff, Township Engineer  and other agencies listed above, prior to consideration of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors as provided herein, the Township Planning Commission may:

(1)	Review  the applicant's submission.

(2)	Review all reports received.

(3)	Discu ss submission with the applicant or applicant's agent.

(4)	Evaluate the plan, report s and discussion.

(5)	Determine  whether  the  final  plan  meets the objectives and  requirement s of  this
chapt er and other ordinances of the Township.

(6)	Recommend   approval,   disapproval  or  conditional   approval   of  the  final  plan.
Conditional approva l shall set forth the conditions to be satisfied by the applicant.

(7)	Submit its reports to the Board of Supervisors. When the Planning Commission recommend s disapproval in terms as filed, the decision should specify the reasons for disapproval.

F.	Revisions to final plans. Durin g the course of the Planning Commiss ion's review of the final  plan and prior to any act ion by the Board of  Supervisors  within  the  required ninety-day  period , the final plan may be revised by the applicant according to the procedure for preliminary plan revisions and as set forth in § l 80-26D herein.

G.	Within  90  days  calculated  in  accordan ce  with  Section  508  of  the   Pennsylvania Municipaliti es Planning Code, as amended,6 unless said 90 days is extended, in writing, by  agreement  of the applicant , following  submission of the completed final plan to the Township, the Board of Supervisors shall:

(1)	Eva luate   the   applicant's	submission,   presentation   and    any   other   relevant
information.

(2)	Determine whether  the  final  pl an  meets  the objectives  and  requirements of  this
chapter and other ordinances of the Township.

(3)	Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the final plan.

(4)	Inform the applicant, in writing, communicated to the applicant personally  or mailed to him at his last address appearing on the application not  later than  15 days following the decision. When the application is not approved  in  terms  as filed, the decision shall specify  the defects  found  in the application and describe the requirement s which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the ordinance relied upon.


6.	Editor's Note : See 53 P.S. § 10508.


180:50	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-29	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-30

(5)	Failure of the Township Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in which case failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.


§ 180-30. Additions to existing lots and lot line adjustments.

A.	Additions  to existing lots and lot line adjustments, as permitted by § 180-16 shall not be
required to show the following plan requirements (See Diagram  180-27B):

(1)	Section  180-24B(2): the designation  "preliminary plan."

(2)	Section 180-24B(14): all existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, utility lines, petroleum or petroleum product lines, fire hydrants, and other significant man-made features.

(3)	Section 180-24B(l 5): all existing  watercourses  and bodies,  tree masses,  locations of outstanding, rare, threatened and endangered and  historic  trees,  rock outcroppings,  wetlands, floodplains and other significant natural features.

(4)	Section 1 80-24B(l6): existing (from actual field or aerial survey) and proposed contours of the site at vertica l intervals of two feet for areas with an average slope of 4% or less and at intervals of five feet for areas with an average slope exceeding 4%. Extrapolated USGS contours shall only be accepted where no public improvements are proposed. Where public improvements are proposed , contours must be field verified with a two-foot minimum interval.

(5)	Section  l 80-24B(l 9): the typical cross section, names, and widths of right-of-wa y,
cartway and paving of proposed  streets, alleys and easements.

(6)	Section 180-248(23): profiles showing propo sed street center lines, including existing and proposed gradients. The profile datum shall indicate the existing and proposed grade elevation at each station.

(7)	Section  l 80-24B(24): the location  of curbs, sidewalks and streetlights , if required.
Also, the location, type and size of all required stop signs, or other traffic control paving markers, signs, devices or signage, including street names. The developer is responsible for specifications and installation of all such traffic controls as hereinabove related as shown on the plan, which shall, in all cases, meet design standards as established by PennDOT or the Township, as appropriate.

(8)	Section 180-24B(25): clear sight triangles at street intersections, as set forth in this chapter and as further provided  in Chapter 204, Zoning.

(9)	Section 180-24B(29): location , size, and invert elevation of proposed sanitary and
storm sewers, the location and size of proposed water mains and fire hydrants .




180:51	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-30                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-31

(10)	Section 180-25C: groundwater  supply report.

(11)	Section  180-250: a  stormwater  management  plan prepared in accordance with the
standards established in Article X of this chapter.

(12)	Section 180-25E: an erosion and sedimentat ion control plan  prepared  in conforma nce wit h the requirements of the Cumberland County Conservation District.

(13)	Section l 80-25G: a preliminary grading plan for the site in accordance with Art icle XI of this chapter.

(14)	Section  180-25H:  a  preliminary  landscaping  plan  for the site in accordance with
Article XII of this chapter.

(15)	Section  180-251: a preliminary  traffic impact study in accordance with § 180-44 of
this chapter.

(16)	Section 180-25K: adequate studies to establish speed limits for all streets within or bordering on the proposed subdivision or land development. Said requirement shall apply to each such street that current ly ha s no legal speed restriction posted or to such streets identified by the Board of Supervisors which maintain a speed restriction that ma y be changed due to the impact of the proposed subdivision or land development.

(17)	Section 180-28C: final stormwater management plan.

(18)	Section 180-280: final erosion and sedimentation control plan and/or National Pollution Dischar ge Elimination System approved by the Cumberland County Conservat ion District and/or the Department of Environmental Protection.

(19)	Section  180-28F: an overall grading plan in accordance with Article XI.


§ 180-31. Time period for filing final plan.

Except as otherwise provided with respect to a duly filed schedule providing for the completion of improvements beyond the five-year protection period set forth in the Municipalit ies Planning Code, the final plan shall be submitted not later than five years after the date of approva l of the preliminary plan by the Board of Supervisors. Failure to comply with the aforesaid five-year time limitation shall render any approval of the preliminary plan null and void unless an extension of time is granted by the Board of Supervisors for good cau se shown, in which case, failure to comply with any extension of time shall render said approval null and void.












180:52	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-32	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-33

ARTICLE  VII
Design  and Construction Standards

§ 180-32. Application; interpretation.

A.	The standards of design and construction in this article shall be used to judge the adequacy of development proposals and shall be considered to be the minimum criteria in achieving the purpose and objectives of this chapter. When a proposed project, because of its Location, topography, special natural or man-made features, or because of its potentia l impact upon the Township or its environment is deemed to require more stringent criteria or additional standards and/or regulations, the Planning Commission may recommend or the Board of Supervisors may impose such requirements in order to promote the public's health, safety, or welfare or to assist in achieving the purpose of this and other Township  ordinances. Conversely , as set forth in Article XIV and Section
512.l of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P .S. § 10512.1, variations or modifications
to  these  criteria  may  be granted  by  the  Township  Board  of  Supervisors in  accordance with the provisions  set forth in Article XIV of this chapter.

B. Where questions should arise regarding the interpretation of these design standards , the determination of the Board of Supervisors shall prevail.


§ 180-33. General standards.

A.	Land. No land shall be subdivided or developed for any purposes unless reasonable hazards to lives, hea lth, or property from flood, fire and disease shall have been eliminated or unless the plans for the project shall provide adequate safeguard against such hazards .

B.	Development. Proposed projects shall be coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously , and no construction in any development is to occur until a building permit is obtained from the Building Permit Officer.

C.	Natural and historic features. Reasonable mea sures shall be taken to insure, insofar as possible, the preservation of natura l and historic features, areas and structures as identified in the Comprehensive Plan to be worthy of such preservation and to insure public access to such features, area s and structures where appropriate.

D.	Conformance with Comprehensive Plan. The layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land development shall conform to the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan and any regulations or maps adopted in furtherance thereof.

E.	Conformance with Zoning Ordinance. The layout or arrangement  of the subdivision or land development shall conform to Chapter 204, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of North  Middleton.









180:53	01-01  -2014
 
§ 180-34                                    NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 180-34

§ 180-34. Streets.

All lots shall front on a public or private street as provided in this chapter. All subd ivisions or land development s shall at a minimum include two means of ingress and egress over public or private streets. Streets shall be designed and constructed as follows:

A.	Street pattern. The propo sed street pattern shall be  integrated  with  ex1stmg  and/or officia lly planned streets and it shall be related to topography to produce usable lots and reasonab le street grades. Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be coordin ated, and be of such widths and grades and in such locations as  deemed necessary to accommodate  prospective traffic, and facilitate fire protection .

B.	Where adjoining areas are not subdiv ided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets to the boundaries of the tract to be  subdivided.

C.	Where a development is to be constructed in phases, the arrangement of streets in each pha se shall make provisions for the proper projections of streets to the boundaries  of the next pha se.

D.	Design and purpose. Streets shall be designed accord ing to their function and laid out to preserve the integrity of their design in accordance with the following functional classification unless otherwise determined by the Board.

(1)	Arterial roads. This classification includes highways which provide, develop or may develop substantial volumes of traffic. Design featu res of arterial road s must permit high operating speed s. An arterial roadway is a roadway  upon which mobility is essential and local access is minimized. All arterial roadways shall have as few access points as minima lly necessary, and in all cases shall be accessed only by other arter ial, collectors, and access drives if the standard s, criteria and conditions of this chapter are satisfied. All such access to arterial roads shall be accompan ied by adequate tra ffic control devices to insure the safe and efficient movement of traffic.

(2)	Collectors. A collector is a roadway upon which mobility and local access are of equa l importance. The collector shall provide mobility from the local and collector roadway network s to the arterial road network. Collectors shall be accessed by arterials, other collectors, loca l roadways, and commercial  and  residentia l driveways , if the standards,  conditions and criteria of this chapter are satisfied.

(3)	Local roads. This classification includes all publ ic roads which are not included in higher classifications. A local road is a roadway upon which mobility and through traffic is minimized and access is of primary importance. Access to local roads is permitted only by other collector roads, as specified in Subsection D(2) above, local roads, alleys and by single-family residential or farm driveways, if the standards, conditions and criteria of the chapter are satisfied.

(4)	Alley s and serv ice drives. This classification is intended to include minor streets which provide secondary access to the back or side of properties abutting a street. It is also intended to include private street s which are parallel to arterial highway s




180:54	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-34	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-34

and   collector   roadways   providing  service  access  to  property  fronting  on  such highways and roadways.

(5)	Cul-de-sac.  This  classification  is  intended  to  include  streets  which  have  a turnaround area at their termini.

(6)	Dead-end streets. This classification of street is prohibited unless designed as a
permanent  cul-de-sac.

E.	Roads shall be laid out according  to  the  following  nurumum  schedule;  however, additiona l road width may be required as determined by the Board to ensure public safety and convenience in accordance with this chapter.


 
Type of Road Arterial roads Collector roads Right-of-way

Cartway (with curbing) Cartway (without curbing) Shoulders
Local roads
Right-of-way
Cartway (with curbing) Cartway (without curbing)
Cartway (parking on 2 sides of the street) Cartway (parking on 1 side of the street) Shoulders
Alley or service drives (to be dedicated
to the Township)
Right-of-way
Cartway (with curbing) Cartway (without curbing) Shoulders
 
Standard
PennDOT  standards PennDOT  standards
50 or 60 feet (as approved by Township Engineer)
32 feet minimum
24 feet
4 feet on each side


50 feet
32 feet minimum
24 feet
36 feet (Curbing required) 32 feet (curbing required) 4 feet on each side



33 feet
24 feet minimum
18 feet
2 feet on each side
 

F.	Cul-de-sac streets.

(1)	Permanent  cul-de-sac streets  shall not  be utilized,  unless  specifically  approved by the Board of Supervisors  after recommendation by the Planning Commission.

(a)	A cul-de-sac street will be approved when a through street is not more advantageous.	To be recommended for approval, the applicant must demonstrate that there is no other manner in which to design a street system due to topography or land parcel shape or size.



180:55	01-01  -2014
 
§ 180-34	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-34

(b)	Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed a center-line distance of 1,200 feet  in length nor be less than 250 feet in length, measured from edge of the intersection of a street which is not a cul-de-sac to the end of the improved cartway at the end of the cul-de-sac street.

(c) Any street which is terminated for access to an adjoining property or becau se of authori zed stage development shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather turnaround paved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed until such time as the street is extended. All cu l-de-sac streets, whether permanent ly or temporarily designed , sha ll be provided at the closed end with a fully paved turnaround constructed  to the specifications of this chapter. The developer who extends a street which has been provided with a temporary turnaround shall remove the temporary turnaround and restore the area of the temporary tu rnaround .

(2)	Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-wa y shall be placed adja cent to a proper ty line and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried  to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the coverage created by the turnaround outside the bou ndaries of the extended street  shall revert in ownership to the property owners fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround . The small tr iangles of land  beyond  the  cul-de-sac  to  the tract boundary shall be  so deemed that , until  the street  is continued, maintenance of these corners of land will be the responsibility of the adjoining owners .

(3)	Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with  a  paved  turnaround having a minimum diameter to the outer  pavement  edge or curbline of not  less than 90 feet and a right-of-way  line diameter of not less than 100 feet.

(4)	Cul-de-sac streets in commercial and industrial development sha ll a lso be subject to  review and approva l of the Township Engineer as to  adequacy  to  handle projected  traffic.

(5)	Drainage of cul-de-sac shall, wherever possible, be toward the open end of the cul-de-sac.

(6)	All cul-de-sac streets shall be designed with an area reserved for the Township to push snow during snow removal operations. An easement shall be provided indicating that the Township has the right to use the area for snow removal. A curb cut shall be provided at least 20 feet in width so that snow can be pushed into the easement area. This easement shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet by 20 feet.

(7)	All street design standards herein which are pertinent to cul-de-sac shall apply.

G.	Private streets.

(1)	New private streets. Private streets are prohibited  unless they meet the same design
standards and specifications as public streets and unless they are accompanied by a



180:56	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-34	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-34

right-of-way and permanent maintenance agreement subject to review and approval by the Township. This agreement shall be recorded with the office of the Cumberland County Recorder of Deeds on the same date as the recording of the final plan. The agreement shall contain at least the following:

(a)	Identification   of   all   parties   with   responsibility   for   the   ownership   and
maintenance of the private street.

(b)	Provision for enforcing the agreement upon all parties of the agreement.

(c)	Assurance  that  the street will be construct ed and maintained  in conformance
with this chapter.

(d)	A requirement  that  a  future  offer  of dedication  will not be made until  and
unless the street is restored to the prevailing standards for a Township street.

(e)	A requirement that an offer of dedication will include either the entire street system, or sections which provide reasonable circulation with  the  public street system.

(f)	A method for assessing maintenance repair cost.

H.	Where  a  subdivision  abuts  or  contains an  existing  right-of-way  of  inadequate  width,
sufficient additional width shall be required to meet the above standards.

I.	Additional right-of-wa y and cartway widths may be required by the Board of Supervisors to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it and to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.

J.	Street  grades.  The  minimum   center-line  grade  for  all  streets  shall  be  1%  and  the
maximum grade shall be as follows:

(1)	Arterial  streets: PennDOT  standards.

(2)	Collector streets: 7%.

(3)	Local road s and alleys: 10%.

(4)	Cul-de-sac: 10%.

(5)	Cul-de-sac turnarounds : 4%.

(6)	Driveways/access drives: 10%.

(7)	Private rights-of-way: 10%.

(8)	Refer to§ 180-340(4) for grades within intersections.

K.	Crown. The slope of the crown on a ll streets shall be not less than 1/8 nor more than  1/3
inch per foot.

L.	Shoulders. Shoulders shall have a slope of 1/2 inch per foot.





180:57	01-01  -2014
 
§ 180-34	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-34

M.	Street construction standards. Streets mu st be constructed to the grades and dimensions drawn on the plans , profiles, and cross sections submitted by the applicant and approved by the Board of Supervisors. Before paving the street's surface, the applicant must install the required utilities and service laterals and provide, where  necessary,  adequate stormwater drainage for the street as approved by the  Supervisors.  All  subgrade  and paving work must be supervi sed by the Township Supervisors or their representative. All subgrade, stone subbase, and ba se pavement must lay over the winter month s from November 1 through May I , before being paved with the wearing course. The wearing course shall  only be placed  between May  l and October 31. Prior to the commencement of paving, the Township shall be  contacted  to determine the suitability  of compaction. The pavement base, wearing surface, and shoulders mu st be constructed according to the specification s in Table l 80-34A, excepting, however , that for the construction of arterial roads or highways, the subdivider shall consult the Supervisors and be governed by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the method  of construction  to be  used. The developer shall also be responsible for the erection of all traffic control signage (i.e., warning, advisory, and informational) of the type and grade deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors and mu st be installed in accordance with the latest addition of PennDOT' s Sign Foreman Manual Publication  108.


 





Pavement
 
Table 180-34A
Street Construction Specifications*
 



Thickness
 
Alternative	Type Material
Rigid pavement	Portland cement concrete
2A subbase
Shoulders
 
Local Roads
6 inches
6 inches
Paved Type 3
 
Collector Street
8 inches
6 inches
Concrete Type 2
 
Flexible pavements
 
Superpave wearing course


Thickness
Superpave mix
Superpave ba se course Thickness Superpave mix
2A subbase
Shoulders













180:58
 



2 inches	2 inches
9.5 mm	9.5 mm


3.5 inches	6 inches
25 mm	37.5 mm
6 inches	8 inches Same construction and pavement standard as the cartway












OJ - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-34	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-34

NOTES :
*	All components of the street construction shall  conform  to  the  specifications  set forth in the "Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408 Specifications," 1987 as amended.
** The Township Engineer will consider alternative paving specifications subject to submission of paving plan supported by site specifications testing and a geotechnical analysis, PA approved . This plan must be certified by a licensed engineer.


N.	Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full width, and  in no case Jess than 10 feet, the type of surface to be the same as specified above. Where  sidewalks are installed , the required driveway surfacing shall end at the street side of the sidewa lk.

1.	Inter sections.

(1)	Intersections  involving  the jun ction  of  more  than  two  streets  are  prohibited.
Right-ang le intersections must be used wherever possible; however, in no case shall streets intersect at le.ss than 70° (measured on the center lines of the streets).

(2)	Curb  radii.  At  intersections of  streets, the radius  of  the curb  or edge of shoulder shall  not be less than the following:


 



Intersection
Arterial with arterial
Arterial with collector street Collector with collector street Collector w ith local road Local road with local road Alleys with all streets
 
Minimum Simple Curve Radii of
Curb or Edge of Shoulder (feet)
45
45
35
25
20
15
 

(3)	Clear sight triangle. Proper sight lines mu st be maintained at all street intersections. Measured a long the center line, there must be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet (150 feet for arterial streets) from the point of intersection , and no building or permanent obstruction and/or plant materials over 18 inches high shall be placed within the clear sight triangle.

(4)	Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 4% in any direction, and approache s to any intersection shall follow a straight course both vertica lly and horizontally within l 00 feet of the intersection. The intersection grade requirement applies to intersections involving arterial and collector streets, local roads and alleys, culs-de-sac, and private rights-of-way.






180:59	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-34	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-34

P.	Streets not in alignment. If streets are not in alignment , the distance between the center lines  of streets opening on opposite sides of an existing or proposed street shall be no less than  125 feet.

Q.	Sight distance. Sight distance must be provided with respect to both horizontal  and vertical alignment. Passing sight distance and stopping sight distance shall comply with the minimum requirements of PennDOT Publication 70, ba sed on highway classification and speed limit.

R.	Curves, horizontal.

(1)	Where  connect ing street  lines deflect  from each other  at any one point , the lines
must be connected with a true, circular curve.

(2)	The minimum  radius of the center line for the curve must be as follows:


 


Type of Street Arter ial Collector
Local
 
Minimum Radius
(feet)
500
300
200
 


(3)	Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the beginning or end of curves.

S.	Curves, vertical. Vertical curves shall be used in changes  of grade when the algebraic difference exceeds 1%, and shall be designed for maximum visibility. Intersections shall be   approached on a ll sides by requirement s  of  Publication  70,  based  on  highway classification and speed limit.

T.	Slope of banks along streets. The slope of banks along streets measured perpendicular to the street center line shall be no steeper than the following:

(1)	One foot of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal mea surement for fills.

(2)	One foot of vertica l measurement for two feet of horizontal measurement for cuts .

U.	Names  of streets. Names  of new  streets shall  not  duplicate or approximate existing or platted  street  names , or  approximate  such  names  by  the  use of suffixes  as  lane,  way, drive, court, avenue.  In  approving  the  names  of  streets, cognizance  may  be  given  to existing or platted street names within the posta l delivery district served by the local post office. New streets shall bear the same name or number of any continuation or alignment with  an existing or platted street. The Township  shall  have the authority to disapprove any proposed street name.

V.	Alleys  and service drives. The following standards shall apply to the design and location
of alleys and service drives:

(1)	Alleys shall not be permitt ed  in residential  developments except by the permission
of the Board of Supervisors. All buildings  or other structures adjacent to any alley



180:60	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-34	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-34

must comply with the side or rear yard setbacks from the alley right-of-way line as included in the appropriate district regulations in Chapter 204, Zoning.

(2)	Alleys,  primary   or  secondary  access  drives  serving  commercial  and  industrial
establishments are required unless other provisions  for service are provided.

W.	Joint use driveways.

(1)	A joint use driveway as the sole means of ingress and egress  between  a subdivision or Jand  development  and public right s-of-way serving more than one lot or dwelling unit are discouraged. The Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may, at the Board's discretion, grant modification of the requirement that lots or developments be accessed by a public street if the literal enforcement of said requirement will exact undu e hardship becau se of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that the modification  shall not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is observed , and further provided that each lot or development is sufficiently accessed by a joint u se driveway which shall be adequately designed to safely accommodate the traffic expected from the proposed and foreseeable development , and provided further that the proposed joint use driveway shall not be required to carry significant traffic.

(2)	It shall be the responsibility  of the applicant to substantiate adequately the need for
such relief in accordance with Article XIV.

(3)	Joint use driveways shall not be approved if:

(a)	A bridge or other structure is located on the joint  use driveway which is not in conformity with standards determined appropriate by the Township Engineer.

(b)	Access  to  the properties  serviced  by  the joint  use driveway  by emergency
vehicles shall be inhibited.

(c)	The joint use driveway wou ld service more than three dwelling units.

(4)	Supervisors may approve joint u se driveways, provided the following conditions are met:

(a)	Existing joint  use driveways proposed  to serve more than one lot or dwelling unit  shall:

[I ]  Existing joint  use driveways  shall be improved with a dustless  surface as specified on the final plan. When serving more than one lot, a minimum of six inches of shale and two inches of 2A modified stone shall be required along with a minimum cartway width of 14 feet with the cartway placed in the center of a private right-of-way. Any joint use driveway serving one lot and running throu gh or between existing lots shall be a minimum of six inches  of  sha le, two  inches  2A modified stone up· to  the point where the bordering lots end and shall have the cartway placed in the center of said right-of-way.



180:61	01 -01 -2014
 

§ 180-34	


[2]	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-34

The cartway shall provide a paved apron at any public road or street
		intersection,  within  the  established  right-of-way  of the public  road  or
street.  The  paving  specification  shall  be  the same  as required  for the classification of the adjacent public road or street.
	[3]	Serve no more than  a tota l of three lots or dwelling  units.
	[4]	Provide adequate access for emergency vehicles.
	[5]	A private right-of-way shall be legally recorded with a minimum width
of 20 feet.
	[6]	Meet minimum, clear sight distances as set forth in this chapter.
	[7]	Security shall be posted for joint  use driveway s to ensure completion of any improvement s, in accordance with Article XIII.
	[8]	Any subdivision or land  development plan proposing a JOmt use driveway, approved by the Township under  the provisions of this chapter, shall include the following notation on the plan sheet and shall be subject to the provisions specified therein.

"Each deed for the transfer or conveyance of any lot(s) shown on this plan shall  contain restrictions and/or conditions that the private right-of-way and joint use driveway shown hereon shall remain a private right-of-way, and that the purchasers or owners of said lot(s), their heirs, successors and assigns, shall be responsible for the construction, maintenance, repair and snow and ice removal of said joint use dri veway within the private right-of -way; which restrictions and/or conditions shall be deemed to be covenants running with the land. North Middleton Township shall not now , nor at any time in the future, have responsibility for the construction, maintenance, repair or snow and ice removal of any private right-of-way or  joint  use driveway shown on this plan, and, no further subdivision of any lot shown on this plan or the tract from which such lots have been subdivided shall be a llowed, unless and until  such  right-of-way  or joint use driveway is constructed or improved to current Township standards as a Local Road and offered for dedication in accordance with the requirements of the North Middleton Township  Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."

(b)	Joint use driveways proposed to serve one or more lot or dwelling unit shall: [l]   The proposed joint  use driveway  shall be improved  with a du stless
surface as specified on the fmal plan. When serving more than one lot a minimum of six inches of shale and two inches of 2A modified stone shall be req uir ed along with a minimum cartway width of 20 feet with the cartway placed in the center of a private right-of-w ay. Any joint use driveway serving  one lot and running  throu gh or between existing lots


180:62	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-34	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-34

shall be a minimum of six inches of shale, two  inches of 2A modified stone up to the point where the bordering lots end and shall have the cartway placed in the center of said right-of-way.

[2] The cartway shall provide a paved apron at any public road or street intersection, within the established right-of-way of the public road or street. The paving specification shall be the same as required for the classification of the adjacent public road or street.

[3]    Serve no more than a total of three lots or dwelling units. [4]    Provide adequate access for emergency vehicles.
[5]  A private right-of-way shall be legally recorded with a minimum width
of 50 feet.

[6]    Meet minimum clear sight distances as set forth in this chapter.

[7]    Security shall be posted  for joint  use driveways to ensure completion of
any improvements,  in accordance with Article xm.

[8] Any subdivision or land development plan proposing . a JOmt use driveway, approved by the Township under the provisions of this chapter, shall include the following notation on the plan sheet and shall be subj ect to the provisions specified therein.


"Each deed for the transfer or conveyance of any lot(s) shown on this plan shall contain restriction s and/or conditions that the private right-of-way and joint use driveway shown hereon shall remain a private right-of-way, and that the purchasers or owners of said lot(s), their heirs, successors and assigns, shall be responsible for the construct ion, maintenance , repair and snow and ice removal of said joint use driveway within the private right-of-way; which restrictions and/or conditions shall be deemed to be covenants running with the land. North Middleton Township shall not now, nor at any time in the future, have responsibility for the construction, maintenance, repair or snow and ice removal of any private right-of-way or joint use driveway shown on this plan, and, no further subdivision of any lot shown on this plan or the tract from which such lots have been subdivided shall be allowed, unless and until such right-of-way or joint use driveway is constructed or improved to current Township standards as a local road and offered for dedication in accordance with the requirements of the North Middleton Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."


X.	Streets. When streets become pas sable, they shall be adequately signed and identified , and all houses, places of busines s, and other such buildings shall be conspicuously numbered for identification purposes, consistent with any applicable ordinances or Township permits.


180:63	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-34	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-35

Y.		Snowplowing. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to properly maintain all roads and keep them rea sonably free and clear of snow and ice and other debris until such time as the Township has accepted an offer of public dedication thereon. In the event the developer should at any time fail to reasonably fulfill this responsibility, the Township and its agents, in its discretion, may enter the premises to properly maintain the road or remove any snow and ice, and the developer shall be held liable for all costs incurred by the Town ship therefor, including, but not limited to, costs associated with manpower, equipment and any damage that may occur to the Township equipment. In addition, the applicant/developer and/or owner agree to hold the Township harmless in the event of damage to the property or improvements and to indemnify the Township for any loss incurred by the Township. Such actions by the Township shall not in any way be construed to constitute an acceptance of the road for public dedication, or otherw ise require the Township to regularly maintain any of the roads.

Z.	Subdivi sion compl iance w ith road access requirements. No subdivision of land shall be permitted unless it is shown that each proposed lot, tract, or parcel will be able to obtai n access to a public street without  violating any road access standard s specified elsewhere in this chapter or any other ordinance or law.

AA. Construction of temporary or perman ent ramps. The construction of temporary or permanent ramps of any material for the purpose of crossing a curb on a dedicated Township road shall be strictly prohibit ed. A note shall be placed on  the  plan acknow ledging compliance with this section.

BB. Placement of dump sters. The placement of dumpster on any dedicated Township road shall be strictly prohibited.


§ 180-35. Blocks and lots.

A.	General layout.

(1)	In general, the lengths, depths, and shapes of blocks and lots must be determined
with regard to:

(a)	Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type
of use contemplated.

(b)	Zoning requirement s as to lot sizes, dimensions, yards and other open areas.

(c)	Needs  for convenient  access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.

(d)	Limitations and opportunit ies of topography.

(2)	Blocks shall not exceed  1,200 feet nor be less than 500 feet in length.

(3)	Blocks shall be of sufficient depth to permit two tier s of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are necessary or in the case of cluster layouts or other site-specific limitations.

(4)	In  nonresidential   areas,   the  block  and  lot  layout  must  be  designed  with
consideration of site conditions:


180:64	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-35	SUBDIVIS ION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-36

(a)	To permit the most efficient arrangement of space for present use and future expansion.

(b)	To permit  adequate,  safe worker  and patron  access,  circu lation and  parking, as well as loading and unloading.

B.	Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be as required by Chapter 204, Zon ing.

C.	Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be as required by Chapter 204, Zoning.

D.	Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be as required by the Chapter 204, Zoning.

E.	Double frontage lots.

(1)	Double frontage lots shall be discouraged, except where  desired  along  limited access highways, or required due to the limitations of a specific site.  Reverse frontage lots adjacent to limited  access  highways must face on an interior street, and back on such thoroughfares. Where a lot is permitted  to have reverse frontage, a landscaped screen shall be provided between the lot and the limited access highway.

(2)	Access  to  all  other  double  frontage  lots  shall be  limited  to  the  street  of  lower
classification .

F.	Lot lines. Lot lines shall be approximate ly at right angles or radial to street lines so long
as rea sonably shaped lots result.

G.	Lot access. Every lot shall have access off a street which shall be properly designed, improved, and constructed as required by this chapter. Lots in a subdivision or land development which are proposed to front upon an existing Township or state road which is  not improved to the standard s set forth herein shall, as a minimum, comply with the right-of-wa y requirement s of§ 180-34.

H.	Street address number s shall be assigned to each lot by the Township or other assigning entity.


§ 180-36. Easements.

A.	Width; location. When easements are required  for  any utility  serving  a  subdivision or land development , they mus t be a minimum of 20 feet wide and  must , to the fullest extent possible, be adjacent to, or centered on, rear or side lot lines.

B.	Natural gas lines. All natu ral gas  lines  mu st  be  installed  in  compliance  with  the applicable state or federal  laws.  The  minimum  distance  from  a  natural  gas  line  to  a dwelling unit or other structure must  be  as  required  by  the applicable transmission or distribut ion company.

C.	Petroleum   lines.  Minimum   setback  easements,  as  established  by  the  owner  of  such
easement must be maintained.





180:65	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-36	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-38

D.		Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage as required by Article IX or X herein (whichever governs), or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage facilities, or for the purpose of installing a stormwater sewer.


§ 180-37. Access.

A.	Streets shall be laid out to provide access to all lots and to adjacent  undeveloped property, in which event the subdivider or developer shall  improve or reserve access streets to the limit of the subdivision or development.

B.	In the event that the Board of Supervisors shall determine that the literal enforcement of the requirement that all lots shall front on a public or private street would constitute a hardship to the owner of the property , up to three lots, which include a parent tract, may be proposed for service by a joint use driveway on the parent tract which is in existence at the time of enactment of this chapter. However, this provision may only be utilized for one joint use driveway per parent tract at the Board of Supervisor's discretion. Such joint use driveway shall be designed to provide safe access to said lots  and  where  such approva l, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, will not  adversely  affect  public health or safety, including but not limited to accessibility for fire and ambulance service and impact on bridges or other structures.

C.	Unless  waived  by  the North  Middleton  Township  Board  of  Supervisors,  two  or more means of ingress and egress shall be provided to service any  subdivision  or  land development.


§ 180-38. Standards for sidewalks.

All  sidewalks constructed  within  the Township  shall conform to the following requirements.
Where sidewalks are mandatory curbs shall also be required.

A.	Installation. Wherever a proposed subdivision or land development plan shall have an average of three or more lots or dwelling units per net acre, is a nonresidential subdivision or land development, or is immediately adjacent to or within  1,000  feet of any existing or recorded subdivision or land development  plan  located  along the  same side of a c01mect ing street having sidewalks, such sidewalks shall be installed on all lot frontages and a vegetative strip of four feet in width shall be provided between  the sidewalk and curb.

(1)	Sidewa lks shall be located within the right-of-way of the street , shall be four feet in widt h and abut  the vegetative strip. A grass area shall  be maintained between the sidewalk and curb.

(2)	In the vicinity of shopping centers, schools, recreation areas and other such facilities, sidewalks must be at least five feet wide and terminate at the street right-of-way line.



180:66	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-38	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-39

(3)	If the Township deems necessary, for health and safety conditions, sidewalks may be required at the Board of Supervisors' discretion .

B.	Construction. Sidewalks located within the dedicated street right-of-way shall  be constructed of cement concrete according to the  standards set forth in the most recent edition or revision of PennDOT  Specification Form 408.

C.	Waiver of requirement. The Board of Supervisors may waive a requirement for the construction of sidewalks. A grant of such a waiver shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board of Supervisors and shall require that the following language be shown on the final plan:


"The owner s of these lots, upon notification by North Middleton Township, shall be responsible for the construction  of sidewalks to Township specifications within six months of the date of such notification."


D.	Sidewalks shall be ADA compliant.

E.	Where, in  order to promote the continua tion of sidewalks over and across property in a planned community , condominium, or other development containing a homeowner s' association, condominium associat ion or the like, and where sidewalks are required under this chapter, all sidewalks within the development shall be connected and sidewalks shall be required to be installed and maintained across commonly owned property of all homeowners and any association in order to create a connected, continuou s sidewalk system throughout the development and to avoid areas along the common ground where sidewalks start and stop and prevent the continuity and continuous sidewalk path throughout the proposed development.


§ 180-39. Curbs and gutters.

Construction  of  curbs  and  gutters  within  the Township  shall  conform  to  the  following
requirements:

A.	When required . Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development plan shall have an average of three or more lots or dwelling unit s per acre, is a nonresidential subdivision or land development , or where any project is immediately adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of any existing or recorded subdivision or land development located along the same side of a connecting street and having curbs, curbs shall be installed on all lot frontages on the street. In areas where curbing is not required , suitable gutters shall be designed and installed, subject to Township approval, to control erosion. If curbs are to be installed, the pavement shall extend from curb to curb. When the stormwater management plan , as determined by the Township, adequately controls surface water, curbs and gutters and such would not be necessary hereunder except for the density provisions herein , the curbing requir ements hereof may be waived by the Township as provided for below.

B.	Construction. Curbs  and gutters shall  be constructed  according to the standards  set forth in the most recent edition or revision of PennDOT  Specifications, Form 408. The type of


180:67	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-39                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-41

curbs or gutters shall be determined by the engineer. Curbs must be of eight-inch vertical face design. Concrete gutter/curb combination is prohibited where streets are proposed to be dedicated to the Township, or could be dedicated to the Township in the future.

C.	Wai ver of requirement. The Board of Supervisors may waive a requirement for the construction of curbs. A grant of such a waiver shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board of Supervisors and shall require that the following language be shown on the final plan:


"The owners of these lots, upon notification by North Middleton Township, shall be responsible for the construction of curbs to Township specifications within six months of the date of notification."


D.	If the Township deems necessary, for health and safety conditions, curbs and gutters may
be required at the Board of Supervisors' discretion.


§ 180-40. Outdoor lighting.

All outdoor lighting installed and/or replaced in North Middleton Township after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of§ 204-337 related to outdoor lighting within Chapter 204, Zoning.


§ 180-41. Recreational land; fee requirements.

A.	Purpose. To ensure that pr esent and future residents of the Township wil l have available to them adequate parks, recreational areas and faci lities by establishing requirements for the dedication of land or a fee in lieu of such dedication to be imposed upon subdividers and land developers as authorized by the Municipalities Planning Code. All land so dedicated or fees collected in lieu thereof shall be u sed only for the purpose of providing accessible park or recreational facilities.  The decision to require dedication  of  land or  a fee in lieu of such dedication will be made at the option of the Board of Supervisors and/or at the recommendation  of the Township Engineer.

B.	Applicability. This section sha ll apply to all subdivisions and land developments in North
Middleton Township , including mobile home parks.

C.	General requirement. Every subdivision or land development shall, as a condition to approval, and subject to the standards for acceptance set forth hereafter, provide for the development of recreational areas or facilities by either the dedication of land suitable therefor or the payment of a fee in lieu of such dedication . The Board of Supervisors has the option to require the subdivider and/or land developer to make either a dedication of land or pay a fee in lieu of such dedication in accordance with the hereinafter established standards:

(1)	Land   dedication   requirement.   Except   as   hereinaft er   provided,   every   owner,
subdivider  or  developer  of  a  subdivision  or  land  development  shall  dedicate  a




180:68	01 - 01-2014
 
§ 180-41	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-41

portion of the land proposed for said development to the Township for recreational purposes in accordance with the following standards and formula:

(a)	Single-family detached or semidetached, including each mobile home pad in a mobile home park shall dedicate a minimum of 3,000 square feet per lot or dwelling unit.

(b)	Multifamily developments shall dedicate a minimum of 3,000 square feet per unit. Twenty five percent of the land so dedicated may  be included  in and used to satisfy the open space requirement  for development.

(c)	Conversions from single- to multifamily will be subject to the standard for multifamily  developments.

(d)	Nonresidential developments shall dedicate a minimum of 10% of gross land
area to recreational use.

(e)	Single lot one-time exemption. The subdivision or development of one single-family residential lot from a larger tract shall be exempt from the dedication or fee requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that this exemption shall be available one time only and further subdivisions or land development from the same tract shall not be exempted. Further, a note shall be made on the subdivision plan that the one-time exemption was applied,

(2)	Standards   and   criteria   for   dedication   and   acceptance   of   recreational   land.
Acceptance of dedication shall be at the option of the Board of Supervisors. In determining whether to accept or reject land offered for dedication the Board shall consider the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Board and the following factors:

(a)	All  land  offered  for  dedication  shall be contiguous and located  in a single
area of not less than three acres in area.

(b)	Not  more than  25% of  the offered  land  shall be located  in a  floodplain  or exceed a slope in excess of 8%.

(c)	Offered  land  must  be  suitable for  recreational  use  as  a  public  park  based
upon its size, topography and soil conditions.

(d)	Offered  land shall abut and  have direct access to a public  road and shall be
suitable for the installation of water and sewer facilities and other utilities.

(e)	The decision of the Board of Supervisors to accept or reject dedication shall be conclusive . In the event dedication is rejected , the developer or subdivider shall comply with the provisions herein for payment of a fee in lieu of dedication.

(3)	Fees in lieu of dedication.

(a)	In lieu  of  dedication  of  land  as aforesaid,  the developer  or  subdivider  shall pay  a  fee  to  the  Township  in  an  amount  based  upon  a  schedule  of  fees adopted  by  resolution  of the Board  of  Supervisors.  Said  fee schedu le shall


180:69	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 1 80-41	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-42

establish a set fee for lots and dwelling units, including mobil e home pads thereon, and may be revised from time to time without further amendment of this chapter.

(b)	Payment of fees. All  fees hereunder  shall  be due and payable in full upon approval of the subdivision or land development plan or any phase or section thereof.

D.	Use of land or fees received. All land or fees received by the Township shall be u sed to establish and develop recreational areas and facilities within the Township which shall be reasonably available for use and enjoyment by the residents  of  the  development  or subdivision assessed  for said  lands or fees. Such facilities shall not however be requ ired to  be  within  or  immediately  adjoining  such  subdivisions  or  developments.  A  separate park  and recreation capita l account in the name of the Township shall be established to set aside  the funds collected and ensure their  use for recreational  purposes  exclusively. Said account shall be an interest-bearing account, and funds not utilized within the period provided by law  shall, upon request , be returned to the owner or developer in accordance with the provisions of Municipalities Planning Code.


§ 180-42. Monuments and markers.

A.	Monument s must be set:

(1)	At the intersection s of all street right-of-way lines.

(2)	At the intersection of lines forming angles in the bou ndaries of the subdivision.

(3)	At one comer of a lot comprising a single lot subdivision, or at one predominant intersection of a street and a property line of a lot  in a subdivision comprised of not more than five contiguous lots or parcels.

(4)	At least three predominant line intersections or line angles in subdivisions of more than five lots or parcels, and in any land development plan. When any plan of development and/or subdivision encompasse s more than 20 acres, the Township Supervisors and/or the Township Engineer may requi re additional monuments at designated points.

(5)	Such other point s as may be required by the Township Supervisors when unusual cond itions may create sight problems or cau se unusual deviation from normal surveying practice.

B.	Markers must be set:

( l)	At all corners, except those monumented.	
(2)	By the time the property is offered for sale.	
(3)	At  the  beginning   and  ending  of  curves  along  street  property monumented.	lines   if  not
(4)	At points where lot lines intersect curves either front or rear.	


180:70	01-0 1-2014
 
§ 180-42	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-43

(5)	At angles in property lines of lots.

C.	Monuments and markers shall be made of the following size and material:

(1)	Monuments shall be four inches square or four inches in diameter and shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of concrete, stone or by setting a four-inch cast iron or steel pipe filled with concrete.

(2)	Markers  shall  be  3/4  inch  square  or  3/4  inch  in  diameter  and  24  inches  long.
Markers shall be made of iron pipes or iron or steel bars.

D.	Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored or marked point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being monumented . They must be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass plate or dowel set in the concrete.


§ 180-43. Sewers and water.

A.	Where a public  sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet, or where plans approved by the municipality provide for the installation of such public sanitary  sewer  facilities  to within 1,000 feet of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system. The design and installation shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, such approval to be based on the North Middleton Authority's recommendation.

B.	Where the installation of a public sanitary sewer system is not required , the subdivider or owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time improvement s are erected thereon, a  private sewage disposal system consisting of a septic tank and tile absorption field or other  approved sewage disposal system . All such individual sewage disposal systems shall be  constructed   in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Pennsylvania Department  of Enviromnental Protection.

C.	Where a private, community sewerage system is proposed, such system shall be subject to approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Enviromnental Protection before approval by	the Township . As a condition of Township approval, the Board, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may establish terms for future acceptance of such system on behalf of the North Middleton Authority which may include a deferral of acceptance or a perman ent refosal to accept. All private, community sewerage systems shall be owned and maintained by a perpetual entity, and such ownership and maintenance responsibility shall be clearly established as a condition  of final plan approval.

D.	Where a water main  supply system is within 1,000 feet of, or where plans approved by the Township provide for the installation of such public  water  facilities, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main supply system to be connected to the existing or proposed water  main supply system. The design and installation shall be subject to the approval of the agency or entity having juri sdiction as a condition of Township  approval.



180:71	OJ • Ol - 2014
 
§ 180-43	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-44

E.	Where installation of a public water  main supply system is not required,  the subdivider or owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time  improvements  are  erected thereon , an individual water supply approved when applicable by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as to source, installation, and quality of water.

F.	Where a private, community water  system is proposed, such system shall be subject  to the applicable approval of the Penn sylvania Department of Environmental  Protection before approval by the Township. As a condition of Township approval, the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may establish terms for future acceptance of such system on behalf of the North Middleton Authority which may include a deferral of acceptance or a permanent refusal to accept. All private, community water systems shall be owned and maintained by a perpetual entity, and such ownership and maintenance responsibility shall be clearly established as a condition of final plan approval.


§ 180-44. Traffic impact studies.

A.	Purpose. To provide the Board of Supervisors with an opportunity to:

(1)	Identify traffic and transportation problems associated with the adequacy of the existing transportation net work and facilities to provide access to and from and through the site in light of the character and volume of traffic expected to be generated by the propo sed subdivision and/or land development.

(2)	Delineate solutions to such problems or facilities, including the prescription of
improvement s to be provided by or at the expense of the applicant.

B.	When required. A transportation impact study shall be submitted regarding subdivisions
and land development s which meet the following criteria:

(1)	Residential: involving 25 or more dwelling unit s.

(2)	Nonresidential:  involving 50 or more parking spaces.

(3)	Other: when the Planning Commission  or Board  of  Supervisors shall  determine that the volume or type of anticipated vehicular movements resulting from the proposed subdivision or land development may adversely impact road conditions.

C.	By whom prepared;  costs.

(1)	The study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or transportation planner who shall be mutually  agreed  upon  by the developer and the Township. The study preparer shall have sufficient , documented prior traffic study experience to qualify him/her to perform the study and render any opinions and recommendation s set forth therein.

(2)	The cost to prepare the study will be borne entirely by the developer.

D.	Contents. The study shall contain information , ana lyses and conclusions rega rding the
following:




180:72	01-0 1- 2014
 
§ 180-44	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-44

(1)	Genera l site description .  The site description shall include the size, location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion date of the proposed land development. If the development is residential, types of dwelling unit s and number of bedrooms shall also be included. The general site description shall also include probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential site uses to the extent that they may affect the transportation needs of the site (i.e., number of senior citizens).

(2)	Transportation  facilities  description.

(a)	Proposed internal transportation system. This description shall show proposed vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations , all existing or proposed  internal roadways , including the widths of paved cartway and  rights-of-way ,  parking  conditions,  traffic  channeliza tion and  any other traffic signals or  other  intersection  control devices, within or near the site of the subdivision or land development.

(b)	External transportation system. This report shall describe the entire external roadway system within the study area of the proposed subdivision or land development. Major intersections in the study area shall be identified and sketched. All existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be documented. All future highway improvements, including proposed construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania	Department of Transportation. Any proposed roadway improvement s resu lting from proposed surrounding developments shall also be recorded.

(c)	Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented  for  all  roadways  and  intersections  in  the  study  area.  Existing traffic volumes for average daily traffic, peak highway hour(s) traffic, and peak  development-generated hour(s) traffic shall be recorded. Manua l traffic counts at   major    intersections   in   the   study   area   shall   be   conducted, encompassing   the  peak  highway  and  development-generated  hour( s)  and documentation  shall  be included in the report. A volume capacity ana lysis based upon  existing  vol umes shall be performed during the peak highway hour (s) and the peak   development-generated hour(s) for all roadways  and major  intersections  in  the  study area . Levels of service shall be determined for each location. This ana lysis  will determine the adequacy of the existing roadway system to serve the current traffic demand.

(d)	Transportation  impact.

[1] Estimat ion of vehicu lar trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for the average daily peak highway hour(s) and peak development-g enerated hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates  to  be used for this calcu lation shall be obtained from  the Trip  Generation Rates Table found in the latest edition of the Institute of Transportat ion Engineers Trip Generation Manual. These development-generated traffic volumes   shall   be   provided   for   the   inbound   and   outbound   traffic



180:73	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 180-44		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-45

movement s as estimated, and the reference source(s) and methodology
		followed	shall   be   documen ted.   All   turning   movements   sha ll   be
		calculated. These generated volumes shall be distributed to the study
		area and assigned  to the existing roadways and  intersections throughou t
		the area.
		[2]   Documentation    of   all   assumptions   used   in   the   distribution   and
		assignment  pha se shall  be provided.  Traffic  volumes  shall be assigned
		to individual access points. Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated,
		if applicable.  If school crossings are to be u sed, pedestrian  volumes
		shall be assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of the site that
		will cause particular trip generation problems shall be noted.
	(e)	Conclusions  and   recommended   improvement s.  Levels  of  service  for  all
	roadways and intersections shall be listed. All roadways and/or intersections
	showing a level of service below D for signalized intersection s and below E
	for non signalized  intersections sha ll  be considered deficient, and specific
	recommendat ions for the elimination of these problems be listed. This listing
of  recommended  improvements  shall  include, but  not  be limited  to, the
	following   elements:   internal   circulation   design,  site  access   location  and
	design,  external  roadway  and  intersection  design and  improvement s,  traffic
	signal insta llation and operation, including signal timing, and transit design
improvements.  All  physical  roadw ay  improvements  shall  be  shown  on  the
	preliminary  p lan.  Existing  and/or  future  public  transportation  service  shall
	also be addressed. A listing of all actions to be u ndertaken to increase present
	public  transportation  u sage  and  improve  service,  if  applicable,  shall  be
	included.  An  ana lysis  based  on  the guidelines contained  in studies  by  the Cumberland   County   Planning   Commission  and  the  Tri-County  Planning
	Commission  (Carlisle  Area  Transportation   Study)  shall  be  undertaken  to
	indicate   whether   or   not   future   public   transportation   service   should   be
	provided  to the development. The  listing of recommended improvements  for
	both  roadw ay  and  tran sit  shall  include,  for  each  improvement, the  part y
	responsible for  the  improvement,  the cost and funding of the improvement,
	and the completion date for the improvement.

(3)	Mod ified stud y. Whenever a study is required solely because of the findings of the Plannin g Commission or Board of Supervisors as provided in  Subsection  B(3) above, or if the Board of Supervisors shall conclude that certain of the required information, analyses or conclus ions are unnecessary for an identification of the traffic problems or finding solutions therefor, the Board of Supervisors shall delineate the scope and content s of the study so as to include only those matters it deems appropri ate to aid  in the identification and solutions of the problems envisaged.


§ 180-45. Road access control.

A.	General  arrangement s. Streets, roadways,  alleys, driveways,  and  private drives form the
circulation system. The circulation system shall be designed to:



180:74	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-45                     SUBDNISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                       § 180-49

(1)	.Permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of vehicles.

(2)	Provide, when possible, two directions of vehicular access by means of a street or
access drive to and within a development.

(3)	Meet the needs for the present and future population.

(4)	Provide a simple and logical pattern.

(5)	Respect the natural features and topography.

(6)	Present  an attractive streetscape.

B.	Access onto state and Township roadways shall be controlled in a manner which is intended for the safe operation of vehicles on and along public streets and highway facilities. The functional classification and speed limit of a roadway will determine the location, number, and spacing between access points allowed onto the roadway.

C.	Unless otherwise indicated herein, proposed location and spacing of new access drives/driveways accessing roadways must comply with standards set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 201, Engineering and Traffic Studies, with respect to safe and desirable sight and stopping sight distances.


ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Home Park Regulations

§ 180-46. Additional rules and regulations established.

In addition to the rules, regulations , standards and procedw-es established in other sections of
this chapter and Chapter 204, Zoning, the following shall also apply to mobile home parks.


§ 180-47. Permits required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the Township without a valid annual license by the Township.


§ 180-48. Application for initial permit.

Application  for  a  mobile  home park  permit  shall follow the requirements  and procedures  as established  in this chapter for preliminary and final subdivision and land development plans .


§ 180-49.  Action on final plan by Township Supervisors; term of permit.

Upon approva l  of the entire final plan and payment of the required fees, the Board of Supervisors shall issue a mobile home park permit to the owner which shall be valid for a period of one year thereafter.






180:75	01  -01 -2014
 
§ 180-50                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 180-54

§ 180-50. Renewal permits.

Renewal permits shall be issued by the Board of Supervisors or its representative, upon the furnishing of proof by the applicant that his/her park continues to meet the standards prescribed in Chapter 204, Zoning, and this chapter and is in compliance with the applicable regulation s of the PA DEP.

A.    A  representative  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  may  inspect  a  mobile  home  park  at
reasonable intervals and at reasonable times to determine compliance with this chapter.

B.	The permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.


§ 180-51. Compliance of existing mobile home parks.

Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this chapter shall, within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter, obtain and maintain a valid Township mobile hom e park permit, and comply with the terms of this chapter.

A.   Existing mobile home parks shall be required to submit an existing plot plan, drawn to
scale, when applying for a mobile home park permit as required under this chapter.

B.	Any subsequent new construction, alteration or extension of existing mobile home park
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

C.	Any existing mobile home park, which in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors creates a fire, safety, or health hazard, shall be required to comply with all provisions of this chapter, with in a period of two yea rs from the adoption of this chapter; otherwise, any existing mobile home park may continue as long as the park complies with § 180-46 of this chapter and otherwise remains lawful and does not create a fire, safety, or health hazard .


§ 180-52. Individual mobile homes.

Individu al mobile homes not located in a mobile home park shall not be required to obtain a mobile home permit. They shall, however, be required to obtain a building permit. Individual mobile hom es shall comply with all other applicabl e Township ordinances and regulation s that govern single-family homes.


§ 180-53. Fees.

The initial permit  fee for each  mobile home park and the annual renewa l permit fee for each
mobile home park shall be estab lished by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.


§ 180-54. Site location.

The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum requirements:



180:76	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-54                       SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                       § 180-58

A.	Free from adverse influence by swamps, marshes, garbage or rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.

B.	Not subject to flooding.

C.	Not subject to hazard or nuisance such as excessive noise, vibration , smoke, toxic matter,
radiation, heat, odor, or glare.


§ 180-55.  Soil and ground cover requirements.

A.	Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or covered with  stone or other solid material or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil eros ion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.

B.	Mobile home park grounds  shall  be  maintained  free of  vegetative  growth  which  is a nuisance or poisonous or  which may harbor rodents, insects or other pests in sufficient quantities as to be harmful to man.


§ 180-56. Areas for nonresidential use.

No part of any park shall be used for nonresidentia l purposes except such  uses  that  are required for direct servicing and recreation for the residents of the park and  for  the management  and maintenance of the park.


§ 180-57. Water and sewer service for lots in mobile home parks.

Land laid out as a mobile home park and all lots, mobile homes and buildings thereon shall be serviced by water and sewer systems approved by the PA Department of Environmenta l Protection.


§ 180-58.  General  design requirements.

A.	Size and number of lots. Lots in a mobile home park shall not be less than 70 feet wide nor less than 10,000 square feet in area, per mobile home  unit,  exclusive of  streets, public uses, open space and stormwater management  facilities.

B.	Foundations.

(1)	The area of the mobile home space shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile home. The mobile home space shall be designed so as not to heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home because of frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration , or other forces acting on the superstructure and shall be installed as per manufacturer's instructions and/or current ANSI regulation for mobile home installation .

(2)	All  mobile  home  pads  shall  comp ly  with  HUD,  Pennsylvania   regulations  and
manufactured  housing guidelines.




180:77	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-58	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-60

C.	Erection  and placement of mobile homes.

(1)	The mob ile home stand shall not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of  the mobil e home due to frost act ion, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces  acting on the superstructure.

(2)	Mobi le homes shall be installed as per manufacturer' s instrnctions and/or current ANSI  regu lation for mobile home installation.

(3)	Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand, and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,080 pounds.

D.	Street numbers and names. All mobile homes shall be given street number s and all park streets shall be named. Street signs complying with Article VII, § 180-34,  shall  be erected.

E.	Lighting. All park  streets, auxiliary parking lots and walkways shall be illuminated during nighttime hours. Street luminaries shall be set no more than 200 feet apart, except approaching street intersections where the maximum shall be l00 feet. At park entrances at least two lu mina ries shall be provided. Luminaries shall be mounted at a height of no less than 16 feet, and provide a minimum of 860 lumens per fixture. Auxiliary parking lots shall have no less than one luminary for each 20 spaces, or fraction thereof, which shall be located so as to distribute the light as evenly as practicable.


§ 180-59. Required setbacks; buffer strips.

A	All mob ile homes shall be located at least 50 feet from any park property bounda ry line abutting upon a public street or highway right-of-way, a street being offered for dedication, or a street that could be offered for dedication in the future, and at least 50 feet from other park property boundary lines. Otherwise all mobile homes and accessory structures shall provide buffer areas which shall not be occupied by streets,  sewage disposal systems, package plants, or similar land uses.

B.	There shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet between an  individual  mobile  home (includ ing accessory structures  attached  thereto and  patios) and the adjoining pavement of a privately owned and maintained park street, or common parking area or  other common areas. Further,  in no case shall a side yard be less than 15 feet.


§ 180-60. Proposed street system.

A.	All  streets  to  be offered  for  public dedication  will  conform  to specifications for  local
street s as estab lished by this chapter.

B.	All streets within mobile home parks, whether offered for public dedication or not, shall
conform to the following standards:

(1)	General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicu lar access  shall be provided from abutting public streets or roads.



180:78	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-60                      SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-62

(2)	Access. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. Wherever a  street  intersects  a public street, a stop sign in conformity with Township regulations shall be installed and maintained.

(3)	Internal streets. Roadways shall be paved with an all-weather, dust-free surface at least 24 feet in width. An additional width of 10 feet shall be provided  for each lane of on-street parking.

(4)	Required illumination of park and street systems. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with illumination placed at such mounting heights as will provide adequate levels of  illumination, as determined by  the Township Engineer, for the safe movement of pedestrian s and vehicles at night. The cost of installation, maintenance, and continued use of such lighting shall be the responsibility of the owner(s). The cost of installation, maintenance and continued use shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), developer or a lot owners' association, if applicable.

(5)	Paving. All streets shall be paved in accordance with the provisions of Article VII hereof.


§ 180-61. Walks.

A.	Genera l requirements. Walks are required along both sides of any proposed  park  street, and all walks shall provide safe, convenient all-season  pedestrian  access  of  adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain , between individual mobile homes, the park streets, and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. Walks shall be  provided  in accordance with  standards and specifications of§ 180-38 of this chapter.

B.	Common walk  system.  Where  a  common  walk  system  is  provided  and  maintained between locations , and where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, such walks shall have a minimum width of four feet.

C.	Individual walks. All mobile home spaces shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a street. Such individual walks shall have a min imum width of two feet.


§ 180-62.  Open space requirements.

All mobile home parks shall provide , and so indicate on the plan of the mobile home park, a minimum of 25% of the gross acreage of the mobile home park devoted to active and/or passive common recreational facilities. Responsib ility for maintenance of the recreational areas shall be with the landowner and/or operator. Should the landowner and/or the operator neglect to maintain the designated recreat ional areas, as depicted on the plan , the Township may elect to maintain the said areas and assess the landowner for any costs incurred.

A.   The recreation and open space shall be located as centrally as possible within the mobile
home park in order to be easily accessible to the residents of the mobile home park.



180:79	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-62                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 180-67

B.	The  open   space  shall   be   landscaped   with   a   water   absorbent   surface   except   for
recreational  facilities and walkways  utilizing a hard surface.

C.	The open space may be dedicated  to the Township, provided the Township is willing to accept and ma intain the open space


§ 180-63. Water and sewer service.

A ll mobile parks shall be served with public water and sewer services. Fire hydra nts shall be installed as agreed upon by the Township and the North  Middleton  Authority  in the event such water system is dedicated to and accepted by said Aut hority.


§ 180-64. Parking requirements .

Each mobile home lot sha ll be provided. with a nurumum of two paved parking spaces containing at least 180 square feet of bituminous  or concrete surface. If on-street  parking is not provided, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided in a common visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking compounds shall be sized, arranged,  and  located so that the spaces are within 300 feet of walking distance to  all  units  served.  Access  to  all parking spaces shall be limited to interior  roads of the mobile home park; in no case shall access to such pa rking spaces be provided from adjoining public roads.


§ 180-65. Storage sheds, extensions and additions.

Individual mobile homes may install accessory structures, storage sheds, extensions and additions to mobile homes and patios. Any such structure or improvement shall not  intrude into any required yard setbacks and shall conform in style, quality and color to the existing mobile home.


§ 180-66. Electrical distribution system.

Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring,  fixtures equipment and appurtenances  which sha ll be installed and maintained in accordance with local electric power company's specifications regulating such systems.


§ 180-67. Structural  requirements  for  service buildings  and other  community  service
facilities.

A.	All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from  damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materia ls and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entra nce or penetration of moisture and weather.

B.	All structures containing laundry and/or toilet facilities shall:

(1)	Have  sound-resistant  walls   extending  to  the  ceiling  between  male  and  female sanitary  facilities.  Walls  and  partitions  in  lavatories and  other plumbing  fixtures



180:80	01 • 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-67	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT	§ 180-70

shall be  constructed  of dense, nonabsorbent,  waterproof  material  or covered  with
moisture-resistant  material.

(2)	Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the  outdoors.  The minimum aggregate gross area of window s for each required room shall be not less than 10% of the floor area served by them.

(3)	Have at  lea st one window  which can be easily opened or a mechanical  device which wi ll adequately ventilate the room.

(4)	Toilets   shall   be   located   each   in   a   separate   compartment   equipped   with   a
self-closing door.


§ 180-68. Refuse disposal.

A.	The  storage,  collection  and  disposal  of  refuse  in  the  mobile  home  park  shall  be  so
mana ged as to create no hea lth hazards or air pollution.

B.	Al l refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight , rodent-proof containers, which shall be located not more than 150 feet away from any mobile home space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse as required by the PelUl sylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Rubbish and recyclables shall be collected and disposed of in accordance with the prevailing  Township  waste removal policy or contract as frequently as may be necessary to insure that the containers shall not overflow.


§ 180-69. Fire protection.

A.	Where fire hydrants are not provided, fire extinguisher s of a type approved by the Fire Underwriter Laborat ories (A-B-C) classification type, bearing the Underwr iter's label, shall be readily accessible to each mobile home, or mobile home park owners shall require each mobile home to be equipped with a fire extinguisher. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authorities shall be maintained in all pub lic service bui ldings under park control.

B.	Burning of refuse shall not be permitted.


§ 180-70. Responsibilities of park management.

A.	The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

B.	The park  mana gement shall super vise the pl acement of each mobile home on its mobile
home stand, which inclu des securing its stability and installing all utility connections.

C.	The park mana gement shall give the Board of Supervisors or its representative access to all  mobi le home lots, service bui ldings,  and  other  communit y  service facilities  for  the purpose of  inspection.



180:8 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-70	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-72

D.	The management shall maintain a register containing the names and addresses of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park.

E.	The management shall notify the local office of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the par k.


§ 180-71. Revocation of permit.

A.	Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provi sion of this chapter, or any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Board of Supervisors, or its representative shall give notice, in writing, to the person to whom the permit was issued,  such  notice to  consist  of  a listing of the violated sections of this chapter and shall advise him or her that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a period of time specified in the notice, the permit to operate will be suspended. At the end of such period , such mobile home park shall be reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not  been  corrected,  the Board of Supervisors shall give notice, in writing, of a hearing for the suspension of the mobile home permit to the person to whom the permit is issued.

B.	In the event such permit is revoked, the Township shall have the right to proceed  in law and/or  in  equity  to  close  the mobile home  park  and/or  to  require compliance with  the provi sions and requirements of this chapter.


ARTICLE IX
Floodplain  Regulations

All subdivi sion and land development plans submitted to North Middleton Township shall comply with Chapter 112, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Township of North Middleton.


ARTICLE X
Stormwater Management Plan and Design Criteria

§ 180-72. Scope.

A.	A stormwater management plan (SWMP) prepared in accordance with the hereinafter provisions shall be required for each subdivision or land development plan at both the preliminary and final plan submittal stage. As an integral part of the SWMP, erosion and sedimentation control measures shall  be  included.  A SWMP mu st be approved prior  to the construction of any improvements.

B.	All SWMPs shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer; provided , however, that a SWMP may be prepared by a professional land surveyor i f said plan constitutes a stormwater management  plan as defmed by Article II of this chapter.






180:82	01-01-2014
 
§ 180-72                         SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                         § 1 80-74

C.	For the purposes of stormwater management planning, the definition of "land development" shall also include any subdivision or new construction or expansion of any residential, commercial, industrial, accessory or other improvement that creates an area of imperviou s   material   on   the   parcel   of   1,000   square   feet   or    more.    The one-thou sand-square-foot requirement applies on individual large projects, projects which exceed a cumulative total of 1,000 square feet after the effective date of this chapter , and any projects occurring after the one-thousand-square-foot level has been reached , either initially or cumulatively. See Chapter 175, Stormwater Management , of the Code of the Township of North Middleton.

D.    All  subdivision  and  land  development  plans  submitted  to  North Middleton  Township
shall comply with Chapter  175, Stormwater Management.


§ 180-73. Township liability.

The degree of stormwa ter management sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonabl e for regulatory purposes. This section shall not create liability on the part of the Township , any appointed or elected. official of the Township, the Cumberland County Conservat ion District, or any officer, engineer  or employee thereof for any erosion, sediment pollution or flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administration decision lawfully made thereunder.


§ 180-74. Content.

The SWMP shall be a separate document and shall contain the following:

A.   A general description of the proposed project.

B.	Project location on a 7.5 minute USGS map .

C.	Topographic  featu res  of the project  site and adjacent  lands  that  ma y  impact upon  the
stormwater management design.

(1)	This data shall include:

(a)	The natu ral draina ge pattern of the site.

(b)	Contour lines at two-foot intervals for slopes of 20% or less.

(c)	Contour lines at five-foot interva ls for slopes of greater than 20%.

(2)	Contour data shall be based on USGS benchmark or other datum acceptable to the Township Engineer, and the location or description of said benchmark shall be indicated on the plan.

D.	The names of existing or proposed  developments or adjacent  land and the locations and
dimensions of a ll streets and/or easements in each development.

E.	The existing and proposed use of the tract.

F.	The total number of lots and the total acreage of the site.


180:83	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-74	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-75

G.	Tract boundaries.

H.	Runoff calculations and related design computat ions of the total drainage basin necessary
to substantiate the proposed temporary and permanent stormwa ter management facilities.

I.	Design and specifications of temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities.

J.	Storm sewer and channel profiles and design cross sections; management facility designs,
profiles and cross sections.

K.	Staging  or  implementation   schedule  for  constructing  the  proposed  stormwater  control system.

L.	A grading plan for the ent ire site which will include all off-road areas, including building sites.  This grading plan may be genera l in nature, but shall provide enough detail to support postdevelopment  stormwater drainage facility designs.

M.	Provisions  to ensure adequate maintenance of stormwater management  facilities for both
during-construction  and post construction conditions.

N.	Signature of the licensed professional who performs the work, certifying the accuracy of the plan and all calcu lations associated therewith .


§ 180-75. Computations for determining runoff and design facilities.

Computations for determining stormwater runoff and for the design of  stormwater management facilities shall be based upon either the Soil-Cover-Complex Method of the Rational Method. Runoff from sites with drainage areas with less than 10 acres may be calculated by the Rational Method. Sites with drainage areas of 10  to 20 acres may be calculated by the Rational Method or by the Soil-Cover-Complex Method. Drainage areas in excess of 20 acres shall be calculated by  the  Soil-Cover-Complex  Method.  Computations based upon an alternat ive method may be accepted upon recommendation of the Township Engineer. The following standards shall apply:

A.	Predevelopment  and postdevelopment  conditions.

(l ) Permanent control measure/facilities shall be designed to assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater after developmen t tha n prior to development at all points of discharge from the subject site for design storms of two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year storm events.

(2)	In those cases, however, where existing storm drainage facilities and/or road embankments control predevelopment discharge from the site, predevelopment conditions shall be simulated in the postdevelopment design for all of the above-referenced storm events.

(3)	Calculations of the predevelopment peak discharge for nonforested pervious areas shall presume a good condition meadow cover. Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present, sha ll be considered meadow, good cond ition, in the model for existing conditions for redevelopment.




180:84	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-75	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-75

(4)	The engineer preparing the calculations shall provide a signed and dated statement indicating that he/she has been to the site for the purpose of conducting a visua l inspection in order to determine the existing ground cover. The date of the site inspection sha ll be included in the said statement.

(5)	Land development proposals involving parking lots in excess of 1.0 acre, uses involving handling of chemicals, grease, oil, solvents and/or other potential contaminants, commercial degreasing and car washing operations, shall, in addition to the above, incorporate  into the stormwater  management  plan measures/facilities to maintain predevelopment stormwater quality at  all pints of discharge  from the site.

B.	Detention ponds.

(1)	All stormwater detention ponds shall be designed in accordance with the above criteria. Calculations  shall be accompanied by the following supporting data:

(a)	Either singular or composite inflow and outflow hydrograph s.

(b)	Stage-storage data.

(c)	Stage-discharge data.

(d)	Storage-routing  calculations.

(e)	Other data as required by the Township Engineer.

(2)	Detention ponds based on graphical or short-cut methods are prohibited.

(3)	Emergency spillways, as a minimum, shall be set at an elevation  to  allow discharge from the pond during the twenty-five-year  storm.  In no case, however, shall the composite outflow from the primary release device(s) and the emergency spillway exceed predevelopment  rates.

(4)	Spillways shall be provided structural stability. As  such, locating spillways within the embankment  is prohibited unless adequate reinforcing  is provided.

C.	Culverts, pipes, and storm  sewers  shall  be  designed  for  a  ten-year  storm  with  a five-minute time of concentration (Tc). Designs based upon calculation of actual Tc will be  allowed if pipe size exceeds  36  inches  in diameter based upon  said five-minute Tc. Supporting  documentation  verifying  the same is required.  In the event, however,  that a culvert passes beneath a public roadway it shall be designed in such a manner to prevent the road from inundation during a twenty-five-year storm.

D.	The SWMP shall include calculations indicating  velocities  of  flow,  grades,  sizes,  and capacities of water-carrying structures, debris or sedimentation basins, and retention and detention ponds  and sufficient design information to construct such facilities.

E.	Subsurface infiltration facilities may be allowed  only  after  all  other  alternatives  have been explored and found not to be practical for the proposed subdivision or land development. Lack of sufficient area to install other alternatives  shall  not  be  an acceptable reason for allowing infiltration facilities.



180:85	01  -01-2014
 
§ 180-75	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-75

F.	Stormwater retention facilities.

(1)	Stormwater retention facilities shall only be permitted in those cases where the developer has proven that  in  the  predevelopment  condition  an  existing  road emba nkment extends over an existing natural depression thereby causing runoff to be retained behind said embankment without release other tha n by natural causes, such as percolation or evaporation. In such cases, the depth of the proposed retention	facility  shall  not  exceed  the  depth  of  that   experienced   in   the prede velopment condition. Requirements for design shall be  described  in Subsections A and B above.

(2)	Ponding  of  runoff  except  for  detention  purposes and  as  described  in  Subsection F( l) is prohibited.

G.	Al l natural drainagewa ys and existing contouring  of  predevelopment  drainage patterns shall be preserved to the maximum  extent  possible.  Postdevelopment  drainage patterns sha ll simulate predevelopment patterns.

H.	The design storm precipit ation depth estimates to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge and water volume control should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequen cy Atla s of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Un ited States Department of Commerce, Na tional  Oceanic and Atmospheric Admini stration (NOAA), National We.: ther Service, Hydrom eteorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland 20910. NOAA's Atla s 14 can be accessed at Internet address: http://hdsc.nws .noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.

I.	Maximum permitted velocities are as follows:

(1)	Three feet per second where only sparse vegetat ion can be established.

(2)	Four  feet per  second  under  normal conditions where vegetat ion can be established
by seeding.

(3)	Five feet  per  second  where  a  dense,  vigorous  sod can  be quickly  established  or
where water can be temporar ily diverted during establishment of vegetation.

(4)	Six feet per second where well-established sod is in existence.

(5)	For lined water-carrying channels the following velocities are required:


 


Channel Lining
6-inch rock riprap 9-inch rock riprap Asphalt
Durable bedrock
12-inch rock riprap
Concrete or steel
 
Maximum  Velocity
(feet per second)
6
8
7
8
9
12





180:86	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-75	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-75

(6)	The normal  maximum velocity of open channel flows shall not exceed  JO feet per
second.

J.	Energy dissipators/erosion  control devices shall  be placed at the outlets of all pipes
where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted channel velocities.

K.	Vertical pipes, inlets and other surface water  receiving  structures shall be installed with
trash racks, or so designed to control trash accumulation.

L.	Stormwater runoff channel s shall be designed to avoid trapping excess sediment, except if structures are so designed to trap sediment. In all instances, the minimum velocity of stormwater through runoff channels shall be 1.5 feet per second.

M.	Piping.

(1)	All piping used in the stormwater drainage system shall be CMP galvanized steel aluminum alloy, reinforced concrete, PVC or other material approved by the Township Engineer. A minimum pipe size of 18 inches in diameter shall be used in all roadway systems propo sed for dedication to the Township. A minimum pipe size of 12 inches in diameter is permitt ed on private facilities which receive no off-site drainage. Pipes shall be designed so as to provide a minimum velocity of
2.5 feet per second when flowing full. Arch pipe may be used in lieu of round pipe
where cover or utility conflict conditions exist.

(2)	All storm drainage piping discharging to the ground surface shall be provided with either reinforced concrete head walls or meta l pipe end sections compatible with the pipe materia l and size involved. A riprap apron of adequate length shall be provided at a ll surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion. The apron shall extend to the crown of the pipe. Riprap size shall be determined by flow velocity leaving the system.

N.	Inlets.

(1)	Storm drainage inlets shall be provided at all low points and hydrau lically intermediate points on a system. Locat ion spacing of inlets shall be based on the hydraulic capacity of each inlet related to the flow received and the amount of flow bypa ss from upstream inlets. Inlets shall be pla ced so street drainage shall not cross intersection or I/2 the width of the adjacent travel lane.

(2)	All street inlet tops shall be a combinat ion curb/gutter inlet referred  to as "PennDOT Type C" with sufficient curb reveal depth to match the adj acent eight-inch curb, where an eight-inch curb is proposed. In  private  parking  areas, streets and yard areas with no curbing. Type M inlet tops shall be used. All inlets shall have bicycle safety grates.

0.	A centra l stormwater management system shall be designed for all nonresidential subdivisions and land developments proposing lots of four acres or less (average lot size throughout	the development). In no case will the responsib ility of stormwater management be passed off on the future lot owner. In all other  instances where  lots exceed the four-acre minimum, the developer is encouraged to consider centralized stormwater management  facilities.


180:87	01-01 - 2014
 
§ 180-76	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-77

§ 180-76. Compliance with Department of Environmental Protection regulations.

A.	Design criteria contained in this section are intended for usage in  conjunction  with Chapter 105 regulation s of the Department of Environmental Protection. All information and regulations contained in Chapter 105 shall be considered to be incorporated into this section of the chapter as if reproduced in full. It will be the developer's responsibility to review Chapter l 05 regulations for his/her project and insure compliance with the same. Neither the Townsltip Engineer  nor any other official of the Township shall be called on to interpret, determine necessity, or waive requirements of Chapter  105.

B.	A Department of Environmental Protection permit , in accordance with Chapter 105, shall be required for any obstruction or encroachment in the regulated Waters of the Commonwealth, prior to the approval of the final plan. All areas of the Township shall be classified suburban or urban for bridge and culvert designs. In the event any question arises between this chapter and the Department of Environmental Protection regulations, the design criteria contained in the Department of Environmental Protection regulations shall govern.


§ 180-77. Floodplain management in wetlands .

A.	The one-hundred-year  floodplain  shall be established  for all watercourses  (defined  bed
and bank) and shall be delineated by one of the following methods:

(1)	A  hydrologic   report  prepared   by  an  agency  of  the  county,  state,  or  federal
government.

(2)	A hydrologic report prepared  by a professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania
and qualified to perform such duties.

B.	Whenever a floodplain is located within or along a lot, the plan shall include:

(1)	The boundary of the floodplain with elevations and dimensions.

(2)	A   note   that   the   floodplain   shall  be  kept   free  of  structures,   fill  and  other
encroachments.

C.	All development within a floodplain shall comply with the standards and requirements provided in Chapter 204, Zoning.1

D.	In conjunction with the above section, the developer shall comply with all federal and state wetlands regulations in effect at the time ltis/her plan is submitted.  Wetland s shall be delineated on all subdivision and land development plans that involve construction improvements or earthmoving activities. In  those instances where single lots are being accessed from existing public streets,  with  driveways crossing  wetlands, said  wetland area must be delineated an a note placed on the plan advising the future lot owner of the requirements to comply with all necessary wetlands regulations. In all other instances , it shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  developer  to  investigate the presence  of wetlands  on




7.	Editor's Note: See also Chapter 80, Building Construction.


180:88	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-77                       SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                       § 180-79

his/her site. A certification statement to this effect shall be placed on the plan by the
designer preparing the plan.


§ 180-78. Erosion and sedimentation.

In those areas involving residentia l development where there are no new improvements being proposed (i.e., no new streets, drainageways , detention ponds, etc.) and/or other stormwater management facilities, a typical individual lot erosion and sedimentation control plan or notation shall be placed on the subdivision or land development plan. In all other instances, the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Cumberland County Conservation District for its review and approva l prior to final plan approval. In those cases involving major land development or subdivi sion plans, said approva l must be obtained at the final plan stage.


§ 180-79. Ownership; maintenance program.

Each  SWMP shall contain  provisions which clearly set forth the ownership  and maintenance
responsib ility of all permanent stormwater management facilities, including:

A.	Description  of temporary  and pennanent maintenance  requirements.

B.	Estab lishment of su itable easements  for access to all facilities, by county and Townsh ip
officials.

C.	Identification of the respon sible party or entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion control facilities. In meeting this requirement , the following priority is herein established:

(1)	Maintenance by private entity. In cases where the permanent control facilities are owned by a private entity (such as a homeowners' association) , such entity shall be responsible for maintenance. In this case, a legally binding agreement between the entity and the Township shall be made providing for maintenance of permanent control facilities, including the inspection by the Township of all such facilities deemed critica l to the public welfare on a regular ba sis and after each major flood event.

(2)	Township ownership. The applicant may offer to dedicate the stormwater management facilities to the Township. The Township shall not be required to accept dedication of stormwater management facilities. However , said facilities may be offered for dedication, upon such terms and conditions established by the Board of Supervisors, and the decision to accept such dedication shall be at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors. As a condition of Township acceptance of said facilities, the applicant shall provide sufficient funds, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to cover anticipated maintenance, repair and construction or reconstruction costs for ten year from the date of fina l plan approval.






180:89	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-80	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-8 1

§ 180-80. Stormwater management construction standards; basic construction criteria.

Construction standards for stormwater managemen t and erosion control facilities shall be in accordance with the approved plans and accompanying specifica tions, if any. The construction details and standards of the following publications in their most recent revisions shall control:

A.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program  Manual

B.	PennDOT , Form 40 8, Specifications.

C.	PennDOT,  RC Series, Roadway  Construction Standards.


ARTICLE XI
Grading and Site Planning Requirements

§ 180-81. Grading.

In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, improve surface drainage,
and control erosion, the following requir ements shall be met:

A.	All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from buildings and dispose of the runoff without ponding, and all land w ithin a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water without  ponding. It is required that all lots and property being developed with an approved grading plan construct the site consistent with the approved grad ing plan. Any departure from or revision to the approved grading plan mu st be authorized by the Township and/or its engineer prior to construction.

B.	All dra inage provi sions shall be designed to adequately hand le the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natura l watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from buildings, they sha ll be paved, sodded or planted and shall be of such slope, shape and size as to conform to the requirement s of the Township.

C.	Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in swales or watercourses that lead to a natural watercourse or drainage structure.

D.	Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto the property of another
landowner without the expressed consent of the Township and the affected landowner.

E.	During grading operations , necessary measures for dust control wi ll be exercised.

F.	Topsoil shall be preserved and redistributed as cover and shall be expeditiou sly planted with perennial  grasses or ground cover.

G.	Tree guards during construction and grading, and limitations as to cuts and  fills, both temporary and permanent, near trees shall be provided  as necessary  to give reasonable assurance of their continued healthy growth.







180:90	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ l 80-81	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-83

H.	Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams. Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges. Emergency crossings may be permitted through permission of PA DEP.

I.	The developer of lots, tracts or parcels, land developments or subdivisions shall be responsible to install all proposed swales and contours as designed and depicted on the approved land development or subdivision plan prior to the sale of any lot in said land development  or subdivision plans.


§ 180-82. Excavations and fills.

A.	Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 unless stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved by the Township Engineer when handled under special conditions.

B.	Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of excava tions or the sloping surfaces of fills.

C.	Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property .

D.	Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or erosion of the soil.

E.	Fill shall not encroach on natural watercourses or construction channels, without all necessary permits from the Depa1tment of Environmental Protectio n, Cumberland County Conservat ion District, and other local, state, and federal authorities.

F.	Fills placed  adjacent to natu ral watercourses  or constructed channels shall have suitable
protection against erosion during periods of flooding.


§ 180-83. Grading plans.

A.	All preliminary subdivision and land development plans shall include a preliminary grading plan that will provide sufficient information to determine the location of stormwater management  facilities, roadway grading, and overall site changes.

B.	All final subdivision and land development plans that require earthmoving activities shall submit a final  grading  plan that provides  sufficient  information to determine the exact location of stormwater  management  facilities, roadway grading, and overall site changes to  the Township  for review and approval.  The grading plan shall be recorded with the final  plan  at  the  Cumberland  County  Recorder  of Deeds' office and  cannot be altered, revised,  or changed without revising the final subdivision or land development plan and obtaining the necessary  approvals from North Middleton Township.

(1)	A note shall be placed on the final subdivision or land development indicating that the property owner cannot change the grading of the property, as depicted on the approved grading plan, without approval by the Township .

(2)	When applicable, all earth disturbance activities shall receive appropria te approvals and  permits  from North  Midd leton Township,  Cumberland  County Conservation




180:9 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-83	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-84

District, the Department of Environmental Protection, and other applicable local, state, and federal authorities .


§ 180-84. Steep slope protection overlay.

A.	Purpose. Steep slopes and hillsides are unique areas. Steep slope areas are fragile and susceptible to erosion, landslides, mudslides,  degradation of their natural vegetation and increa sed  flooding using conventiona l development  practices. By protecting these assets Nort h Middleton Township intends to:

(1)	Guide development  away from steep slope areas;

(2)	Minimize grading and other site preparation  in steep slope areas;

(3)	Provide safe means for ingress and egress while  minimizing  scarring  from steep slope and hillside construction;

(4)	Preserve the natural conditions in steep slope areas; and

(5)	Prevent  flooding and the deteriorating effects of erosion to streams, watercourses,
and drainage areas.

B.	Establishment of steep slope protection overlay boundaries .

(1)	The steep slope protection overlay shall consist of all land within  the development/disturbance area of the property which has a 15% or greater slope based upon Lidar or other comparable data or a field or aerial survey  of  the property as determined by a professional land surveyor or professional engineer licensed and registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the practice of land surveying and/or engineering. Addit ional or exact field recorded data/detail shall be required if determined  necessary  by  the Township Engineer to complete a plan review.

C.	Disturbance  limits .

(1)	Based upon the slope of  the  land, the following  disturbance  limits  shall be the maximum  area  of  such  steep  slopes  that  may  be  regraded  and/or  stripped  of vegetat ion, as set forth in Table l 80-84A. Such percentages, as set forth in Table l 80-84A, shall be based on the steep slopes contained within the entire lot or lots to be    developed   at   the   time   of   application   for   development   (including subdivision/land development plans).


 





Slope Range
 
Table 180-84A
Slope Ranges and Amounts of Disturbed Area
Maximum Distu rbed Area
(percent)
 
15.0% to 17.99%
18.0% to 24.99%
 
50%
25%




180:92	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-84	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-84

 





Slope Range
25.0% +
 
Table 180-84A
Slope Ranges  and Amounts of Disturbed Area
Maximum Disturbed Area
(percent)
0%
 


(2)	Grading or earthmoving on all steep slope areas shall not result in earth cuts and/or fills in which the highest vert ical dimensions exceed 10 feet, except where no reasonable alternatives exist for construction of streets, drainage structures, private driveways, stream crossings, and other  improvements (whether public or private), in which case such vert ical dimensions shall not exceed 20 feet. Finished slopes of a ll cuts and/or fills shall not exceed 3:1, unless the applicant can demonstrate that steep slopes can  be stabilized and maintained adequately. The landscape shall be preserved in its natura l state insofar as a practicable.

(3)	The type and location of any permitted on-lot sewage disposal facility shall be provided in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 204, Zoning, and the PA DEP.

D.	Minimum lot area standard s. No portion of a lot containing a slope equal to or greater than 25% shall count towa rd the minimum lot area required by the underlying zone.

E.	Minimum setbacks. No change in existing topogra phy, which result s in a slope greater than the predevelopment condition, may be located within l 0 feet of the abutting property.

F.	Design information. ALI applications for development shall include a detailed description of the method s proposed to be u sed for construction in area s containing slopes of 15% or greater  to attain the following:

(1)	Protection and stabilization of areas that have a high potent ial for soil erosion;

(2)	Accommodate  stormwater runoff/drainage;

(3)	Assure  structural  safety  and  minimize harm  to  the environment  associated  with
development on steep slopes;

(4)	Protection and preservation of on-site and off-site valuable natural wildlife and/or plant habitats;

(5)	Protection and preservation of on-site and off-site water quality; and

(6)	Protection of steep slopes on abutting propert ies.

G.	Standards.

(1)	The steep slope  protection  overlay  shall  be  established  at  the  time  of  the submission   of  the  application   for   development  (subdivision/ land  development plan).

(2)	In all subdivision and land development applications, the steep slope protection overlay  and  each slope range  within  the overlay shall be clearly identified. A


180:93	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-84	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-85

conservation easement covering the steep slope protection overlay shall be provided in accordance with this chapter. No designation or identification of the steep slope protection over lay district shall be required on individual lots exceeding 10 acres and not involving any new street s, easements of access or any proposed development , unless it is determined by the Township that the proposed development may adver sely impact a neighboring property.

H.	Land may be removed or altered. Up to 1/4 of the land with slopes greater than 25% may be  removed or altered only when such  slopes are isolated,  small  or otherwise occur  as knolls   which   do  not  adversely  affect  the  design  of  the  plan,  subdivision,  or  land development.


§ 180-85. Stream protection overlay.

A.	Purpose. It is the intent of this overlay is to preserve natu ral  and man-made streams, creeks, watercourses , and the critica l natural areas around them as important hydrological and environmental assets. These natural and  man-made  streams,  creeks, watercourses, and the critical natural areas around them are considered some of the North Middleton Township's most important natural resources, features and resources, as set forth in the most recent version of the Nort h Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan.

B.	Establishment of stream protection overlay bounda ries.

(1)	The  stream  protection  overlay  shall  consist  of  all  land  and  water  areas  in  and around all streams, creeks, and watercourses (including intermittent streams and watercourses) that are typica lly inundated throughout the yea r. The size and limits of the stream protection overlay shall be based on size and width of the streams, creeks, and  watercourses as well as the critical environmenta l features present in the areas  surrounding the streams, creeks, and watercourses. The overlay shall be drawn to encompass all critical areas as described below.

(2)	Critical environmental features and areas to be included in the stream protection overlay. In addition to the streams, creeks, and watercourses, the following critical environmental features, resources and areas adjacent to such streams, creeks, and watercour ses shall be included in the stream protection overlay:

(a)	All  lands  within  25  feet  of  the water's edge  of  the  stream, creek, and
watercourse under typical flow conditions.

(b)	Alluvial soils located within 50 feet of the water 's edge of the stream , creek, and watercourse under typical flow conditions.

(c)	Springs located within 50 feet of the wat er's edge of the stream, creek, and watercourse under typical flow conditions.

(d)	Slopes of 25% or greater located within 50 feet of the water 's edge of the stream, creek, and watercour se under typica l flow conditions. In determining the limits and extent of these features, these slope areas shall extend to the uppermost edge of the area with 25% or greater slopes.




180:94	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-85	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-86

C.	Required vegetation . Within the stream protection overlay, native species of trees, shrubs and  ground cover must be  provided  and  maintained  for  stream bank  stabilization, soil stability   and habitat for native  animal  species.  Where  adequate  vegetation  does  not a lready exist,  new plantings sha ll be provided.

D.	All necessary permits shall be obtained from the PA DEP and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers for any proposed activities that involve the discharge of dredge or fill material, excavation or encroachments of waterways .

E.	Standards.

(1)	The stream protection  overlay shall be established at the time of the submission of the application  for development (subdivision/land development plan).

(2)	In all subdivision and land development applications, the stream protection overlay shall be clearly identified. A conservation easement covering the stream protection overlay shall be provided.


§ 180-86. Surface water protection overlay.

A.	Purpose. Natural and man-made lakes and ponds and the natural areas arou nd them are important hydrological and environmenta l assets. It is the intent of this surface water protection overlay to preserve these natural and man-made assets. By  protecting  these assets  identified  in  the  most  recent  version  of  the  North   Midd leton   Township Compr ehensive Plan, the Township  intends to:

(1)	Protect wildlife.

(2)	Preser ve existing vegetation a long lakes or ponds.

(3)	Minimize scenic degradation.

(4)	Protect the integrity of ponds and lakes as functioning wetland areas.

(5)	Minimize the negative effects on  lakes or ponds from agriculture and development
related erosion.

B.	Establishment of surface wa ter protection overlay  boundaries.  The  surface  water protection overlay shall consist of all land and water areas in and around all natura l and man-made lakes and ponds. The size and limits of the surface water prot ection overlay shall be based on size and width of the lakes and ponds as well as the area within 25 feet of the water's edge of all man-made and natural lakes or ponds under typical conditions. All natural and man-made lakes, ponds and established easement areas shall remain in permanent open space. Becau se these areas  may relate to other hydrologic features, no development or diverting of these water bodies shall be permitted wit hout  proper approval from PA DEP.

C.	All necessary permit s shall be obtained from the PA DEP and/or the United States Almy Corps of Engineers for any proposed activities that involve the discharge of dredge or fill material, excavat ion or encroachments of wa ter bodies.




180:95	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-86	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-87

D.	Standards.

(1)	All lands identified  in the surface water prot ection overlay shall  contain no more than  15% impervious surface.

(2)	At least 70% of the surfa ce water protection overlay shall remain and be preserved in its natural state as open space insofar as is practicable.

 
(3)	The surfa ce water protection overlay shall be submission of the application development developm ent plans).
 
established   at   the  time  the (including	subdivi sion/land
 

(4)	In all subdivision and l and development applications, the surface water protection overlay shall be clearly identified and conservation easement covering the sur face water protection overlay shall be provided .


§ 180-87.  Wetland protection overlay.

A.	Purpose. Wetland areas are indi spensable and fragile hydrological natu ral resources that provide:

(1)	Habitat for fish, wildlife and vegetation.

(2)	Water-qu ality maintenance and polluti on control.

(3)	Flood control.

(4)	Erosion control.

(5)	Open  space.

(6)	Scientific study opportunities.

(7)	Recreational  opportuniti es.

B.	Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. By protecting these assets identified in the most recent version of the North Middleton Township Comprehen sive Plan, North Middleton Township intends to:

(1)	Requir e plannin g to avoid and minimize damage of wetlands whenever prudent or feasible.

(2)	Require that activities not dependent upon wetland s be located to other upland
sites.

(3)	Allow wetland  losses only where all practi cal or legal measures have been applied to reduce those losses that are una voidable and in the public interest.

C.	Establishment of wetland protection overlay boundaries. The wetland prot ection overlay shall  be based on a wetland investigation by the applicant. For all subdivision or land development applications involving areas with hydric soils and/or areas considered to be wetland s, a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands



180:96	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-87	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-88

shall conduct a field investigation and delineate the limits of the wetlands on the parcel of land being subdivided or developed. As part of this requirement, a report containing the field investigation notes, wetland  data sheets, summary, conclusions  and resume of the person(s) responsible for the field investigation shall be issued to North Middleton Township for review and consideration. Further, the subdivision plan  or  land development plan shall contain a certification note tha t has been endorsed by the qualified person(s) responsible for the field investigation and the wetlands delineation, as accurately depicted on the subdivision plan or land development plan.

D.	Review of wetland delineation . Where the applicant has provided a determination of the wet land protection  overlay,  the North Middleton Township Engineer or qualified North Middleton  Township  consultant  shall  review,  and  may  render   adjustments   to,  the boundar y delineation. In the event that the adjusted boundary delineation is contested, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Supervisors for a waiver.

E.	All necessary permits shall be obtained from the PA DEP and/or the United States Army Corps of Engin eers for any proposed activities that involve the discharge of dredge or fill material, excavat ion or encroachments of wetlands.

F.	Standards.

(1)	The wetland protection overlay shall be established at the time of the application for development (subdivision/land development plan). The wetland delineations shall be performed in accordance with the procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictiona l Wetlands and any subsequent amendments  thereto.

(2)	In all subdivision and land development applications, a wet lands investigation shall be required and a conservation easement covering the wetland protection overlay shall be provided;  provided,  however,  no  designation  or  identification  of  the wet lands protection  overlay shall be required on individual lots exceeding 10 acres and not involving any new street s, easements of access or any proposed development.


ARTICLE XII
Landscaping  Requirements

§ 180-88. Purpose and compliance.

The  intent  of  this article  is  to  promote  practical  and  attractive  development  within  North Midd leton Township by:

A.	Minimizing erosion and sedimentation, and stimulating groundwater recharge.

B.	Minimizing glare and heat on proposed hard surfaces, and reducing noise pollution.

C.	Stimulating air purification and oxygen regeneration.

D.	Maintaining existing, healthy vegetat ion.




180:97	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-88	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-89

E.	Providing harmonious development  of properties adjacent to incongruou s zoning districts
or uses by providing minimum landscaping requirements.


§ 180-89. Specific requirements.

Landscaping of subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the following:

A.	Obstructions to vision . No bushes or shrubs exceeding 30 inches in height, or at such lesser height which due to ground elevations would obstruct the vision of motorists, shall be permitted within I 0 feet of the right-of-way line of private drives, driveways or street intersections.

B.	Street trees. Street trees are prohibited.

C.	Existing trees.

(1)	Existing trees  shall be protected to prevent unnecessary destruction. At least 15% of the number of trees (minimum trunk caliper of six inches at a height of four feet above the  ground) that exist at the time of plan submission shall be maintained or replaced    immediately  following   construction.   Replacement   trees   shall   be   a minimum trunk  ca liper of 2.5 inches at a height of six inches above finished grade and located within  nonbuildable  sections  of the site (i.e., floodplain, steep  slope, and setback areas).

(2)	Existing trees as described below shall not be removed without the express approval of the Board of Township Supervisors, after proof  of  good  and necessitous cau se for removal, and upon recommendation of  the  Township Planning  Commission:

(a)	All  trees  having  a diameter  of 30 inches or greater at a height of four feet above the ground, or any tree  identified  as  a  national ,  state  or  county champion tree by the Pennsylvania Forestry  Association,  designated  as 11outstanding tree."

(b)	Trees,  shrubs  or  plants  identified  on  the  list  of  rare,  threatened   and endangered species of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, designated as "rare, threatened and endangered species."

(3)	Trees that are part of a historic  site  or  associated  with  a  historic  structure, designated as "trees of historic significance. 11

D.	Where  on-lot sewage disposal  systems  are proposed,  trees shall  not  be placed  over the
top of the area where the propo sed septic tank and drain field are to be constructed.

E.	AJI shrubbery and plant s shall have a normal habitat or growth, and shall be sound ,
healthy , vigorous and free of disease, insects, insect eggs and larvae.

F.	All trees required by ordinance shall have a minimum trunk diameter of 2.5 inches at a
height of six inches above finished grade.





180:98	01 - OJ - 20 14
 
§ 180-89                          SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPM ENT                         § 1 80-91

G.	All plantings shall be performed in conformance with good nursery and  landscape practices and to other standards that are established by the Township.

H.	Requirements for the measurement, branching , grading, qua lity, and burlappin g of all shrubbery shall follow the code of stand ards recommended by the American Association of Nu rserymen , Inc., in the American Standard Nursery Stock, ANSIZ60 , 1-1973, as amended.

I.    Screen buffering . Screen buffering shall be in accordance with § 204-26 of the Chapter
204, Zoning.

J. Windbreaks. The u se of planting row s to serve as windbreaks to control the drifting of snow across public and private thorou ghfares as well as for general comfort is recommended.

K.	Only grass lawn shall be permitted to be installed and maintained in the area between the curb and sidewalk. The lawn in this area should be maintained and/or mowed to a height not exceeding eight inches.


§ 180-90. Recommended plant materials.

Species selection shall be based upon the existing site conditions, including the site geology, hydrolo gy, soils and microcl imate, as well as functional considerations of screening, energy conservat ion and architectural compatibility.


ARTICLE XlII
Improvements  and Construction Assurances

§ 180-91. Guarantee of required improvements as prerequisite to final plan approval.

A.	No su ch plan shall be finally approved unless the developer shall provide for the deposit w ith the Township of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of said improvements as well as recreational facilities, open space improvements , or buffer or screen plantings which may be required. The developer shall not be required to provide financial security for the cost of any improvement s for which financial security  is required by and provided to the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Transportation  in connection with the issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L.  1242, No . 428), known as the "State Highway Law."s

B.	Contingent approval.

(1)	When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approva l of the final plan contingent upon the developer obtai.ning a satisfactory financial security. The final plan or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial security agreement is executed and delivered to the Township.


8.	Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. §670-10 1 et seq.


180:99	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-91	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-91

(2)	The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors; such extension shall not be unrea sonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer. A request  for extens ion shall be submitted in writing by the developer not more than 90 days following the date of contingent approva l. Said request shall specify the reasons for the extension, and the developer shall show good cause for the granting thereof. The Township may require a written agreement of extension conditioned upon such terms as are deemed necessary and reasonable.

C.	Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the Township  may approve, which approval sha ll not be unrea sonably withheld, federal or commonwealth cha rtered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or  escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.

D.	Such financial securit y shall be posted with a bonding  company  or  federal  or commonwea lth chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.

E.	Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements which may be required on or before  the  date  fixed  in the  formal action of approval or accompa nying agreement  for completion of the improvements.

F.	The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the  requ ired improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may   adjust the amount  of  financial  security  by  comparing  the  actual  cost  of  the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for completion of the remaining improveme nts as of the exp iration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.  Subsequent  to  said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%.

G.	The amount of financial security shall be based upon  an  estimate  of  the  cost  of completion of the required improvements,  submitted by an applicant  or  developer and prepared by a professional engineer  licensed  as  such  by   the  Commonwealth  of Permsylvania. The engineer shall certify the amount  of  security  to  be  a  fair  and rea sonable estimate of such cost. The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township Engi neer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate sha ll be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such  in the commonwea lth and  chosen mutually  by the Township  and  the applicant  or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be  presumed   fair  and rea sonable, and shall be the final estimate. In the event a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or developer.




180:100	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 180-91	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-91

H.	If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each  one-year  period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above procedure.

I.	In the case where development is projected over a period of five years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by section or stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the development.

J.	As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the Board of  Supervisors  to  release  or  authorize  the relea se, from time to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary  for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work.  Any  such requests  shall be, in writing, addressed to the Board of Supervisors, and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of the work upon the improvements ha s been completed in accordance with the approved plan. Upon receipt of such certification, the Board  of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount  as  estimated  by  the Township  Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act within said  forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors  shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of complet ion and certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.

K.	Where the Board of Superv isors accepts declication of all or some of the improvements following completion, the Board of Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the fina l plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the  amount  of  the financial  security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation, or 15% of the original security, whichever  is greater.

L.	If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both , along with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the juri sdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial securit y to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public  utility  or municipal  authority and shall not be included wit hin the financial security as otherwise required  by  this section.

M.  The Township may condition  the issuance of builcling, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement  of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land



180:101	01-01 -2014
 
§ 180-91                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 180-92

as depicted upon the final plan upon actual completion of the improvement s depicted upon the approved final plan , regardless of whether financial security has been provided as a condition for the final approval of a plan as set forth in this section. Moreover , if said financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any bui lding or buildings to be erected may be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise perm anently pa ssable condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or  lots in  question if such improvement s are not  necessary  for the rea sonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.


§ 180-92. Inspection during construction.

The Board of Supervisors shall authorize and direct the Township Engineer to cooperate with the applicant in arrangin g for the Engineer's periodic presence at the site of the work and construction of the required facilities and improvements during such phases thereof as in the judgment of the Engineer will enable him to determine whether or not such construction is in general conformity with the final plan and all Township requirement s.  The  Township Engineer is not a resident engineer. The developer's contractor shall be responsible for such inspections, etc., that are needed to insure that the constru cted improvement s are in conformance with the approved plan s and specification s.

A.	No underground pipes, structures, subgrades or ba se courses shall be covered until inspected and approved by the duly authorized official of the Township. Failure in compliance with this regulation shall provid e cause for uncovering of such work, at the applicant's expense, to permit the required inspection.

B.	Notice shall be given to the Township at least 48 hours in advance of commencement of any construction operation to provide for required inspection.

C.	In those cases where the Township Engineer deems necessary, the developer, through his contractor, shall retain the services of a certified soils engineer to perform moisture and density testing in order to determine compaction or the extent thereof as related to the requirements of such Township construction and materials specification s as have been or may be adopted by the Board of Supervisors.

D.	The wearing course on all streets proposed  to be dedicated to the Township shall not be placed  prior  to  such  time as 75% of the  lots  within  the development  have been built upon .

E.	Whenever any work or mat erials are found to be not in compliance with the final plan and/or applicable Township requirements, the Township Engineer or any other duly authorized Township representative, may stop work on the job until such noncompliance or variance is eliminated and any work or materials installed which are not in compliance are made to comply. It shall be unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent injury or damage to person or property. Such stop order may be revoked by the Board of Supervisors.





180:102	01 -01-20 14
 
§ 180-92                     SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                      § 180-94

F.	Whether or not such construction or work  shall have been accomplished in accordance with Township requirement s shall be determined by the Township  Engineer upon  the basis of his on-site inspection s during such phases thereof as in his judgment will enable him to make such determination. The Engineer shall submit a written report to the Board of Supervisors in regard thereto.


§ 180-93. As-built plan.

A.	After final plan approval, following the completion of all required improvement s and prior to acceptance of the dedication of any improvements by the Township, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan prepared by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor. Said plan shall indicate that the constructed improvements are in conformance with the previously approved drawings and specification s. Said plan shall also note any a nd all deviations from the previou sly approved drawings and specifications. A stable film reproducible and two copies of the as-built plan shall be filed with the Township. In addition, the developer shall submit the final as-built pla ns in a GIS format that is compatible with the Township's or county's GIS platform , and a PDF vers ion.

B.	The as-bu ilt plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the final plan, certified to by a professional engineer or surveyor and approved by the Township Engineer. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to:

(1)	Concrete  monuments.

(2)	The edge of the cartway and top of the cmb for both sides of each street.

(3)	Sanitary sewer mains, manholes and laterals.

(4)	Storm sewers, inlets and cu lverts.

(5)	Water mains and fire hydrants.

(6)	Streetlights.

(7)	Landscaping and screen planting.

(8)	Perma nent sedimentation, erosion control and stormwater management structures.

(9)	All easements.


§ 180-94. Release from financial security.

When the developer has completed all of the required and necessary improvements, and has submitted the required as-built  plan, the developer  shall notify the Board of Supervisors,  in wr iting, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.





180:103	01-01 -2014
 
§ 180-94                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 180-95

A.	The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the required improvem ents.

B.	The Township Engineer shall, thereupon , file a report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the authorization for inspection by the Board of Supervisors.

C.	The report shall be detailed and shall  indicat e  approval  or  rejection  of  said improvement s, either in who le or in part , and if said improvements , or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shaJI contain a statement of reason for disapprova l or rejection .

D.	The Board of Supervisors shall notify  the developer, within  15 days of receipt  of  the Engineer 's report , in  writing,  by certified  mai l or registered  mail, of the action  of the Board with relation thereto.

E.	If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released of all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.

F.	If any portion of the said improvement shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to complete the same, and upon completion, the same procedure of notification as l isted above shall be followed.

G.	Nothing herein , however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.

H.	The developer may request a partia l release for completed  improvements, the request for which shall be processed as provided above. The Board of Supervisors may elect, at their sole discret ion, to permit such partial release of financial security, and any partial release thereof  shall not entitle the developer to any further release thereof unless the Township shall agree that all improvements are complete.


§ 180-95. Remedies to effect completion of improvements .

In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accordance with the approved fmal plan, the Board of Supervisors shall have the power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal  and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security the Board of Supervisors may, at its opt ion, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements covered by such security, and not for any other Township purpose.





180: 104	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 180-96                         SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                          § 180-97

§ 180-96. Fees for inspection of improvements.

The Board of Supervisors shall prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors upon enactment of this chapter, or as such schedule may be amended. A copy of said fee schedule shall be ava ilable for review at the Township Office. Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township Engineer or consultants for work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.


§ 180-97. Disputes over fees.

A.	If the applicant disputes the amount of any  such  expense  in  connection  with  the inspection  of  improvements , the applicant shall, within  10 working  days of the date of billing , notify the Township that such expenses are  disputed  as  unreasonable  or unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land  development application or any approval or perm it rela ted to development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.

B.	In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are rea sonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution as set forth below:

(1)	If within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of  expenses  which  are reasonab le and necessary, then the app licant and Township shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review such expenses and make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary, provided that the professionals resolving  such dispute shall be of the same profession or discipline as the consultants  whose  fees  are being  disputed.

(2)	The professiona l engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentat ion as the professional engineer,  in  his  or  her  sole opinion,  deems necessary and render a decision within 30 days of the selection date. The applicant shall be requ ired to pay the entire amount deterrnined in the decision immediately .

(3)	In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot  agree   upon  the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party , the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland County (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Townsh ip Engineer nor any professional engineer who has  been retained by, or performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the preced ing five years.





180:105	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
§ 180-97                                      NORT H MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 180-100

(4) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the reasonable and neces sary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is equa l to or greater than the original bill ; if the amount of payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the profe ssional engineer, but otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 112 of the fee of the  appointed professionalengineer.


ARTICLE XIV
Modification  of Requirements

§ 180-98. Special conditions.

Where a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulation s will result in unreasonable hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, the Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements of one or more provision s of this chapter, provided that such reasonable alteration thereof will not be contrary to the public interest and so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed and sub stantial justice done.


§ 180-99. Applications for modification.

Applications for any modificat ion or waiver of requirements or specifications imposed by this chapter or other ordinances shall be submitt ed in writing by the applicant at the time the application for subdivision or development is filed with the Township. The application shall state the property involved, explain fully the grounds of unreasonableness  or hardship  on which the request is based, the specific provision or provisions of the ordinance involved, and the minimum modification  necessary.


§ 180-100. Modification action by Board of Supervisors.

A.	The Board of Supervisors shall consider and act upon requests for modificat ion at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The applicati on for any modification or waiver of requirement s or specifications shall be referred to the Planning Commission.

B.	A forma l hearing shall not be required ; however, the applicant or any interested party may request a hearing upon agreement to pay for the public notice and stenographic costs thereof.

C.	At  any meeting or  hearin g, the applicant or his representative shall present  evidence in
support of the request.

D.	The Board of Supervisors, after hearing said evidence and considering the application, may grant or deny said modification or may approve the modification with conditions. Approval of an application for modification of requirements shall only be the minimum modification necessary and shall be entirely within the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.




180:106	01 -OJ  -2014
 
§ 180-100	SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-101

E. In modifying any requirement s, the Board of Supervisors shall record its action and the grounds for the modification of a requirement to the applicant applying for the modification.

F.		Whenever a requ est for the modification of a requirement is denied, the Board of Supervisors shall record its action and the grounds for such denial in  its minu tes. The Board of Supervisors shall transmit a copy of the action and the grounds for denial of any alteration to the applicant applying for the modification.


ARTICLE XV
Enforcement;  Violations and Penalties; Amendments

§ 180-101. Administration and enforcement.

A.	Duties and authority.

(1)	The Board of Supervisors shall have the duty and authority for the administration and  general enforcement  of the provisions of this chapter, as specified or implied herein.

(2)	Officials of the Township  having regulatory  duties and authorities connected with or appurtena nt to the subdivision, use or development of land shall have the duties and authorities for the controlling enforcement of the provisions of this chapt er, as specified or implied herein or in other ordinances of the Township.

B.	No construct ion, building,  alteration, or any other improvement to land, or change in the manner of the use of the land shall be effected unless it fully complies with the standards of this chapter and other ordinances, as well as the standards contained in any applicab le subdivision or land development plan approved pursuant to this chapter.

C.	The Sewage  Enforcement  Officer  shall  require  that  applications  for  sewage  disposa l system permit s contain all the  information  for  him  to  ascertain  that  the  site for  the proposed system  is acceptable  in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the rules a nd regulation s of the Department of Environmenta l Protection and any requirement of the Townsh ip pertaining to the issuance of such permit.

D.	Preventive remedies.

(1)	In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain appropriate act ions by law or equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawfu l construction , to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.

(2)	The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real prope1ty which has been developed or which has resulted from a  subdivision of real proper ty in vio lation of this chapter. The




180:107	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-101	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 180-103

Township's authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the
following applicants:

(a)	The owner of record at the time of such violation.

(b)	The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

(c)	The current owner  of  record  who  acquired  the property  subsequent  to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actua l or constructive knowledge of the violation .

(d)	The vendee or lessee  of  the  current  owner  of  record  who  acquired  the property subsequent to the time of the violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

(3)	As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting  of  an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicab le to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such rea l property.


§ 180-102. Amendments.

A.		Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for enactment of a  proposed subdivision and land development ordinance in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as subsequently amended.

B.	In case  of  an  amendment  other  than  that  prepared  by  the  Planning  Commission,  the Board of Supervisors shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.

C.	At least 30 days prior to the hearing on the amendment, the Township shall submit the proposed	amendment to the Cumberland County Planning  Department  for recommendations.

D.	Within 30 days after adoption, the Board of Supervisors shall forward a certified copy of any amendment to this chapter to the Cumberland County Planning Department.


§ 180-103. Violations  and penalties.

A.	Jurisdiction. Initial jurisdiction  in the courts shall be as provided in the PA Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.

B.	Enforcement remedies.




180:108	01 • 01 - 2014
 
§ 180-103	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	§ 180-103

(1)	Any per son, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township , pay a judgment  of not more than $500, plus all court costs, includ ing reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment  pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a  violation continues shall constitute a separate violation , unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation furth er determines that there was a good faith ba sis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until  the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgment s, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation of the chapter shall be paid over to the Township.

(2)	The Court of Common Plea s, upon petition, may grant an order  of  stay,  upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.

(3)	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or  entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
































180:109	01 -01 - 2014
 
 
 
Chapter 186 TAXATION

ARTICLE I	§ 186-24.	Dates for determining tax
Earned Income Tax	liability and payment.
§ 186-25.	Self-employed individuals.
§ 186-1.	Definitions.	§ 186-26.	Individuals engaged in more
§ 186-2.	Imposition of tax.	than one occupation or
§ 186-3.	No exemption from tax.	employed in more than one
§ 186-4.	Individual tax returns and	political subdivision.
payments.	§ 186-27.	Nonresidents subject to tax.
§ 186-5.		Employer  withholding,	§ 186-28.	 Administration of tax. remittance and tax returns.	§ 186-29.	Suits for collection.
§ 186-6.	Tax Collector.	§ 186-30.	Violations and penalties.
§ 186-7.	Interest, penalties, costs, and	§ 186-31.	Interpretation
fines.
§ 186-8.	Purpose/amendment and	ARTICLE IV
restatement/repeal.	Amusement Tax
§ 186-9.	Effective date.
§ 186-10.	through § 186-13. (Reserved)	§ 186-32.	Short title.
§ 186-33.	Definitions.
ARTICLE II	§ 186-34.	Imposition of tax.
Per Capita Tax	§ 186-35.	Permits.
§ 186-14.	Legislative authority; intent.	§ 186-36.	Collection.
§ 186-15.	Definitions.	§ 186-37.	Reporting and payment.
§ 186-16.	Tax rate; purpose.	§ 186-38.	Failure to file; penalty.
§ 186-17.	Exemptions.	§ 186-39.	Record of admissions.
§ 186-18.	Collections.	§ 186-40.	Authorization to examine
records.
§ 186-19.	Duties of Tax Collector.	§ 186-41.	Assessment of tax and
penalty.
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax	§ 186-42.	Recovery of debts.
§ 186-43.	Violations and penalties.
§ 186-20.	Definitions.
§ 186-21.	Levy of tax.	ARTICLE V
§ 186-21.1. Exemption and refunds .	Realty Transfer Tax
§ 186-22.	Duty of employers to collect.	§ 186-44.	Short title.
§ 186-23.	Returns.




186:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 186-1

§ 186-45.	Imposition of tax.	ARTICLE VI
 
§ 186-46.	Administration.
§ 186-47.	Interest.
§ 186-48.	through § 186-63. (Reserved)
 
Income Tax Officer

§ 186-64.	Appointment.
 

[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board  of Supervisors  of the Township of North Middleton as indicated  in article histories. Amendments  noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-3-1979 as Ch. XXIV, Part 1, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances; amended  in its
entirety 12-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-3]

§ 186-1. Definitions.

All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act 1 shall have the mea nings set forth therein. The following terms  shall have the meanings set forth herein:

COLLECTOR - The person or entity appointed as Tax Officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax. In 20 11, it shall remain Cen Tax. Thereafter , in 2012, it shall be the ent ity as selected by the TCC pursuant to the provisions of Act 32.

EFFECTIVE DATE - January I, 20 11.

ENACT MENT - This article.

GOVERNING BODY - The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township.

LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT - The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth in 53 P.S.
§ 690 I et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924. 10 1 et seq., when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as amended in the future.

NONRES IDENT - A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled outside the Township of North Middleton.

RESIDENT - A person , partnership, association or other entity domiciled in the Township of North Middleton.

TCC - The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income tax with.in the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.

TCD - Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.

TAX - The tax imposed by this enactment.




I.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S.§6924.101 ct seq.


186:2	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 186-1                                                     TAXATION                                                     § 186-2

TAX RETURN - A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.

TAX YEAR - The period from January 1 to December 31.

TAXING AUTHORITY - North Middleton Township.


§ 186-2. Imposition of tax.

A.	General purpose resident  tax.  The  taxing  authority  hereby  imposes  a  tax  for  general revenue purposes at the  rate  of  0.5%  on  earned  income and net  profits  of  individual residents of the  taxing  authority.  This  tax  is  in addition  to the separately  levied  local services tax.

B.	General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of I% on earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of the  taxing  authority  from  any  work,  business, profe ssion, or activity, of any kind engaged in  the boundaries  of the  taxing  authority. This tax is in addition to the separately levied local services tax.

C.	Ongoing tax.  The tax shall continue at  the above rates  during the current  tax  year  and each tax year thereafter, without annual reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed by subsequent amendment by ordinance.

D.	Combined tax rate appl icable to residents . Currently, the total rate applicable to residents
of  the  taxing  authority,  including the tax  imposed by the municipality  in which the ·
individual resides, is 1.6%.

E.	Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresident s. Currently, the total rate applicable  to nonresidents working  within  the taxing authority based on the municipal  nonresident  tax rate is 1%.

F.	Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.

G.	Applicable laws, regulation s, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be collected and administered in accordance with: all applicable laws and regulations ; and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedur es adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.








186:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-3                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                      § 186-8

§ 186-3. No exemption from tax.

Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations , no individua ls are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.


§ 186-4.  Individual  tax returns and payments.

Every individual  receiving  earned income or earning net profits in any tax year shall file tax
returns and pay tax in accordance with the Loca l Tax Enabling Act.


§ 186-5. Employer withholding , remittance and tax returns.

Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.


§ 186-6. Tax Collector.

The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.


§ 186-7. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.

Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.


§ 186-8. Purpose/amendment and restatement/repeal.

The primary purpose of this  enactment is to conform the earned income and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior enactment  imposing a tax on earned income or net profits  of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting with the provi sions of this enactment is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provision s of this enactment are intended as a continuation  of such prior  enactment and not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this enactment sha ll only amend and restate on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on earned income or net profit s in force immediately prior to the effective date. Any other taxing enabling statutes or ordinances not inconsistent  herewith shall remain in full force and effect.


186:4	01 .01 - 2014
 
§ 186-9                                                     TAXATION                                                   § 186-18

§ 186-9. Effective date.

This article shall become effective by operation of law on January I, 2011.


§ 186-10. through§ 186-13. (Reserved)



ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 5-3-1979 as Ch. XXIV, Part 2, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II))

§ 186-14. Legislative authority; intent.

The Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton, Pennsylvania , hereby imposes a per capita tax in accordance with the authority granted by the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P .L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.


§ 186-15. Definitions.

In the construction  of this  article, the following terms  shall have the meanings  indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

RESIDENT - Every adult 18 years of age or older who lives within the Township.

TAX COLLECTOR - The person or agency designated by the Board of Supervisors to administer and collect the per capita tax.


§ 186-16. Tax rate; purpose.

A per capita tax at the rate of $5 is hereby levied and assessed for general Township purposes upon each residen t of the Township, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes levied and assessed by the Township pursua nt  to any other laws of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania .


§ 186-17. Exemptions.

Any resident whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum is exempt from the imposition of the per capita tax. The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to adopt regulations for the  proces sing of claims  for exempt ions which must be complied  with by any person claiming entitlement to an exemption.


§ 186-18. Collections.

The per capita tax shall be collected by the Tax Collector. The entry of a person's name on the per capita tax duplicate and the issuance of such duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his or her warrant for the collection of the per capita tax hereby levied  and  assessed. The expense of collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be as provided by law.



186:5	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 186-19                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 186-20

§ 186-19. Duties of Tax Collector.

The Tax Collector shall give notice to residents, shall have the power to collect the per capita tax by any lawful means, shall have the power and authority to demand and receive taxes from the employer of any resident owing any per capita tax or whose spouse owes any per capita tax, shall remit the per capita taxes to the Township Treasurer, shall allow discounts and add penalties , and shall genera lly be subject to all the duties and shall have all the rights and authority conferred by the Local Tax Enabling Act.


ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-6-2007 by Ord. No.2007-62]

§ 186-20. Definitions .

The following words and phra ses, when used in this article, sha ll have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where  the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

COLLECTOR - The person, public employee or private agency designated by North
Middleton Township to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.

DCED - The Department of Community and Economic Development of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania .

EARNED INCOME - Compensat ion, as this term is defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P .S. § 6924.501.3

EMPLOYER  - An  individual,  partner ship,  association,   limited  liability  corporation ,  limited l iability partnership, corporation, governmental body, agency or  other  entity  employing one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other  compensation  basis,  including  a self-employed    person.

HE, HIS or HIM - Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male, female and neuter genders.

INDIVIDUAL  - Any  person ,  male  or  fema le,  engaged  in  any  occupation,  trade  or
profession wit hin the corporate limits of Nort h Middleton Township.

NET PROFITS - The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.501.4

NORTH MIDDLETON TOWNSHIP or TOWNSHIP - The area within the corporate limits of North Middleton Township.




2.	Editor's  No te: This ordinance  also  repealed  former  Art.  III,  Emergency and  Municipal  Ser vices Tax,  adopted
1-3-2006 by Ord. No .2006-1.

3.	Editor's Note: Amended at tim e of adopti on of Code (sec Ch. I , Gener al Provisions, Art. fl).

4.	Editor's Note : Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


186:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-20                                                   TAXATION                                                 § 186-21.1

OCCUPATION - Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of North Middleton Township for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.

TAX - The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 186-21 of this article.

TAX YEAR - The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a calendar year.


§ 186-21. Levy of tax.

For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and  assessed,  commencing January 1, 2008, upon the priv ilege of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of employment within North Middleton Township during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax maybe used solely for the following purposes as the  same  may  be allocated by the Board of Supervisors from time to time: emergency services,  which  shall include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services;  road  construction and/or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.  Chapter  85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property  exclusion). The Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or  nature  heretofore  levied by North  Middleton Township . The tax shall be no more than  $52 on each person for each calenda r year, irrespective of the number of politica l subdivisions within which a person may be employed.


§ 186-21.1. Exemption and refunds.

A	Exemption. Any per son whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within the Township is less than $12,000 for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from payment of the tax:

(1)	Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict  in  which  the  United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United  States Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total one-hundred -percent disability.

(2)	Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable year . For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of the armed forces" shall  mean the  United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsy lvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.

B.	Procedure to claim exemption.



186:7	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-21.1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 186-21. 1

(1)	A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may annu ally file an exemption certificate with the Township and with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Township utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificat e shall have attached to it a copy of all the employee's la st pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the Township for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is request ing  to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and unt il otherwise instructed by the Township or except as required by Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readi ly available to employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the Township.

(2)	With respect  to a per son who claimed an exempt ion for a given calendar yea r from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or by the Township that the person has received earned income and net profit s from all sources within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within the Township in  an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold  the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).

(3)	If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar yea r from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection B(2),  the employer shall withho ld the tax for the remainder of that calendar yea r. The employer shall withhold  from the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equa l to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to  the exemption  claimed  by  the person under this subsection, plu s the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remainin g payroll per iods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently severed in that calendar year,  the person shall be liable for any  outstanding balance of  tax due, and the Township may pursue collection under  this article.

(4)	Except as provided in  Subsection  B(2),  it  is  the  intent  of  this  subsection  that employer s  shall  not  be  responsible  for  investigating   exemption   certificates, monitoring  tax  exemption  eligibility  or  exempting any  employee  from  the  loca l services tax.

C.	Refunds. The Township Manager , in consultation with the Collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any person who  is eligible for exemption, wh ich procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the



186:8	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-21.1	TAXATION	§ 186-22

general municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. (NOTE: With respect to refunds , see 53 P.S. § 8425; with  respect to interest, see 53 P.S.
§ 8426.) Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the  tax for the last quarter of the calendar yea r, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a  calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Township Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons .


§ 186-22. Duty of employers to collect.

A.	Each employer within North Middleton Township, as well as those employers situated outside North Middleton Township but who engage in business within North Middleton Township, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for him within North Middleton Township and making a return and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct thi s  tax from each employee in his or her employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all such services are performed  within North Middleton Township.

B.	A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For  purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 11100 of a dollar . Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation , except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the Township.

C.	No  person  shall be  subject  to  the payment  of  the  local services  tax  by more than one
political  subdivision during each payroll period.

D.	In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the  employee provid es a recent pa y statement from a principal employer that includes the name  of the employer,  the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax wit hheld  and   a  statement  from  the  employee  that  the  pay  statement  is  from  the employee's  principal employer and the employee will notify other employers of a change in principal  place of employment within two weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on the form approved by DCED.

E.	The t ax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the  number  of  political  subdivisions within  which a person  may  be employed . The Township shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.

F.	No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold  the tax or for the payment of the
withheld tax money to the Township if the failure to withhold  taxes arises from incorrect



186:9	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-22                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 186-26

information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or  places  of employment, the employee's principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 186-2 1.1B of this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld  in accordance with this article.

G.	Employers  shall  be  required  to  remit  the local  services  taxes  30 days after  the end of each quarter of a calendar year.


§ 186-23. Returns.

Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.


§ 186-24. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.

In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to determine the number of emp loyees from whom  such tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.


§ 186-25. Self-employed individuals.

Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of employment within North Middleton Township shall be required to comply with this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.


§ 186-26. Individuals engaged in more  than  one  occupation  or employed  in more  than one political subdivision.

A.	The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period.  In the event a person  is engaged in more than one occupat ion, that is, concurrent employment , or an occupation which requires the person  working in more than one  political  subdivision  during  a  payroll  period,  the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:

(1)	First, the political  subdivision in which a person maintain s his or her principal office or is principally employed;

(2)	Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works if the tax
is levied by that political subdivision;





186:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-26                                                   TAXATION                                                   § 186-29

(3)	Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.

B.	In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year  declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.


§ 186-27. Nonresidents subject to tax.

All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places  of  business outside of North Middleton Township but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within North Middleton Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves  to  the  provisions,  penalties  and  regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of North Middleton Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within North Middleton Township and an employee of a nonresidential employer  may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the Township shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.


§ 186-28. Administration of tax.

A.	The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. It shall be the duty of  the Collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him from each employer or  self-employed person, together with the date the tax was received.

B.	The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,  subject to Board of Supervisors approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration  and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any return ma de in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland County as in other cases provided.

C.	The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Collector the mean s, facilities and opportunity for such examination.


§ 186-29. Suits for collection.

A.	In the event that any tax under this article remain s due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the  recovery  of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty.




186:11	01-01-2014
 
§ 186-29                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 186-33

B.	If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.


§ 186-30. Violations and penalties. s

Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this  article,  or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $ L ,000 and costs of prosecution , and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. The action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.


§ 186-31. Interpretation

A	Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower Nort h Middleton Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania.

B.	If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.


ARTICLE IV
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 1-4-1979 by Ord. No. 79-1)

§ 186-32. Short title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "North Middleton Township Amusement Tax Ordinance."


§ 186-33. Definitions.

Unless  otherwise  expressly  stated,  the  following  terms  shall have,  for  the purpose  of  this article, the meanings herein indicated:



5.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


186:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-33                                                   TAXATION                                                    § 186-34

ADMISSION	Monetary charge of any character whatever, including donations, contributions and dues or membership fees (periodical or otherwise) charged or paid for the privilege of attending or engaging in amusements as hereinaft er defined. "Admission" shall not include any tax added to the charge.

AMUSEMENT - All manner and form of entertainment, including, among others, the following: theatrical performance , operatic performance, carnival, circus, show, concert, lecture, sports event, vaudeville show, side show, amusement park and all forms of entertainment therein , dancing, golf, bowling, billiards or pool, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, boxing and sparring exhibitions, football, basketball and baseball games, ice skating, roller skating, tennis, hockey, bathing, swimming, archery, shooting, riding, racing and other form of diversion , sport, pa stime or recreation , shows, exhibitions, contests, displays and games for which admission is charged or paid. The term "amusement" shall not include any form of entertainment the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to charitable institutions, societies or organizations, volunteer firemen's organizations, civic activities supported by tax funds. In addition, the term "amusement" shall not include motion-p icture exhibitions nor sound motion-pictur e exhibitions.

COLLECTOR - The per son appointed by the Township of North Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of issuing permits and collecting the tax imposed by this article.

PERSON - Any natural person, firm, association , copartnership or corporation.

PRODUCER - Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement.

TOWNSHIP - North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.


§ 186-34. Imposition of tax.

(1)	A tax is hereby imposed for general Township purposes under the authority of the Act of Assembly No. 511, dated December  31,  1965, as amended,  known  as  the  "Local  Tax Enabling  Act ,"6 upon  the  admission  fee  or  privilege  to  attend  or   engage   in   any amusement during the year 1979,  to  become  effective  30  days  from  the  date  of enactment  of  this article through  December  31,  1979, and all calendar  years  thereafter , within the Township, at the rate of 10% of the admission price, which shall be paid by the person  acquiring  such privilege, commencing  30 days from the date of enactment of this article to December  31, 1979, and therea fter on a calendar-year basis.

(2)	Where no established price is charged, the tax shall be based upon the gross admissions
collected.








6.	Editor 's Note: See 53 P.S. §6924.101 et seq.


186:13	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 186-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 186-35

§ 186-35. Permits.

A.	On or after January 1, 1979, any person desiring to conduct, or to continue to conduct, any amusement within the Township shall, before conducting the same, file with the Township Secreta ry-Treasurer an application, on a form to be furnished by the Township, for a permanent amusement permit  or a temporary  amusement permit,  as the case may be, and shall pay the fee for such permit required  by this section. In the case of any amusement t hat is to continue for longer than 30 days, a permanent amusement permit shall be issued at a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. In the case of any amusement that is to continue for a period of 30 days or less, a temporary permit shall be issued at a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

B.	Permanent permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued. Temporary permit s shall be valid until the last day the amusement is conducted, but not exceeding 30 days from date of issue.

C.	The Township Secretary-Trea surer shall procure, at  the  expense  of  the  Township,  a sufficient number of permit  forms, on each of which the following information shall be printed or inserted in ink or by typewriter :

(1)	The number of the permit ;

(2)	The name of the Township;

(3)	Whether a temporary or a permanent permit;

(4)	The name and address of the person receiving the permi t;

(5)	The location of the amusement covered by the permit;

(6)	The type of amusement ;

(7)	The period for which the permit  is issued;

(8)	The date when the permit is issued;

(9)	The signature of the Township Secretary-Treasurer.

D.	Every permit shall be issued in duplicate. The original, to which the seal of the Township shall  be affixed, shall be given to the person  applying for the permit  and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the Township Secretary-Treasurer.

E.	In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any permit , the person to whom the permit was issued shall apply to the Township Secretary-Treasurer, who may issue a new permit, for which a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be charged.









186:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-36                                                   TAXATION                                                   § 186-38

§ 186-36. Collection.

A.	Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable  to  the Township , as agents thereof, for the payment of same into the Township treasury, as hereinafter provided in this article.

B.	Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary  amusements  by persons  who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the place where  the amusements are to be conducted or where the temporary amusement is penrutted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place to be conducted without the procurement of a permit or penruts required by this article, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid by the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where such temporary amusement is held or conducted unless paid by the producer conducting the amusement.


§ 186-37. Reporting and payment.

A.	Every holder of a permanent permit shall, on or before the last  day of every calendar month, transm it to the Township Secretary-Treasurer a report under oath of affirmation, on a form to be furnished by  the Township, of the total amount of admissions charged and collected by him during the last preceding calendar month and of the tota l amount of tax due thereon under this art icle, and at the same time shall pay over to the Township Secretary-Trea surer the entire amount of said tax.

B.	Every holder of a temporary permit shall, at the close of each day on which the amusement is held , pay over to the Township Secretary-Treasurer the amount of tax due under this article from such person upon  admissions charged or collected for such day, and at the same time shall submit to the Township Secretary-Treasurer a report on the form to be furnished by the Township Secretary-Trea surer of the total  admissions charged or collected on such day and the total amount of tax due under this article, on such admissions. On the day of expiration of such temporary penrut, the person to whom such permit is issued shall, in addition, submit to the Township  Secretary-Treasu rer a report on a form to be furnished by the Township Secretary-Treasurer, under oath or affirmation, of a ll admissions charged or collected during the period in which such temporary permit was in effect and of all taxes due, and the same time pay over to the Township Secretary-Treasurer the entire amount of all taxes due and remaining unpaid.

C.	A holder of a temporar y perm it who is  a  resident  of  the Township  or  who  has  a permanent  place of business  therein may submit the reports hereinabove required of the holder  of  a  temporary  permit  and  may make the payment  hereinabove required  of the holder of a temporary permit on the day following the days hereinabove specified.

D.	In any case, the Township Secretary-Treasurer shall furnish to the person paying any tax
levied under this article a receipt for the payment of such tax.


§ 186-38. Failure to file; penalty.

If any report required to be filed in pursuance of this article shall not be filed within the prescribed time or if any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto, if the failure to


186:15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-38                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 186-41

file the return or to pay the tax is for not more than 30 days, with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days, or fraction thereof, during which failure continues, not to exceed 25% of the aggregate.


§ 186-39. Record of admissions.

A.	Every person required by the provisions of this article to pay to the Township any tax on admissions must keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of admissions and reduced rate admissions . The records must show as to each class of admissions the following: Al l figures and  other informa tion necessary to determine the amount of the tax due and the amount of tax due.

B.	The records must be kept on file at the place of bu siness or at some other convenient location and shall be available for inspection  by  the Township  Secretary-Treasurer  or other persons designated by the Supervisors of the Township.

C.	Such records shall contain sufficient information to enable the Secretary-Treasurer of the Township, or other person designated  by the Supervisors of the Township, to determine whether the correct amount of tax has been paid. The records shall at all times be open to inspection by the Township Secretary-Treasurer or other person designated by the Supervisors of the Township.

D.	Any information  gained  by the Township Secretary-Treasurer or any other agent of the Supervisors of the Township as a result of any reports or investigations required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes , and except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law. Any divulgence of any such information so gained is hereby declared to be a violation of this article.


§ 186-40. Author ization to examine records.

The Township Secretary-Treasurer, or other person designated by the Supervisors of the Township, is hereby authorized to examine any relevant books, papers and records of any person required under this article to secure a permit, in order to verify the accuracy of any report made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed by this article.


§ 186-41. Assessment of tax and penalty.

A.	If any person required to secure a permit under this article shall fail to file a report at the time stipulated by this article, or shall file a report which on the face appears inaccurate, incorrect or incomplete, the Township Secretary-Treasurer shall make an assessment of such tax, or any deficiency thereof, against such person of the amount of the tax or deficiency for which such person is liable or for which the Township Secretary-Treasurer believes such person is liable, to which such assessment the Township Secretary-Treasurer shall add the penalties herein provided for and the aggregate amount so obtained shall be the ba sis of taxation.

B. After such assessment , the Secretary-Treasurer of the Township shall give written notice of such assessment to the person liable for the tax imposed thereby. Such assessment



186:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-41                                                   TAXATION                                                   § 186-44

shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax due unless  such person  shall appeal in writing to the Supervisors of the Township for a hearing within 30 days of the date of such notice. Such hearing by the Supervisors shall be held within 30 days of the request for hearing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right of appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland  County  within  30  days from the date of such decision; provided, however , that such appeal shall not act as a supersedeas unless specifically allowed by  the Court. Promptly upon the filing of such appeal, the petitioner shalJ serve a copy of the Petition therefor and any Rule granted by the Court upon the Collector.


§ 186-42. Recovery of debts.

All taxes  imposed  by this article, together with all penalties,  shall be recoverable by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Township as other debts of like amounts are recoverable.


§ 186-43. Violations and penalties. 7

Any person who vio lates or permits a  violation  of any of the provisions or requirement s of this article or of neglecting, failing or refu sing to furnish  complete  and  correct  reports  or returns or to pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required  shall, upon  being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment , the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.  Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such fine or penalty shall  be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article. Further, the appropriat e officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including  injunction, to enforce compliance herewith .


ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 87-2; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]

§ 186-44. Short title.

This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax of North Middleton Township."










7.	Editor's  otc: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


186:17	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 186-45                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 186-64

§ 186-45. Imposition of tax.

The Township of North Middleton adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a rea lty transfer tax as authorized under that article subj ect to the rate limitation s therein. The tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of l %.


§ 186-46. Administration .

The tax imposed under § 186-45 and all applicable  interest  and  penalties  shall  be administered, collected and enforced under the Act  of  December  31,  1965 (P.L.  1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "The  Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township of North  Middleton,  pu rsuant  to  Section  1102-D  of  the Tax  Reform  Code  of  1971  (72  P.S.
§  8102-D),  authorizes  and  directs  the  Department   of  Revenue  of  the  Commonwealth  of
Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and pen alties.


§ 186-47. Interest.

Any tax imposed under § 186-46 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S . § 7101 et seq.), as amended , known as "The Municipal  Claims and Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed  upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.C 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum­ interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.


§ 186-48. through§ 186-63. (Reserved)



ARTICLE VI
Income Tax Officer [Adopted 1-3-1983 by Ord. No. 83-1)

§ 186-64.  Appointment.    [Amended 2-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-ls]

The Board of Supervisors of North Middleton Township shall, from time to time, by resolution, appoint the Income Tax Officer to collect earned income tax and local services tax in North Middleton Township  until revoked by later resolut ion or ordinance. Each appointment by resolution will be conditioned upon North Middleton Township and the Income Tax Officer or collection entity reaching a satisfactory agreement reduced to writing and approved by further resolution properly enacted by North Midd leton Township after the responsibilities, obligations and procedures to be employed by the fncome Tax Officer on beha lf of the Township have been established.





8.	Ed itor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, Gen eral Provisions, Art. II).


186:18	01 - 01 - 2014
 
Chapter  196 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
 

ARTICLE I
General  Regulations

§ 196-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 196-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations .
§ 196-3.   Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 196-4.  Experimental regulations.
§ 196-5.  Authority of police officers.
§ 196-6.		Construction of temporary or permanent ramps prohibited on all Township roads .
§ 196-7.		Placement of dumpsters on all Township roads shall be prohibited.


ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations

§ 196-8.  Speed limits established.
§ 196-9.		Traffic signals at certain intersections.
§ 196-10. Left and/or right turns
prohibited at certain
intersections.
§ 196-11. Through highways established.
§ 196-12. Stop intersections established.
§ 196-13. Unlawful to operate motor vehicles or tractors on highways closed for construction or repair.
§ 196-14. Play highways authorized.


ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations

§ 196-15. Parking without lights authorized.
 

§ 196-16. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
§ 196-17. Parking prohibited at all times
in certain locations.
§ 196-18. (Reserved)
§ 196-19. Creating no parking
regulations at certain times in certain locations.
§ 196-20. Parking of trucks, buses, recreational vehicles and certain other vehicles prohibited on all Township roads or rights-of-way thereof.
§ 196-21. Violations and penalties.


ARTICLE IV
Vehicle Weight Limits

§ 196-22. Title.
§ 196-23. Vehicle weight limits
established  on certain streets and bridges.
§ 196-24. Violations and penalties.


ARTICLE V
Truck Traffic Regulations

§ 196-25. Short title.
§ 196-26. Definitions and interpretations .
§ 196-27. Continuation of prior regulations.
§ 196-28. Temporary and emergency suspensions.
§ 196-29. Regulation of length of vehicles utilizing Meadowbrook Road; violations and penalties.
§ 196-30. Signage.





196:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-1                                        NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                        § 196-3

§ 196-31. Authority of police officers.

[HISTORY: Adopted  by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton 5-3-1979 as Ch. XV, Parts 1, 2 and 3, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances; amended in its entirety 8-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-2. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]


ARTICLE I
General Regulations

§ 196-1. Definitions and interpretation.

A.	Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania , as now in force, or as hereafter amended,1 enacted or reenact ed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.

B.    In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural , the plural shall include the singular,
and the masculine shall include the feminine.


§ 196-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking regulations.

All traffic and parking regu lations of a permanent  nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as
part s of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the Township of North Middleton.


§ 196-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.

A.	The Chief  of  Police  shall  have  the  following  powers to regu late traffic  and  parking
temporarily and in time of emergency :

(1)	In  case  of  fire,  flood, storm or  other  emergency,  to  establish  temporary  traffic
and/or parking regulations;

(2)	In the ca se of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades, procession s or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for period s of not more than 72 how-s .

B.	Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulation s. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in vio lation of any such regu lations, or  who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected , posted or made to give notice of any such regulation , shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the pena lty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapt er, to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of pa yment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for one day for each $10 of such fine and costs.



I.	Editor 's Note: See 75 Pa .C.S.A. § I 01 et seq.


196:2	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-4                                         VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC                                          § 196-8

§ 196-4. Experimental regulations.

The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period of not more than  90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations , prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation , prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not less than
$10 nor more than $25 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo  imprisonment for one day for each $10 of such fine and costs. The purpose of this sect ion is to allow for the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.


§ 196-5. Authority of police officers.

The police offices of the Township are hereby given authority to  direct  traffic  on  the highwa ys of the Township and at intersections thereof.


§ 196-6. Construction  of  temporary  or  permanent  ramps  prohibited  on all Township
roads.

It shall be unlawful for any person to construct temporary or permanent ramps of any material for the purpose of crossing a curb on a dedicated Township road.


§ 196-7. Placement of dumpsters on all Township roads shall be prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place a dumpster on any dedicated Township road.


ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations

§ 196-8. Speed limits established.

A.	The following speed limits are hereby established:


 


Name of Street Abrams Avenue Aeronca Avenue
 
Speed Limit
(mph)	Location
25	Macarthur Drive and West Point Drive
25	Fern Avenue and Airport Drive
 



196:3	01 - 01-2014
 
§ 196-8	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-8



Name of Street	Speed Limit (mph)	

Location
Airport Drive	25	Spring Road and dead end
Alder Road	35	Meadow Brook Road and West Pennsboro Township line
American Avenue	25	Brubacker Drive and Patriot Road
Andover Place	25	Bennington Way and dead end
Appalachian Avenue	25	West View and North Middleton Road
Augusta Place	25	Walton Avenue and dead end
Bald Eagle Boulevard	25	Appalachian Ave and White Deer Way
Basin Hill Boulevard	25	Cavalry Road and East Hillcrest Drive
Bellaire Avenue	25	Longs Gap Road and Maple Avenue
Bennington Way	25	McClures Gap Road and Bennington
Way
Blue Mountain Boulevard	25	Appalachian Avenue and dead end
Blue Ridge Boulevard	25	Cornma n Road and Appalachian
Avenu e
Breeze Lane	25	Stream Drive and American Avenue
Brookwood Avenue	25	Wood Avenue and Clearview Drive
Brubacker Drive	25	Waggoners Gap Road and Breeze Lane
Buckingham Place	25	Walton Avenue and dead end
Calvary Road	35	Spring Road and Harrisburg Pike
Candlelight Drive	25	Sunset Drive and Dorwood Drive
Cavalry Street	25	Cavalry Road and Charles Street
Cave Hill Drive	25	Carlisle Borough line and dead end
Ceda r View	25	Regal View and dead end
Center Street	25	West Louther Street and West N011h
Street
Cessna Avenue	25	Airport Drive and cul-de-sac
Channel Drive	25	Longs Gap Road and Green Meadow
Drive
Charles Street	25	Cavalry Street and Gobin Street
Cha rles Street	25	Harrisburg Pike and Hamilton Street
Chester Street	25	Fry Loop Avenue and Mary Lane
Circle Road	25	Cumberland Drive and Cumberland
Drive
Claridon Place	25	Walton Avenue and dead end
Clearview Avenue	25	Bellaire Avenue and Maple Avenue
Codorus Creek Court	25	Creek Road and cul-de-sac
Colonial Drive	25	Homestead Lane and Patriot Road


196:4	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 196-8	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-8



Name of Street	Speed Limit (mph)	

Location
Cornman Road	40	Longs Gap Road and North Middleton
		Road
Conodoguinet Avenue	35	Lower Frankford Township line and
		dead end
Coral Drive	25	Waggoners Gap Road and Waggoner s
		Gap Road
Cottonwood Court	25	Regal View and dead end
Coventry Court	25	McClures Gap Road and dead end
Cra in Drive	25	Spring Road and Reservoir Drive
Cranes Gap Road	35	Route 34-Spring Road and Enola Road
Creek Road	35	Cranes Gap Road and Longs Gap Road
Crest View	25	Tree View  and West View
Crown View Drive	25	Cedar View and dead end
Cumberland Drive	25	Reservoir Drive and Dougla s Drive
Curtis Drive	25	Shatto Drive and Harvest Drive
Darby Court	25	Bennington Way and dead end
Darr Avenue	25	Lake View Drive and Douglas Drive
Dorwood Drive	25	Sunset Drive and Firelight Drive
Dorwood Drive	25	Sunset Drive and Shatto Drive
Douglas Drive	25	West Hillcrest and Mary Lane
Downing Street	25	Union Hall Road to cul-de-sac
Dyarman Road	40	Meadow Brook Road and McClures Gap Road
East Hillcrest Drive	25	Spring Road and dead end
East Louther Street	25	Carlisle Borough line and dead end
Extension		
Easy Road	35	Waggoners Gap Road and Lower Frankford Township line
Echo Road	35	Waggoners Gap Road and Easy Road
Elm Drive	25	Spring Road and Hope Terrace
Eisenhower Drive	26	Sherman  Avenue  and Midd lesex  Line
Esther Drive	25	Virginia Avenue and Susan Lane
Faith Circle	25	Spring Road and Township line
Family Drive	25	Brubacker Drive and Patriot Drive
Farview Avenu e	25	Township line and dead end
Fern Avenue	25	Spring Road and dead end
Frederick Court	25	George Avenue and dead end
Fry Loop Avenue	25	Wagner Street and Wagner Street


196:5	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-8
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE
 
§ 196-8
 



Name of Street	Speed Limit (mph)	

Location
Gap View	25	Cranes Gap Road and Glenn View
Garden Drive	25	Longs Gap Road and dead end
George Avenue	25	Fern Avenue and dead end
Glenn View Court	25	Tree View and Crest View
Glenn View Court	25	Crest View and dead end
Gobin Street	25	Cavalry Road and Carlisle Borough line
Gordon Drive	25	North Middleton Road and the end
Grant Court	25	Longstreet Drive and dead end
Green Meadow Drive	25	Longs Gap Road and Channel Drive
Greystone Road	25	Trindle Road and Trindle Road
Hamilton Street	25	Cavalry Road and Carlisle Borough
line
Harriet Street	25	Cavalry Road and dead end
Harvest Drive	25	Candlelight Drive and Firelight Drive
Harvest Drive	25	Candlelight Drive and Shatto Drive
Heishman Gardens	25	Sterretts Gap Avenue and dead end
Heron Way	25	Partridge Circle and Partridge Circle
Hill Drive	25	Longs Gap Road and Kaseeta Drive
Homestead Lane	25	Colonial Drive and dead end
Hope Terrace	25	Faith Circle and Faith Circle
Hoy Road	40	North Middleton Road and Enola Road
Hoy Road	35	North Middleton Road to Enola Road
Imperial Court	25	Cranes Gap Road and dead end
Jane Lane	25	Chester Street and Mary Lane
Jody Lane	25	Susan Lane and dead end
Kaseeta Drive	25	Hill Drive and Stine Avenue
Kenwood Drive	25	Candlelight Drive and Dorwood Drive
Kingwood Terrace	25	Faith Circle and Hope Terrace
Kittanning Court	25	Tuscarora Trail and dead end
Lake View Drive	25	Spring Road and Reservoir Drive
Lamplite Drive	25	Curtis Drive and cul-de-sac
Lantern Court	25	Brubacker Drive and dead end
Laurel Mountain Lane	25	Tuscarora Trail and dead end
Lee Court	25	Longstreet Drive and dead end
Long View	25	Pine Creek Drive and Crest View




 
196:6
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-8
 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
 
§ 196-8
 



Name of Street	Speed Limit
(mph)	

Location
Longs Gap Road	35	Spring Road and 0.914 feet north of
		Enola Road
Longstreet Drive	25	Wertz Run Road and Pickett Drive
Luke Lane	25	West Louther Street and West Louther
		Street
Macarthur Drive	25	Post Road and Patton Drive
Manada Creek Circle	25	Pine Creek Drive and Pine Creek
		Drive
Maple Avenue	25	Woodland Avenue and dead end
Maplewood Avenue	25	Marion Avenue and Pennsylvania
		Avenue
Marbeth Avenue	25	Harriet Street and Rebecca Avenue
Marion Avenue	25	Spring Road and dead end
Mark Circle	25	Hope Terrace and dead end
Mary Lane	25	Virginia Avenue and dead end
Meade Drive	25	Longstreet Drive and Picket Drive
Meadow Brook Road	35	Newville Road and Conodoguinet Avenue
Meadow View Drive	25	Faith Circle and Spring Road
Meeting House Spring Road	25	Newville Road and West North Street
Milwick Road	40	Waggoners Gap Road and Lower
		Frankford  Townsh.ip  line
Moongale Drive	25	Candlelight Drive and Dorwood Drive
Moss Lane	25	Patriot Road and American Avenue
Mountain View	25	Cumberland Drive and Mary Lane
Municipal Drive	25	Spring Road and Clearwater Drive
North Creek Avenue	25	Douglas Drive and Circle Road
North Middleton Road	35	Waggoners Gap Road and Cranes Gap
		Road
North White Deer Way	25	Blue Ridge Boulevard and dead end
Oak Lane	25	Faith Circle and Ridge Avenue
Old Coach Lane	25	Country Side Drive and Farmhouse
		Lane
Old Gap Road	35	Waggoners Gap Road and Waggoners Gap Road
Old Longs Gap Road	35	Longs Gap Road and Longs Gap Road
Park Avenue	25	Waggoners Gap Road and dead end
Parker Spring Avenue	25	Post Road and Claremount Road


 
196:7
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-8
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE
 
§ 196-8
 



Name of Street	Speed Limit (mph)	

Location
Partridge Circle	25	Route 34-Spring Road to the end
Passage Lane	25	Waggoners Gap Road and American
		Avenue
Patriot Road	25	Family Drive and dead end
Pearl Drive	25	Esther Drive and Mary Lane
Pennsylvania Avenue	25	Spring Road and dead end
Pheasant Drive North	25	Wagner Street to cul-de-sac
Pheasant Drive South	25	Pheasant Drive North to Sterretts Gap
		Avenue
Pickett Drive	25	Longstreet Drive and dead end
Pine Creek Drive	25	Entire length, Creek Road and Pine Creek Drive
Pine Hill Road	40	Longs Gap Road and Waggoners Gap
Road
Pleasant Hall Road	40	Waggoner s Gap Road and Waggoners Gap Road
Post Road	35	Harrisburg Pike and Claremont Road
Quail Drive	25	Phea sant Drive and West Hillcrest
		Drive
Rachel Drive	25	Chester Street and Virginia Avenue
Rasp Drive	25	East Hillcrest Drive and Suncrest Drive
Rebecca Avenue	25	Cavalry Road and dead end
Rega l View	25	Summi t View Drive and Skyline View
Rellim Street	25	Darr Avenue and Reservoir Drive
Reservoir Drive	25	Wagner Street and Crain Drive
Ridge Avenue	25	Midd lesex Township line and dead end
R idge View	25	West View and Long View
Ridgeview Drive	25	Basin Hill Boulevard and East Hillcrest
		Drive
Roaring Creek Court	25	Pine Creek Drive and cul-de-sac
Robert Lane	25	Mary Lane and dead end
Rosewood Court	25	Old Coach Lane and dead end
Shatto Drive	25	Waggoners Gap Road and cul-de-sac
Sheraton Drive	25	Candlelight Drive and Dorwood Drive
Sherman Avenue	25	Macarthur Drive and West Point Drive
Shillington Lane	25	West North Street and West North
		Street
Skyline View	25	Cranes Gap Road and dead end



 
196:8
 

01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 196-8
 
VEIDCLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-8
 



Name of Street	Speed Limit (mph)	

Location
Smokehouse Road	25	Brubacker Drive and American
		Avenue
Somerset Way	25	Andover Place and Bennington Way
South Mountain Drive	25	Blue Mountain Boulevard a nd
		Appalachian Avenue
Spur Road	35	Enola Road and Waggoners Gap Road
Sterretts Gap Avenue	25	Spring Road and Lake View Drive
Stine Avenue	25	Longs Gap Road and Kaseeta Drive
Stone Church Road	40	Waggoners Gap Road and Lower Frankford Township line
Stony Creek Court	25	P ine Creek Drive and cul-de-sac
Strawberry Lane	25	Mountainview and Cumberland Drive
Stream Drive	25	Family Drive and Patriot Road
Summit View	25	Imperia l Court and Skyline View
Suncrest Drive	25	Basin Hill Boulevard and dead end
Sunset Drive	25	Shatto Drive and Union Hall Road
Susan Lane	25	Douglas Drive and Mountain View
Terrace View	25	West View and Long View
Tree View	25	Cranes Gap Road and Glenn View
Tuscarora Trail	25	Blue Ridge Bou levard and dead end
Tussey Trail	25	Appalachia n Avenue and dead end
Union Hall Road	35	Waggoners Gap Road and McClures
		Gap Road
Valley View Drive	25	Spring Road and dead end
Vernon Street	25	Spring Road and Fry Loop Avenue
Virginia Avenue	25	Mary Lane and Dou glas Drive
Wagner Drive	40	Cranes Gap Road and Middlesex Township line
Wagner Street	25	Spring Road and Reservoir Drive
Wa lton Avenue	25	West Hillcrest Drive and dead end
Wayne Avenue	25	Cavalry Road and Marbeth Avenue
Werts Run Road	35	Spring Road and Cranes Gap Road
West Hillcrest Drive	25	Spring Road and Douglas Drive
West Louther Street	25	Carl isle Borough line and Meeting
		House Spring Road
West Middlesex Drive	35	Spring Road and Middlesex Township
		line




196:9	01-01-20  14
 
§ 196-8	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-10



Name of Street	Speed Limit
(mph)	

Location
West Mulberry Hill Road	25	Middlesex Township Line and dead
		end
West North Street	25	Carlisle Borough line and Shillington
Lane
West View	25	Long View and cul-de-sac
West Point Drive	25	Post Road to Middlesex Line
White Deer Way	25	Blue Ridge Boulevard and dead end
Willow Grove Road	40	Easy Road and McClures Gap Road
Wi llow Road	25	Cavalry Road and Suncrest Drive
Wood Avenue	25	Pennsylvania Aven ue and Valley View
		Drive
Woodland Avenue	25	Longs Gap Road and dead end
Wynnwood Avenue	25	Spring Road and Maplewood Avenue
Yorwick Road	40	Longs Gap Road and Enola Road

B.	Any person who violates any provlSlon of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person exceeding the maximum  speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.


§ 196-9. Traffic signals at certain intersections.

At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or if heretofore erected
are hereby ratified), and traffic at such intersections shall be directed by such signals:

A.    Cavalry Road and Spring Road.

B.	Claremont Road and rear gate of Army War College.

C.	Cava lry Road and Harrisburg Pike.


§ 196-10. Left and/or right turns prohibited at certain intersections.

It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or tractor traveling upon the first-named highway at any of the following intersection s, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn at the intersection as hereby indicated:

	Direction of	Prohibited	
Name of Street	Travel	Turn	At Intersection of
Crain Drive  [Repealed
3-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1)			
Safeway parking lot	West	Left	Sterretts Gap Avenue



196:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-11                                       VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC                                     § 196- 11

§ 196-11. Through highways established.

The following highways are hereby established as through  highways,  and  the  operator  of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such highway at any  intersection  thereof (except for such intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall come to a full stop,  within  a  reasonable  distance, before entering  any  such throu gh highway:

 
Name of Street
Airport Drive
Basin Hill Boulevard Bellaire  Avenue Candlelight Drive Cavalry Road
Cedar View Chester Street Claremont Road

Clearview Drive Cranes Gap Road Cumberland  Drive Darr Avenue Dorwood  Drive Douglas Drive Easy Road

Enola Road Esther Drive Faith  Circle

Fern Avenue
Fry Loop Avenue Gobin Street
Harriet Avenue
Harrisburg Pike


Hope Terrace Imperial Court Lakeview Drive Longs Gap Road Longstreet Drive
 
Limits
Spring Road and dead end
Cavalry Road and East Hillcrest Drive Longs Gap Road and Maple Avenue Sunset Drive and Dorwood Drive Harrisburg Pike and Spring Road Regal View and cul-de-sac
Reservoir Drive and Mary Lane
Carlisle Borough line and Middlesex Township
line
Brookwood Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue Spring Road and Enola Road
Reservoir Drive and Douglas Drive Lakeview Drive and Reservoir Drive Sunset Drive and Harvest Drive Chester Street and Cumberland Drive
Waggoners Gap Road and Lower Frankford
Township line
Waggoners Gap Road and Spring Road
Susan Lane and Chester Street
Spring Road and Hope Terrace (north
intersection)
Spring Road a nd dead end
Wagner Street, Vernon Street and Chester Street Carlisle Borough line and Cavalry Road
Cavalry Road and dead end
Carlisle Borough line and Middlesex Township
line
Faith Circle at each end of Hope Terrace Cranes Gap Road and cul-de-sac
Spring Road and Reservoir Drive Spring Road and Enola Road Ridge Avenue and Pickett Drive
 



196:11	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-11

Name of Street Longstreet Drive Maple Avenue Maplewood Avenue Mar beth Avenue Marion Avenue Mary Lane McClures Gap Road

Meadowbrook Road Meetinghouse Spring Road Newville Road

North Middleton Road


Penn sylvania Avenue
Pine Creek Drive


Pine Creek Drive



Pleasant Hall Road


Rebecca Avenue Regal View Reservoir Drive Ridge Avenue Shatto Drive Skyline View Spring Road

Sterretts Gap Avenue Summit View Suncrest Drive Sunset Drive
Trindle Road


Union Hall Road
Valley View Drive
Waggoners Gap Road
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-11

Limits
Wertz Run Road and Ridge Avenue Woodland Avenue and dead end
Marion Avenue and Pennsylvan ia Avenue Rebecca Avenue and Harriet Avenue Spring Road and dead end
Pearl Drive and Virginia Avenue
Newville Road and Lower Frankford Township
line
Newville Road and Conodoguinet Avenue
Newvi lle Road and dead end
Carlisle Borough line and West Pennsboro Township line
Waggoner s Gap Road and Longs Gap Road; Longs Gap Road and Cranes Gap Road
Spring Road and dead end
Pine Creek Drive  (centra l  intersection)  and Pine Creek  Drive  (northern  intersection)
Pine Creek Drive (southern Intersection) and Pine Creek Drive (central Intersection) east and west direction
Waggoners Gap Road, Pine Hill Road and
Stone Church Road
Cavalry Road and dead end Skyline View and Summit View Wagner Street and Crain Drive
Farview Avenue and Long street Drive
Waggoners Gap Road and dead end Cranes Gap Road and Long View
Carlisle Borough line and Middlesex Township
line
Spring Road and Wagner Street Imperial Court and Skyline View Basin Hill Boulevard and dead end Shatto Drive and Union Hall Road
Carlisle Borough line and Middlesex Township line
Waggoners Gap Road and McClures Gap road Spring Road and Wood Avenue
Carlisle Borough line and Perry County line




196:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-L 1

Name of Street Wagner Drive Wagner Street Walton Avenue
West Hillcrest Drive
West Louther Street
 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-12

Limits
Cranes Gap Road and Middlesex Township line Spring Road and Sterretts Gap Avenue
West Hillcrest Drive and dead end
Spring Road and Sterretts Gap Avenue
Orange Street and Meetinghouse Spring Road
 


§ 196-12. Stop intersections established.

A.	Stop intersections . The following intersections (in addition to highways intersecting with the through highwa ys established by § 196-9 of this chapter) are hereby established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named highway upon the first-named highway, in the direction or directions hereby  indicated. All vehicles and  tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway , in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection:


Stop Sign On Aeronca Avenue Aeronca Avenue Airport Drive Alder Road
Allen Road	At Intersection of
Airport Drive Fern Avenue Spring Road
Meadowbrook Road Newville Road	Direction of Travel
North South West East
North
Amy Drive	Cranes Gap Road	West
Augusta Place	Walton Avenue	West
Ba sin Hill Boulevard	Cavalry Road	South
Ba sin Hill Boulevard	Hillcrest Drive	North
Basin Hill Boulevard (T-510)	Ridgeview Drive (T-606)	North
Basin Hill Boulevard (T-510)	Ridgeview Drive (T-606)	South
Bellair e Avenue	Longs Gap Road	West
Bellaire Avenue	Maple Avenue	North
Bellaire Park Road	Longs Gap Road	East
Bradley Drive	West Hillcrest Drive	North
Brookwood Drive	Clearview Drive	East
Brookwood Drive	Wood Drive	West
Buckingham Place	Walton Avenue	West
Cactus Hill Road	Longs Gap Road	East
Candlelight Drive	Dorwood Drive	West
Candlelight Drive	Sunset Drive	North
Cavalry Street	Cavalry Road	East


 
196:13
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On Cave Hill Drive Cedar View	At Intersection of
K Street Regal View	Direction of Travel
South North
Center Street	West Louther Street	South
Center Street	West North Street	North and south
Cessna Avenue	Airport Drive	North
Cessna Avenue	Fern Avenue	South
Cessna Street	Fern Avenue	North
Channell Drive	Longs Gap Road	East
Charles Street	Cavalry Street	North
Charles Street	Gobin Street	South
Charles Street	Hamilton Street	North
Charles Street	Harrisburg  Pike	South
Chester Street	Fry Loop Avenue	East
Chester Street	Mary Lane	West
Chester Street	Reservoir Drive	East and west
Chester Street	Sterretts Gap Avenue	East and west
Circle Road	Cumberland Drive	South
Clara Road	Longs Gap Road	West
Claridon Place	Walton Avenue	West
Clear Water Drive	Route 34-Spring Road	West
Clearview Avenue	Bellaire Avenue	South
Clearview Avenue	Maple Avenue	North
Conodoguinet Avenue	Meadowbrook Road	North and south
Coral Drive	Waggoners Gap Road	East
Coral Drive	Coral Drive	East
Cornman Road	Longs Gap Road	West
Cornman Road	North Middleton Road	North
Cottonwood Court		
Cra in Drive	Spring Road	East
Cranes Gap Road	Enola Road	North
Cranes Gap Road	Spring Road	East
Cranes Gap Road	North Middleton/Cranes Gap
Road	South
Cranes Gap Road	Creek Road	South
Creek Road	Cranes Gap Road	East
Creek Road	Longs Gap Road	West
Crestview School Drive	Longs Gap Road	East
Crown View	Long View	West


196:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On Crown View Cumberland Drive	At Intersection of
Ceda r View
Douglas Drive	Direction of Travel
East
West
Cumberland Drive
Curtis Drive	Reservoir  Drive Harvest Drive	East
West
Curtis Drive Curtis Drive Curtis Drive Darr Avenue	Shatto Drive Harvest Drive Shatto Drive Douglas Drive	East West East West
Darr Avenue Darr Avenue Dawn Drive	Lakeview  Drive Reservoir Drive Hidden Noll Road	East
East and west North
Dawn Drive Delhi Drive Dorwood Drive Dorwood  Drive Dorwood Drive Douglas Drive Douglas Drive Douglas Drive Douglas Drive Douglas Drive Downing Street	North View Drive
Echo Road Sunset Drive Harvest Drive Shatto Drive Chester Street
Cumberland Drive Pheasant Drive North Pheasant Drive South West Hillcrest Drive Union Hall Road	South North North
West, south and north
South
North and south North and south North and south North and south South
North
Dyarman Road Dyarman Road
East Hillcrest Drive
East Hillcrest Drive (T-508) East Hillcrest Drive (T-508) East State Hill Road
Easy Road
Echo Road Echo Road Elm Drive	McClures Gap Road Meadowbrook Road Spring Road
Basin Hill Boulevard (T-510) Basin Hill Bou levard (T-510) Longs Gap Road
Waggoners Gap Road
Easy Road
Waggoners Gap Road
Hope Terrace	East West West East West West East West East West
Elm Drive Enola Road Esther Drive Esther Drive Esther Drive Faith Circle	Spring Road
Waggoners Gap Road
Susan Lane Virginia Avenue Chester Street Spring Road	East
East and west
North
South
South and north
East


196:15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On
Fern Avenue	At Intersection of
Spring Road	Direction of Travel
West
Fry Loop Avenue Garden Dri ve George Avenue	Wagner Street Longs Gap Road Airport Drive	South South
North and south
George Avenue Gobin Street
Golf Course Drive
Gordon Drive	Fern Avenue Cavalry Road Downing Street Gordon Drive	South East East South
Gordon Drive
Grant Court
Green Meadow Drive Greystone Road Hamilton Street Harriet Street
Harvest Drive Heather Drive Heishman Gardens Heron Way
Heron Way Heron Way
Hidden Noll Drive
Hill Drive Hope Terrace Hope Terrace Hoy Road Hoy Road
Imperial Court
Jane Lane Jane Lane Jody Lane Kell Drive
Kenwood Drive Kenwood Drive Kingswood  Terrace Kingswood Terrace Lakeview Drive Lakeview Drive Lakeview Drive	North Middleton Road Longstreet Drive Longs Gap Road Trindle Road
Cavalry Road Cavalry Road Candlelight Drive Cranes Gap Road
Sterretts Gap Avenue Partridge Circle Partridge Circle Partridge Circle Cranes Gap Road Longs Gap Road Faith Circle
Faith Circle
Enola Road
North Middleton Road Cranes Gap Road Chester Street
Mary Lane Susan Lane Enola Road
Candlelight Drive Dorwood Drive Faith Circle
Hope Terrace Reservoir Drive Spring Road Darr Avenue	South West East South East West North East West
North and south
North South East East South West North South East North West North South East West South North West East North


196:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12
 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
 
§ 196-12
 

Stop Sign On
Lamplite Drive	At Intersection of
Curtis Drive	Direction of Travel
North
Lamplite Drive	Curtis Drive	North
Lee Court	Longstreet Drive	South
Long View	Pine Creek Drive	West
Long View	Skyline View	North and south
Longs Gap Road	Spring Road	South
Longs Gap Road	Enola Road	North and south
Longstreet Drive	Pickett Drive	West
Longstreet Drive	Ridge Avenue	East and west
Longstreet Drive	Wertz Run Road	South
Lucinda Drive	Easy Road	South
Manada Creek Circle	Pine Creek Drive (eastern intersection)	North
Manada  Creek Circle	Pine Creek Drive (western
intersection)	North
Maplewood  Avenue	Marion Avenue	South
Maplewood Avenue	Pennsylvania  Avenue	North
Marbeth Avenue	Harriet Avenue	South
Marbeth Avenue	Rebecca Avenue	North
Marion Avenue	Spring Road	West
Marion Avenue	Clearview Drive	East
Mark Circle	Hope Terrace	West
Marllyn Drive	Cranes Gap Road	West
Mary Lane	Mountain View	Nort h
McClures Gap Road	Newvi lle Road	South
Meade Drive	Pickett Drive	East
Meade Drive	Longstreet Drive	East
Meade Drive	Ridge Avenue	East and west
Meadow View Drive	Faith Circle	West
Meadow View Drive	Route 34-Spring Road	East
Meadowbrook Road	Conodogu inet Avenue	East
Meadowbrook Road	Newvi l le  Road	South
Meadowview  Drive	Faith Circle	West
Meetinghouse Spring Road	Newville Road	South
Meetinghouse Springs Road
(T-448)	West Louther Street (T-489)	North
Meetinghouse Springs Road
(T-448)	West Louther Street (T-489)	South



 
196: 17
 

01-01-2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE
 
§ 196-12
 

Stop Sign On
Meetinghouse Springs Road	At Intersection of
West North Street (T-507)	Direction of Travel
North
(T-448)		
Meetinghou se Springs Road	West North Street (T-507)	South
(T-448)		
Milwick Road	Waggoners Gap Road	East
Moongale Drive	Cand lelight Drive	East
Moongale Drive	Dorwood Drive	West
Mountain View	Cumberland Drive	North
Municipa l Drive	Clearwater Drive	North
Municipa l Drive	Spring Road	West
NMT Municipal Campus	Clearwa ter Drive	North
NMT Municipal Campus	Spring Road	West
North Creek Avenue	Circle Road	South
North Creek Avenue	Douglas Drive	North
North Middleton Road	Longs Gap Road	East and west
North Middleton Road	Waggoner s Gap Road	West
North View Drive	Cranes Gap Road	East
Oak Lane	Faith Circle	East
Oak Lane	Faith Circle	East
Oak Lane	Ridge Avenue	West
Old Gap Road	Waggoners Gap Road	East and west
Old Longs Gap Road	Longs Gap Road	East and west
Park Avenue	Waggoners Gap Road	West
Park Avenu e z	Conodoguinet Creek	East
Partridge Circle	Partridge Circle	North
Partridge Circle	Spring Road	West
Pearl Drive	Esther Drive	East
Pearl Drive	Mary Lane	West
Penn-Del Conference Complex	Union Hall Road	North
Pennsy lvania  Avenue	Spring Road	West
Pennsylvania Avenue	Clearview Drive	East
Penny Lane	Longs Gap Road	West
Pheasant Drive	Douglas Drive	West
Pheasant Drive	Wagner Street	North
Phea sant Drive North	Douglas Drive	East and west
Pheasant Drive North	Pheasant Drive North	North

2.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


196:18	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 196-12	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On Pheasant Drive South Pheasant Drive South	At Intersection of Sterretts Gap Avenue Douglas Drive	Direction of Travel
East
East and west
Pheasant Drive South	Pheasant Drive North	North
Pickett Drive	Longstreet Drive	South
Pine Creek Drive	Creek Road	South
Pine Creek Drive	Long View	North and south
Pine Creek Drive	Pine Creek Drive (central	East
	intersection)	
Pine Creek Drive	Pine Creek Drive (northern	East
	intersection)	
Pine Creek Drive	Pine Creek Drive (southern
intersection)	North, east and west
Pine Hill Road	Longs Gap Road	East
Pine Hill Road	Pleasant Hall Road	East and west
Pine Hill Road	Waggoners Gap Road	West
Pleasant Hall Road	Waggoners Gap Road	East and west
Post Road	Claremont Road	South
Post Road	Harrisburg Pike	North
Pratt Avenue	North Hanover Street	West
Quail Drive	Pheasant Drive North	North
Quail Drive	Phea sant Drive South	South
Quail Drive	Pheasant Drive North	North
Quail Drive	Pheasant Drive South	South
Rachel Drive	Chester Street	North
Rachel Drive	Virginia Avenue	South
Rasp Drive	East Hillcrest Drive	North
Rasp Drive	Suncrest Drive	South
Rebecca Avenue	Cavalry Road	West
Regal View	Skyline View	North
Regal View	Summit View	East
Rellim Street	Darr Avenue	South
Rellim Street	Reservoir Drive	West
Reservoir Drive	Chester Street	North and south
Reservoir Drive	Darr Avenue	North and south
Reservoir Drive (T-504)	Wagner Street (T-512)	South
Ridge Avenue	Farview Road	North
Ridge Avenue	Longstreet Drive	East and west
Ridge Avenue	Meade Drive	East and west



196:19	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On	At Intersection of	Direction of Travel
Ridge Avenue	Oak Lane	North and south
Ridge View	Long View	East
Ridge View	West  View	West
Ridgeview Drive	Basin Hill Boulevard	West
Ridgeview Drive	East Hillcrest Drive	North
Roaring Creek Court	Pine Creek Drive	East
Robert Lane	Mary Lane	West
Shatio Drive	Waggoners Gap Road	East
Sheraton Drive	Candlelight Drive	East
Sheraton Drive	Dorwood Drive	West
Skyline View	Long View	West
Skyline View	Cranes Gap Road	East
Skyline  View	Regal View	East and west
Sterretts Gap Avenue	Chester Street	North and south
Sterretts Gap Avenue	Lakeview Drive	North
Sterretts Gap Avenue	Spring Road	South
Sterretts Gap Avenu e	Wagner Street	North and south
Stine Avenue	Longs Gap Road	East
Stone Church Road	Pleasant Hall Road	East
Stone Church Road	Waggoners Gap Road	East and west
Stony Creek Court	Pine Creek Drive	West
Strawberry Lane	Cumberland Drive	North
Strawberry Lane	Mountain View	South
Summit View	Imperial Court	South
Summit View Drive	Skyline View	North
Suncrest Drive	Basin Hill Boulevard	West
Sunset Drive	Shatto Drive	South
Sunset Drive	Union Hall Road	North
Susan Lane	Dougla s Drive	East
Susan Lane	Mountain View	West
Terrace View	Long View	East
Terrace View	West View	West
Trayer Lane
Turkey Foot Road	Longs Gap Road Waggoners Gap Road	East
West
Uni-Mart Complex	Fry Loop Avenue	South
Union Hall Road	McClures Gap Road	West
Union Hall Road	Waggoners Gap Road	East
Valley View Drive	Spring Road	West


196:20	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-12

Stop Sign On Vernon Street Vernon Street	At Intersection of Fry Loop Avenue Spring Road	Direction of Travel
West
East
Virginia Avenue	Mary Lane	West
Virginia Avenue	Dougla s Drive	East
Wagner Drive	Cranes Gap Road	West
Wagner Street	Spring Road	East
Wagner Street	Sterretts Gap Avenue	East and west
Wagner Street (T-512)	Reservoir Drive (T-504)	West
Walton Avenue	West Hillcrest Drive	South
Watts Lane	McClures Gap Road	North
Wayne Avenue	Cavalry Road	West
Wayne Avenue	Marbeth Avenue	East
Werts Run Road	Cranes Gap Road	West
Wert s Run Road	Spring Road	East
West Hillcrest Drive	Spring Road	East
West Hillcrest Drive	Sterretts Gap Avenue	East and west
West Hillcrest Drive	Douglas Drive	West
West Hillcrest Drive	Sterretts Gap Avenue	East
West Louther Street	Meetinghouse Spring Road	West
West Middlesex Road	Spring Road	West
West Mulberry Hill Road	Bayberry Road	East
West North Street	Center Street	East and west
West North Street	Meetingho use Spring Road	West
West Slate Hill Road	Longs Gap Road	East
Wilbett Drive	Easy Road	South
Willow Grove Road	Easy Road	East
Willow Grove Road Willow Road	McClures Gap Road
Cavalry Road	East and west West
Willow Road	Suncrest Drive	North
Winchester Drive	Crain Drive	North
Wood Avenue	Pennsylvania Avenue	South
Wood Avenue	Valleyview Drive	North
Woodland Avenue	Longs Gap Avenue	West
Woodland Avenue	Maple Avenu e	West
Wy1U1wood  Avenue	Maplewood Avenue	East
WYJU1wood Avenue	Spring Road	West
Yorwick Road	Enola Road	North
Yorwick Road	Longs Gap Road	West


196:21	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-12

B.	Three-way  stop  intersections  established.  The  following  intersections  are  hereby esta blished as three-way stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby  confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching on the   second-named highway or highways upon the first-named highway, in the direction or  directions hereby indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon  the first-named highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall  stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code, and shall  not  proceed   into   or across the intersect ion until he or she has followed all applicable requirements of that  section of the law.


Stop Highway
Basin Hill Boulevard Basin Hill Boulevard Ba sin Hill Boulevard Conodoguinet Avenue Conodog uinet Avenue Cumberland Drive Dorwood Dri ve Dougla s Drive Douglas Drive
Dougla s Drive
Douglas Drive	Through Highway East Hillcrest Drive Ridgeview Drive Ridgeview Drive Meadowbrook Road Meadowbrook Road Mountain View Harvest Drive Mountain View Virginia Avenue Virginia Avenue
Mounta in View Drive or	Direction of Travel
North North South East West West
North and south
South North South South
	Mary Lane	
East Hillcrest Drive	Basin Hill Boulevard	East
East Hillcrest Drive	Basin Hill Boulevard	West
Harvest Drive	Dorwood Drive	West
Long View	Pine Creek Drive	West
Long View	Skyline View	North and south
Longstreet Drive	Pickett Drive	West
Mary Lane	Douglas Drive or Mountain View Drive	North
Meade Drive	Pickett Drive	East
Meadowbrook Road	Conodoguinet Avenue	North
Meet ing House Spring Road	West Louther Street	North
Meeting House Spring Road	West Louther Street	South
Meeting House Spring Road	West North Street	North
Meeti ng House Spring Road	West North Street	South
Mou ntain View	Cumberland Drive	Nort h
Mountain View Drive	Douglas Drive or Mary Lane	South
Pheasant Dr ive North	Wagner Street	No1th



196:22	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-12

Stop Highway
Pickett Drive	Through Highway
Longstreet Drive	Direction of Travel
South
Pickett Drive	Meade Drive	South
Pine Creek Drive	Long View	North and south
Pine Creek Drive	Pine Creek Drive (southern
intersection)	East and west
Pine Creek Drive	Pine Creek Drive (southern
intersection)	North
Reservoir Drive	Wagner Street	South
Ridgeview  Drive	Basin Hill Boulevard	West
Skyline V iew	Long View	West
Virginia Avenue	Douglas Drive	East
Wagner Street	Reservoir Drive	West
West Louther Street	Meeting Hou se Spring Road	West
West North Street	Meeting Hou se Spring Road	West

C.	Four-way  stop  intersections  established.  The  following  intersections  are  hereby established as four-way stop  intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named highway upon the first-named highway, in the direction or directions hereby   indicated. All vehicles and tractors approachin g such intersection upon the first-named  highway,  in the direction or directions hereby indicated  in each case,  shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection:


Stop Highway Bradley Drive Chester Street	Through Highway West Hillcrest Reservoir Drive	Direction of Travel
North
East and west
Chester Street Darr Avenue Dougla s Drive Dou glas Drive Douglas Drive Longstreet Drive Meade  Drive	Sterretts Gap Avenue
Reservoir Drive
Pheasant Drive North Pheasa nt Drive South West Hillcrest
Ridge Avenue R idge Avenue	East and west East and west North and south North and south South
North and south
North and south
Pheasant Drive Nort h Pheasant Drive South Reservoir Drive Reservoir Drive Ridge Avenue	Douglas Drive Douglas Drive Chester  Street Darr Avenue Longstreet  Drive	East and west East and west Nort h and south Nort h and south East and west
Ridge Avenue	Meade Drive	East and west


196:23	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 196-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-15

Stop Highway	Through Highway	Direction of Travel
Sterrett s Gap Avenue Sterrett s Gap Avenue Wagner Street
West Hillcrest	Chester Street Wagner Street Sterretts Gap Avenue Douglas Drive	North and south North and south East and west East and west

D.	Penalty for viola tion. Any person who violates any provisions of these subsections shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs in accordance with the mandates  of the Vehicle Code, Act of June  17,  1976, P.L.  162, No.  81 (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§  101 et  seq.),  or  any fine and  cost  authorized  by future amendment  or amendments thereto.


§ 196-13. Unlawful  to  operate  motor  vehicles  or  tractors  on  highways  closed  for
construction or repair.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon any highway in the Township that is under construction, resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to vehicu lar traffic. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for one day for each $10 of such fine and costs.


§ 196-14. Play highways authorized.

A.	The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate as play  highways,  whenever  he sha 11 deem such action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed by him, any portion of any highway in the Township whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the police.

B.	No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except in case of emergency, with special permission of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play highway of all persons usin g such highway for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for one day for each $10 of such fine and costs.


ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations

§ 196-15. Parking without lights authorized .

The boundary  limits of the Township of North Middleton are hereby established as a zone in which motor  vehicles  may remain standing without  lights in urban areas only, and all other


196:24	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 196-15	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-17

than urban  highways  within  such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways  where motor vehicles may not remain standing without lights.


§ 196-16. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.

Wherever  a  space  shall  be  marked  off  on  any  highway  for  the parking  of  an individual
vehicle, every vehic le there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding such space.


§ 196-17. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.

Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:

 
Street
Brookwood Drive
Cave Hill Drive
 
Side Both Both
 
Location


From the Carlisle Borough line to the old entrance of the Pennsylvania Turnpike
 
Charles Street	Both
 
Between Harri sburg Pike and Hamilton Street
 
Charles Street  [Added 3-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-2 3 )
 
West
 
From Gobin Drive to Calvary Street
 
Clara Road
 
Cartway only  From the intersection of Clara Road
and Longs Gap Road to the cul-de-sac
 
Crain Drive	Both


Crain Drive	Both


Faith Circle	Both


Fry Loop Avenue 4	West



Fry Loop Avenue	East
 
Between Reservoir Drive and PA Route 34
Between PA Route 34 and Reservoir
Drive
From 50 feet north and south of the
intersection of Faith Hope Terrace From a point 50 feet north of Vernon
Street to a point 50 feet south of
Vernon Street
From the intersection of Fry Loop Avenue and Chester Street north 50 feet on the east side of Fry Loop Avenue; from the intersection of Fry Loop Avenue and Chester Street south 50 feet on the east side of Fry Loop Avenue
 





3.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).

4.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. l , General Provisions, Art. II).


196:25	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-17	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-17

Street
Garden Drive	Side
Both	Location
From the Intersection of Garden Drive
		and Longs Gap Road North 150 feet
		along Garden Drive
Greystone Road	Both	Entering from the east entrance of the Trindle Road (PA Route 641),
		beginning at a point 265 feet north of
		PA Route 641 and continuing for a
		distance of 175 feet along Greystone
		Road
Greystone Road	Both	Entering from the west entrance of the
Trindle Road (PA Route 64l ),
		beginning at a point 300 feet north of
		PA Route 641 and continuing for a
		distance of 120 feet along Greystone
		Road
Longs Gap Road	Both	Between Green Meadow Drive and Crestview School entrance
Longs Gap Road	Both	From Spring Road to the Conodoguinet
Creek Bridge
Longs Gap Road	Both	From north of Cla re Road to the end of
Longs Gap Road Extended
Longs Gap Road	Both	Between Creek Road and Cactus Hill
		Road
Marlon Avenue	Both	Between PA Route 34 and the eastern
		terminu s thereof
Meetinghous Spring Road	Both	Between Newville Road north and dead
		end
Park Avenue	Both	Between boat dock and a point 160 feet
		west thereof
Rebecca Avenue	Both	Between Cavalry Road and the eastern
		terminu s thereof
Rellim Street	Both	From Darr Avenue for a distance of
		500 feet
Spring Road (Route PA. 34)	Both	From the Carlisle Borough line to
		Calvary Road
Sterretts Gap Avenue	Both	Wagner Street and Spring Road
Suncrest Drive	Both	From the intersection of Basin Hill
		Boulevard and Cavalry Road east feet
		along Suncrest Dr ive
Wayne Avenue	Both	North from Calvary Road to Marbeth
Avenue




 
196:26
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-17	VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC	§ 196-19

 
Street
West Louther Street
 
Side
South
 
Location
Between Meetinghouse Spring Road
and a point 150 feet east thereof
 


§ 196-18. (Reserved)


§ 196-19. Creating no parking  regulations  at certain times in certain locations .

Parking  shall  be  prohibited   in  the  following  locations  during  the  following  times,  from
December 1 to March  15:

 
Name of Street Airport Drive Andover Place Augusta Place Buckingham  Place Cave Hill Drive Cedar View Comt Cessna Street
Clara Road Clarindon Place Clearview Drive Clearwater Drive
Codorus Creek Court Conodogu inet Avenue Cottonwood Court Coventry Court Cumberland  Drive Darby Court
Downing Street
East Hillcrest Drive East Louther Street Fairview Street Frederick Court Garden Drive George Avenue Glenn View Court Golf  Course Drive Grant Court
 
Limits
Cessna Street to dead end Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac
Both sides, including Cul-de-sac Dead end west, both sides, 150 feet Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac
Rasp Drive and dead end
Dead end west, both sides, I00 feet Dead end east, both sides, 150 feet Cul-de-sac
Dead end west, both sides, 100 feet Dead end south, both sides, 150 feet Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac




196:27	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 196-19	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-20

 
Name of Street
Greystone Road




Greystone Road




Harriet Street
Heishman  Garden Drive Imperial Court
Jody Lane Kittanning Court Lamplite Drive Lantern Court Lee Court
Luarel Mountain Lane
Maple Avenue
Mark Circle
North White Deer Way Old Longs Gap Road Pheasant  Drive North Pickett Drive
Rebecca Street Ridge Avenue
Roaring Creek Court
Robert Lane Shatto Drive Walton Avenue
West Mullberry Hill Road
West View
Whit e Deer Way Willow Road Woodlawn Avenue
 
Limits
Entering from the east entrance of Trindle Road (PA Route 641), beginning at a point 266 feet north of Trindle Road and continuing for a distance of 175 feet along both sides of Greystone Road
Entering from the west entrance of Trindle Road (PA Route 641), beginning at a point 300 feet north of Trindle Road and continuing for a distance of 120 feet along both sides of Greystone Road
Marbeth Avenue and dead end Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac
Bellaire Avenue and dead end Cul-de-sac
Cul-de-sac
Longs Gap Road south and dead end Cul-de-sac on side adjacent to island Longstreet Drive and dead end Marbeth Avenue and dead end
Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac
Maple Avenue and dead end
 

§ 196-20. Parking  of trucks,  buses,  recreational  vehicles  and certain other vehicles
prohibited on all Township roads or rights-of-way thereof.

It shall be unlawfu l  for any person  to park,  or to allow to remain parked, on any Township
road  or  right-of-w ay thereof,  any  vehicle  other  than  a  passenger  car,  passenger  truck, or



196:28	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-20                                        VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC                                         § 196-23

motorcycle for a period exceeding 72 hours. For the purpose of this section, passenger cars and passenger trucks shall be 10,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight.


§ 196-21. Violations  and penalties. 5

Any person who violates  any provision of this Article III shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay the fines and penalties set forth in the appropriate section  of  the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), plus costs. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Township to report all violations of any provision of this Article III, indicating in each case the following: the section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this Article III. The notice shall also contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will repo1t to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $15 within 48 hours after the time of the notice, the sa me will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.


ARTICLE IV
Vehicle Weight Limits

§ 196-22. Title.

This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Nort h Middleton Township Vehicle Weight Limit Ordinance."


§ 196-23. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and bridges.

On the following streets or parts of streets and bridges, pursuant to the authority granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a),  it  shall  be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that street or part of street and bridge, as the case may be:



Name of Street or Bridge	Max. Gross Weight (pounds)	

Location
Calvary Street (T-719)	36,000	Entire length
Charles Street North (T-718)	36,000	Ent ire length
Charles Street South (T-617)	36,000	Entire length
Dyarman Road (T-483)	8,000	Entire length
Gobin Street (T-720)	36,000	Entire length
Hamilton Street (T-479)	36,000	Entire length

S.   Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I, General Provisions, Art. II).


196:29	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-23
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 196-27
 

 


Name of Street or Bridge Harriet Street (T-469) Marbeth Avenue (T-490)
Post Road (T-710) and Bridge Rebecca Street (T-484)
Wayne Avenue (T-587)
West Middlesex Drive (T-499)
 
Max. Gross Weight
(pounds)	Location
36,000	Entire length
36,000	Entire length
30,000	Entire length
36,000	Entire length
36,000	Entire length
36,000	Entire length
 


§ 196-24. Violations and penalties.

Any person violating any provisions of § 196-23 is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except that any person convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the posted weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight and the costs of prosecution , all matters to be prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g)(l) of the Vehicle Code, as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(l), along with futw·e amendments thereto.


ARTICLE  V
Truck Traffic Regulations [Added 3-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3)

§ 196-25. Short title.

This article shall be known as the "Meadowbrook Road Truck Length Traffic Regulation Ordinance."


§ 196-26. Defmitions  and interpretations.

A.	Words and phrases , when used in this article, except where otherwise specifically provided, sha ll have the meanings ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17, 1976, P .L. 162, No. 8) as amended, except that in this article the word "street" or "road" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as described in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.

B.	In this  article, the singular  shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and masculine shall include the feminine.


§ 196-27. Continuation of prior regulations.

The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances in force prior to the adoption of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done  or  liability  incurred ,  nor  shall  they  affect  any  suit  or  prosecution  pending  or  to  be



196:30	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 196-27                                         VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC                                         § 196-31

instituted  to enforce any right  or penalty or to punish  any offense under such ordinances or
regulations as aforesaid.


§ 196-28. Temporar y and emergency suspensions.

The Township Supervisors or Chief of Police shall have the power to temporarily suspend this article in the time of emergency.


§ 196-29. Regulation of length of vehicles utilizing Meadowbrook Road; violations and penalties.

A.	It shall be unlawful for any truck traffic utilized for hauling, transporting, delivery or carrying of commercial goods which exceeds 30 feet in length to utilize Meadowbrook Road between Newville Road and Distribution Drive within North Middleton Township, Cumberland County, Pennsylva nia, excepting only local deliveries for businesses located along and having vehicular access only from Meadowbrook Road.

B.    Any person who violates this provision  of this article shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $200 together with costs of court and costs of prosecution.


§ 196-30. Signage.

North Middleton Township shall, upon the passage of this article and prior to enforcement, ensure that proper signage is placed to give proper notification to all vehicular traffic of this size/ length limitation on Meadowbrook Road.


§ 196-31. Authority of police officers.

Police officers of the Townsh ip of North Middleton shall have the authority to take all necessary measures to enforce this article in accordance  wit h  North  Middleton  Township Code and the Pennsylva nia Vehicle Code.























196:31	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
ZONING



204 Attac hment 1

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-13B
Area and Design Requirements Agricultural Zone (AG)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Froltt Setback (feet)	Minim um Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All pennitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
Residential2
All pennitt ed uses	43,560 sq. ft.	l50 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Nonresidentiai2
All pennitted uses	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	35%	35	151	35	35









204 Attachment 1:1	01-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings	
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Accessory
Residential accessory
bu ilding/structure other than specified  elsewhere herein  this chapter,
including Articles Ill and IV	NIA	NIA	Included in above if on a permanent foundation	Not permitted to be located between the principal
building and the street right-of-way 3	20	10	25

NIA -Not applicable
1  Twenty-five feet when abu tting property with Residential Zones (R- 1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2	Additional agricultural setbacks. On any separate nonagri cultural parcel, no shrub shall be planted, and no accessory stmctures or fences shall be placed within 10 feet of any land used for agricultural purposes. Similarly, no tree shall be planted within 30 feet of any land used for agricultura l
purposes.
3	If the principa l stru cture is set back greater than 50 feet from the street line, the minim um requ ired front setback for an accessory bu ilding/structure is 50 feet.


















204 Attachment 1:2	01 - 01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Attachment 2
Township of North Middleton Table 204-14B
Area and Design Requirements Rural Resource Zone (RR)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All pennitted uses	IO acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
Residential 2
All permitted uses	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ I 20 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Nonresidential2
All permitted uses	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (buildin g setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	25%	35	151	35	35









204 Attachment 2: l	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE










Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Accessory2
Residential accessory building/ structure other than specified elsewhere herein  this chapter, including  Articles  IIIand IV	NIA	NIA	Included in above if on a permanent foundation	Not permitted to be located between the principal building and the street
right-of-w ay3	20	10	25

NIA -Not applicable
1  Twenty-five feet when abutting property with Residential Zones (R-1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2	Additiona l agricultural  setbacks. On  any separate  nonagricu ltural  parcel, no shrub  shall  be  planted , and  no accessory  structures or fences  shall  be placed  within  10 feet of any land used for agricultural purposes. Similarly, no tree shall be planted within 30 feet of any land used for agricultu ral
purposes.
3	If the principal structure is set back greater than 50 feet from the street line, the minimum required  front setback for an accessory buildin g/structure is
50 feet.


















204 Attachment 2:2	01-01-2014
 
ZON ING



204 Attachment 3

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-ISB
Area and Design Requirements
Low/Medium Density Residential Zone (R-1)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum
Required
.Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All permitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
						
Residential
No publi c water/no publi c sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Public water/no publ ic
sewer	32,000 sq. ft.	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	15	35	35
No public water/public
sewer	20,000 sq. ft.	100 (bu ilding setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	10	35	35
Public water/pub lic sewer	15,000 sq. ft.	80 (build ing setback line)/ 70 (frontage)	35%	35	10	35	35



204 Attachment 3: 1	01-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE











Nonresidential
















Accessory
Accessory building/	NIA	NIA	Included in	Not permitted	5 (equal to or	5 (equal to or	20
structure other than			above if on a	to be located	under	under	
specified elsewhere herein			pemrnnent	between the	200 sq. ft.)/	200 sq. ft.)/	
this chapter including			foundation	principal	10 (greater	10 (greater	
articles 3 and 4				building and	than	than	
				the street	200 sq. ft.)	200 sq. ft)	
				right-of-way		
						

NIA -Not Applicable
1   Twenty-five feet when abutting property with Residential Zones (R- 1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.






204 Attachment 3:2	01-01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Attac hment 4

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-16B
Area and Design Requirements
Medium-/High-Density  Residential Zone (R-2)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All pennitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
Residential
Multifamily Dwellings/Apartments
No publi c water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not pennitted
No public water/pub lic
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	See Article IV of this chapter







204 Attachment 4: 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	·	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Single-Family Attached
No public wa ter/no public sewer	Not permi tted
Public wa ter/no public
sewer	Not pennirted
No public water/public sewer	Not perm itted
Public water/public sewer	See Article IV of this chapter
Single-Family Detached
No public wa ter/no public sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Public water/no public sewer	32,000 sq. ft.	100 (bu ilding setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	15	35	35
No public water/pu b lic sewer	20,000 sq. ft.	100 (bu ilding setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	10	35	35
Public wa ter/public sewer	10,000 sq. ft.	80 (building setback line)/ 70 (frontage)	35%	35	10	35	35








204 Att achment 4:2	01-01-2014
 
ZONING









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Single-Family Semidetached
No public water/no publi c
sewer	Not pennitted
	
Public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
No public water/public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	5,000 sq. ft.	40 (building setback line)/ 40 (frontage)	50%	35	0
(attached)/ IO
(end unit)	35	35
Two-Family
No publi c water/no public sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no publi c sewer	Not pe1mitted
No public water/public
sewer	Not permitt ed
Public water	/public sewer	5,000 sq. ft.	40 (building setback line)/ 40 (frontage)	50%	35	10	35	35









204 Attachment 4:3	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	
Minimum Required Lot Area Per
Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Nonresidential
No public water/no public sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	151	35	35
Public water/no public
sewer	32,000 sq. ft.	l 00 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	151	35	35
No public water/public
sewer	20,000 sq. ft.	l 00 (buildin g setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	101	35	35
Public water/public sewer	10,000 sq. ft.	80 (building setback line)/ 70 (frontage)	35%	35	101	35	35
Accessory
Residential  accessory building/structure  other than specified elsewhere herein this chapter, including Articles III and IV	NIA	NIA	Included in above if on a permanent foundation	Not permitted to be located between the principal building and the street right-of-way	52	5	20

NIA -Not Applicable
1    Twenty-five feet when abutting property with Residential Zones (R-1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2  The minimum required side setback for residential accessory/bui lding structures on single-family attached dwellings is two feet.





204 Attachment 4:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
ZONING



204 A ttachment 5
Township of North Middleton Table 204-17B
Area and Design Requirements
Village Mixed-Use Zone (VMU)








Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimtun Required Front Setback2 (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Bnilding Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All permitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
Residential
Multifamily Dwellings/Apartments
No pub lic water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
No public wa ter/public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	See Article IV of this chapter
Single-Family Attached
No public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted



204 Attachment 5: 1	01-01  -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE










Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback2 (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum
							Permitted Building Height (feet)
Public water/no public sewer	Not permitted
No public water/public sewer	Not permi tted
Public water/public sewer	See Articl e IV of this chapter
Single-Family Detach ed
No public water/no public
sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Public water/no publ ic sewer	32,000 sq. ft.	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	15	35	35
No public water/public sewer	20,000 sq. ft.	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	10	35	35
Public wa ter/public sewer	7,500 sq. ft.	60 (building setback line)/ 50 (frontage)	45%	35	10	35	35
Single-Family Semid etached
No public water/no public sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no public sewer	Not permitted
No public water/public sewer	Not permitted



204 Attachment 5:2	01 - 01 -2014
 
ZONING









Permitted Uses		Lot/Land	Buildings
		

Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback2 (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Public wa ter/public sewer	3,250 sq. ft.	30 (building setback line)/ 30 (frontage)	55%	35	0 (attached)/
10 (end unit)	35	35
Two-Family
No public water/no public
sewer	Not pennitted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
No public water/public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	3,250 sq. ft.	30 (building setback line)/ 30 (frontage)	55%	35	10	35	35
Nonresidential
No public water/no public
sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	151	35	35
Public water/no public
sewer	32,000 sq. ft.	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	151	35	35
No public water/public
sewer	20,000 sq. ft.	I 00 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	101	35	35






204 Attachment 5:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	


Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback2 (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Public water/public sewer	7,500 sq. ft.	60 (building setback line)/ 50 (frontage)	45%	35	101	35	35
Accessory
Residential accessory building/structure other than  specified elsewhere herein  this chapter, including  Articles  IIIand IV	NIA	NIA		Included in above if on a permanent found ation	Not permitted to be located between the principal
building and
the street right-of-way	5	5	20

NIA -Not Appli cable
1  Fifteen feet when abu tting property with Residential Zones (R-1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2    If abutting lots are developed, See § 204-l 7C( 1) of this chapter. Otherwise, use minimum  required front setback in Table 204- I 7B.



















204 Attachment 5:4	01-01 - 2014
 
ZONING



204 Attachment  6

Township of N orth Middleton

Table 204-lSB
Area and Design Requirements
Neighborhood  Commercial Zone (NC)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area per unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All permitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	35
						
Residential
Multifamily Dwellings/Apartments
No public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not perm itted
No public water/public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	See Article IV of this chapter







204 Attachment 6:1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE










Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area per unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Single-Family Attached
No public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not permitted
No public water/public
sewer	Not permitted
Public water/public sewer	See Article IV of this Chapter
Single-Family Detached
No public water/no public
sewer	43,560 square
feet	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	15	35	35
Public water/no public
sewer	32,000 square feet	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	25%	35	15	35	35
No public water/public sewer	20,000 square
feet	100 (building setback line)/ 90 (frontage)	30%	35	IO	35	35
Public wate sewer	r/no publi c	7,500 square
feet	60 (building setback line)/ 50 (frontage)	45%	35	1	0	35	35








204 Attachment 6:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
ZONING









Permitted  Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	


Minimum Required Lot Area per unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Single-Family Semidetached
No public water/no pub lic sewer	Not permitted
Public water/no publi c
sewer	Not perm itted
No public water/public
sewer	Not pennitted
Public water/public sewer	3,250 square
feet	30 (building setback line)/ 30 (frontage)	55%	35	0 (attached)/ 10 (end unit)	35	35
Two-Family
No public water/no public sewer	Not perm itted
Public water/no public
sewer	Not pennitted
No public water/p ublic sewer	Not pennitted
Public water/public sewer	3,250 sq . ft.	30 (buildin g setback line)/ 30 (frontage)	55%	35	10	35	35
							
Nonresidential
No public water/no public sewer	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 120 (frontage)	20%	35	151	35	35




204 Attachment 6:3	01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE



Lot/Land	Buildings






































1   Twenty-five feet when abutting property with Residential Zones (R- 1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.



204 Attachment 6:4	01-01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Attachment  7

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-19B
Area and Design Requirements
Commercial/Light Industrial Zone (C/LI)








Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Buildinr
Height
(feet)
AgricuJtural/Forestry
A ll permitted uses	10 acres
existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	50, provided each structure is set back a distance at least equal to its height from each property line
Nonresidential
All permitted uses	43,560 sq. ft.	80 (building setback line)/ 70 (frontage)	60%	35	101	35	50, provided each structure is set back a distance at least equal to its height from each property
line




204 Attachment 7: I	01 - 01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area Per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each) Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Heighf (feet)
Accessory
Accessory  building/ structure other than specified elsewhere herein this chapter, including Articles III and IV		NIA	NIA	Included in above if on a permanent foundation	Not permitted to be located between the principal building and the street
right-of-wa y	Same as principal
building/structure

NOTES:
1    Forty feet when abutting property with Residential Zones (R-1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2   Fifty feet, provided each structure  is set back  a distance at least equal to its height from each property  line and approved by the Fire Chief of the
company with primary  service area responsibility  for the site and the Township's fire consultant and/or fire consultant engineer, attesting to adequate fire protection.






















204 Attachment 7:2	01-01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Atta chment 8

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-20B
Area and Design Requirements
Indu strial Zone (IND)







Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	
Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each)
Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Agricultural/Forestry
All permitted uses	10 acres existing on the effective date of this chapter	200	10%	50	50	50	65, provided each structure is set ba ck a distance at least equal to its height
from each
property line
Nonresidential
A ll permitted uses	43,560 sq. ft.	150 (building setback line)/ 150 (frontage)	70%	50	301	2	51	65, provided each structure is set back a distance at least equal to its height from each property line




204 Attachm ent 8:1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE









Permitted Uses	Lot/Land	Buildings
	

Minimum Required Lot Area per Unit	
Minimum Required Lot Width
(feet)	
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage (percent)	
Minimum Required Front Setback (feet)	Minimum Required Side (each)
Setback (feet)	
Minimum Required Rear Setback (feet)	Maximum Permitted Building Height (feet)
Accessory
Accessory building/ structure other than specified elsewhere herein this chapter, including Articles III and IV	NIA	NIA	Included in above if on a permanent foundation	Not pem1itted to be located between the principal
building and the street right-of-way	Same as principal
building/structure

NOTES:
1  Seventy-five feet when abutting prop erty with Residential Zones (R-1 and R-2) or any existing residential use.
2 Sixty-five feet, provided each structure is set back a distance at least equal to its height from each property line and approved by the Fire Chief of the company with primary service area responsibility for the site and the Township's fire consultant and/or fire consultant engineer, attesting to adequate fire protection .





















204 Attachment 8:2	01-01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Attachm ent 9

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-41 A - Permanent Sign Requirements Table









Sign Type	Freestanding Signs	Wall Signs	
	



Maximum Permitted Number	



Maximum Permitted Sign Area	

Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs
(feet)	

Maximum Height of Flat Wall Signs (feet)	

Maxim um Height of Wall Projecting Signs	Maximu m Projection from Wall for Wall Projecting Signs (feet)	




Permitted Zones	




Other Requirements	




Permit
Required
Signs owned and associated with u ses operated by the
Township; officia l traffic signs	Unlimited	Un l imited	Unlim ited	Un limited	Unlim ited	Unlimited	All		No
Signs identifying publ ic and semipubl ic uses (e.g., schools, churches, utilities, hospitals, libraries, parks, fire stations, post offices and other similar uses)	2 per princ ipal use	64 square
feet	10	Height of wall to which sign is attached	Height of wall to which sign is attached	10 but no closer than 10 feet from any lot line	All		Building
Residentia l namep lates identifying nam e of home, its occupant,or both , not including name listing on
ma ilbox	I  per dwell ing unit	2 square
feet	5	10	N ot
pe1mitted	No t permitted	All		No
Property cont rol sign (e.g., "No Trespassi n g," "Private Prope1ty," ''No
H unting or Fishing," "Posted," "Private Drive," or similar
type signs)	I  per25 linear feet of lot line	2 square feet per sign	5	10	Not
permi tted	Not
permitted	All	Spacing at not less than
25-foot
intervals	No





204 Attachment 9:1	01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE











Sign Type	Freestanding Signs	Wall Signs	
	



Maximum Permitted Number	



Maximum Permitted Sign Area	

Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs
(feet)	

Maximum Height of Flat Wall Signs (feet)	

Maximum Height of Wall Projectin g Signs	Maximum Projection from Wall for Wall Projecting Signs (feet)	




Permitted Zones	




Other Requirements	




Permit Required
Residentia l development/ neighborhood  signs; such  signs shall on ly list the name of the neighborhood/
development and shall not list any names of contractors, realtors, or both	I  per street entrance,  but no  more
than 2 tota l	I  squ are foot  per dwel l ing, not to exceed
40 square
feet per sign	15	Height of wall to which sign is attached	Height of wall to
which sign
is attached	3, bu t no
closer than
I O feet from
any lot line	AG,RR ,
R- 1, R-2,
VM U, and
NC	The applicant shall submit
a w1itten
description of the main tenance responsibilities in a form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors	Building
Individual business signs identifyi ng the name and type of business, any trademark of the business conducted on the premises, or any combination thereof; this does not include businesses contained within
planned centers, as defined
herein	I per principal   use	I square foot per 5 linear
feet of lot frontage, not to exceed
96 square feet per sign	15	Height of wall to which sign is attached	Height of wall to which sign is attached	20 but not closer than IO feet from any lot line	VMU ,
NC, C/U,
and IND	No flat wall sign nor wall projecting sign shall be larger than 1 5% of the
wall area to
which the sign
is attached	Bu ilding
On-site directional, entrance, exit, rec room and other inform ational signs.	4 per buildi ng	2 squ are feet per sign	5	JO	Height of
wall to wh ich sign is attached	2	All		No
Billboards	See § 204-49H	Building






204 Attachment 9:2	01-01-2014
 
ZONING



204 Attachment 10

Townsliip of North Middleton

Table 204-41B-Temporary Sign Requirements Table









Sign Type	Freestanding Signs	Wall Signs	
	



Maximum Permitted Number	



Maximum Permitted Sign Area	

Max imum Height of Freestanding Signs
(feet)	


Maximum Height of Flat Wall Signs	

Maximum Height of Wall Projecting Signs	Maximum Projection from Wall for Wall Projecting Signs (feet)	




Permitted Zones	




Other
Requirem ents	





Permit Required
Temporary signs of contractors, architects,
mechanics, landscapers, and artisans, displayed only w hile actual on-site work is in progress	I per firm whose work is in progress	12 square feet	5	Not
permitted	No
permitted	Not permitted	All	Should a sign be left on site beyond allowable  time period, the Township m ay impound  it and recover a fee from owner equal to cost of impoundme nt
and storage	No
Real estate sale, sold or rent signs when placed upon the property (unit) to be rented or sold, containing less than
3 acres	I per street frontage; maximum of2 signs	9 square feet
per sign	5	Height of wa ll to
wh ich sign
is attached	No t
permitted	Not
permitted	A ll	A ll such signs shall be rem oved within
5 days of final sales tran saction or upon rental occupancy, or be subject to
Town ship impoundmen t and a recovery fee	No
Real estate sale, sold or rent signs when placed upon the property (unit) to be rented or sold, conta ining more than
3 acres	I per street frontage; maximum of2 signs	32 square
feet per sign	10	Height of wa ll to
which sign
is allached	No t
permi tted	Not
permitted	All	Same as above	Zonin	g



204 Attachmen t 10:1	OJ-OL-20l4
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE










Sign Type	
Freestanding Signs	
Wall Signs	
	



Maximum Permitted N umber	



Maximum Permitted Sign Area	

Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs
(feet)	


Maximum Height of Flat Wall Signs	

Maximum Height of Wall Projecting Signs	Maximum Projection from Wall for WaJI Projecting Signs (feet)	




Permitted Zones	




Other
Requirem ents	





Permit Required
Proposed development signs for residential, office, or both, complexes	I per street fron tage; maximum of2 signs	I square foot per unit of occupancy, not to
exceed
32 squ are
feet	10	Height of wa ll to which sign is attached	Not permitted	Not
permitted	All, but only after final
plan is approved	Such sign shall be remo ved upon completion of constru ction of final unit	Zoni n g
Proposed development signs
for commercial uses, indu st ria l uses, other
n onresidential uses, or an y combination  thereof	I per street frontage; maximum of2 signs	I square foot per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area, not to
exceed
64 squ are
feet	10	Height of wall to
wh ich sign
is attached	Not
permitted	Not
permitt ed	VMU,
NC, C/U,
and IND but only after final plan approval	All such signs shall be remo ved upon completi on of buildin g
con struction	Zoning
Special event signs and	I  per
bu sin ess per
event	32 square feet if freestanding; 48 square feet if
attached to
wall	10	Height of wall to whic h sign is attached	Not
permitted	Not
pennitted	VMU,
NC, C/Ll
and IN D	Such signs m ay only be used during two consecutive
periods per calendar year, n ot exceed ing 30 days total	Zoning
banners for bu sinesses (e.g., grand openings, change of use or ownership, closeout sale, clearan ce sale, holiday sale, etc.)									
Road side stand signs for the sale of agricu ltural products upon a principal farm property	I per farm	32 square feet	5	Height of wall to which sign is attached	Hei ght of wall to
w hich sign
is attached	5	A ll	Road side stand signs shall only be displayed during  seasons
w hen products are for sale	Zoning





204 Attachment 10:2	01-01 - 2014
 
ZONING











Sign Type	Freestanding Signs	Wall Signs	
	



Maximum Permitted Nnmber	



Maximum Permitted Sign Area	

Maximum Height of Freestanding Signs
(feet)	


Maximum Height of Flat Wall Signs	

Maximum Height of WalJ Projectin g Signs	Maximum Projection from Wall for Wall Projecting Signs (feet)			





Permit Required
							

Permitted Zones	

Other Requirem ents	
Garage/yard sale signs upon properties conducting such sales	2	6 squ are feet
per sign	5	H eight of wall to which sign is attached	Not
permitted	No t
permitted	All	See § 204-41 for additional
requirem ents	No
Political  signs	Unlimited	12 square
feet	5	Height of wa ll to
w hich sign
is attached	Not
permitted	No t
permitted	All	Such signs may only be displayed between 30 days prior lo and 5 days after an election; should a sign be left
on site beyond
allowab le tim e period, the Township  may impound it and recover a fee from owner equa l to cost of impou ndm ent and st orage	No
















204 Attachment 10:3	01  - 01-2014
 
 
 
ZONING



204 Attachment 11

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-41C - Signage for Planned Center Sites Containing Less than 50,000 Square Feet of Gross Leasable Floor Area





Sign Type	

Maximum N umber Permitted	


Maximum  Permitted Sign Arca	
Maximum Permitted Height (feet)	Maximum Permitted Letter
H eight (in ches)	


Permitted Zon es	



Other Requirem ents	


Permit Required
Freestanding planned
center sign	I  per planned
center	64 square feet	15 feet	18	C/ LI and IND	This sign shall devote no less than 50% of the total sign area (per side) to the adve1tisement of the planned center's name	Building
Anchor tenant sign for one use contain ing more than 150 linear feet of storefront	I  per side facing a street with a maximum of 2 signs	If sign is less than 300 feet from facing street, then sign can be I square foot per each l inear foot of storefront up to
a maximum of75 square feet;
if sign is more than 300 feet from faci ng street, then sign can be 1.5 square feet per each l inear foot of storefront up to a maxim um of 100 square feet	Heigh t of wall to which sign  is attached	42	C/Ll and IND	These signs shall only be provided as flat wall or wall projecting  signs	Bui lding
Storefront sign for one use
containing up to 150 linear feet of storefront	I per principal  u se	2 square feet per linear foot
of storefront, up to a
ma x imum of 50 square feet	Height of wa ll to which
sign is attached	20	C/LI and IND	This sign sha ll only be provided as a flat wall projecting sign	Building
Storefront  under-canopy
signs for all pri ncipa l u ses	I  per
principa l use	24 square feet	To base of canopy ; or where no canopy is provided, I 0	8	C/LI and IND	No under-canopy sign shall have a vertical dimension of more than  1 8 inches from its lowest to highest point ; the base of an  under-canopy
sign shall be no less th an 8
feet 6 inches above the
finished grade below such sign	Bui lding

204 Attach ment 11:1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
 
 
ZONING



204 Attachment 12

Township of North Middleton

Table 204-410 - Signage for Planned Center Sites Containing 50,000 Square Feet or More of Gross Leasable Floor Area





Sign Type	

Maximum Number Permitted	


Maximum Permitted Sign Area	
Maximum Perm itted Height (feet)	Maximum Permitted Letter Height (inches)	


Permitted Zones	



Other  Requirements	


Permit
Required
Freestanding planned center sign	Iper  street frontage or ex it	64 square feet	15	1 8	C/LI and IND	This sign shall devote no less than 50% of the total sign area (per side) to the adveriisement of the planned center's name	Building
Anchor tenant sign for one u se containing more th an 150 linear feet of storefront	I per side facing a street with a maximum of 2 signs	If sign i s less than 300 feet from facing street, then sign can be l square foot per each linear fool of storefront up to a maximum of 100 square feet; if sign is more than
300 feet from facing street, then sign can be I .5 square feet per each linear foot of storefront up to a maximum of 150 square feet	Height of wall to which sign is attached	42	C/LT and IND	These signs shall only be provided as flat wal l or wall projecting  signs	Bui lding
Storefront sign for one use conta ining up to 150 Iinear feet of storefront	Iper
principal u se	2 square feet per linear foot of storefronr up to a maximum of75 square feet	Height of wall to wh ich sign is attached	20	C/LI andIND	This sign shall only be prov ided as a flat wall or a wall projecting sign	Building










204 Attachment 12:1	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE







Sign Type	

Maximum N umber Permitted	


Maximum Permitted Sign
Area	
Maximum Permitted Height (feet)	Maximum Permitted Letter Height (inches)	


Permitted
Zones	



Other Requirements	


Permit
Required
Storefront un der-canopy
signs for all principal uses	I  per
principal  u se	24 square feet	To base of canopy; or where no canopy is
provided,  10	8	C/LI and IN D	No under-canopy sign shall have a vertical dimen sion of more than 1 8 inches from its lowest to highest point. The base of an under-canopy
sign shall be no less than 8 feet 6 inches above the finished grade below such sign	Building
Outparcel signs for principal  freestanding uses sharing common ingress and egress to planned center	2 per principal use, but only
I per wa ll	75 square feet per sign, not exceeding 20% of wall area to which sign is attached	Height of wa ll to which
sign is
attached	28	C/LI and IND	These signs shall only be provided as flat wall or wall projecting signs	Building
























204 Attachment 12:2	01-01 - 2014
 
Chapter 204

ZONING

 
ARTICLE I
Background Provisions

§ 204-1.   Title.
§ 204-2.	Purpose.
§ 204-3.	Scope.
§ 204-4.	Interpretation.
§ 204-5.	Conflict with other provisions.
§ 204-6.	Uses not provided for.
§ 204-7.	Municipal exemption.
§ 204-8. Establishment of zones .
§ 204-9.	Zoning Map.
§ 204-10. Zone boundary lines.
§ 204-11. Community development objectives.
§ 204-12. Definitions; word usage.


ARTICLE II
Zone Regulations

§ 204-13. Agricultural Zone (AG).
§ 204-14. Rural Resource Zone (RR).
§ 204-15.  Low-/Medium-Density
Residential Zone (R-1).
§ 204-16.  Medium-/High-Density
Residential Zone (R-2).
§ 204-17. Village Mixed-Use Zone
(VMU).
§ 204-18.  Neighborhood  Commercial Zone (NC).
§ 204-19. Commercial/Light Industrial
Zone (C/LI).
§ 204-20. Industrial Zone (IND).
§ 204-21. Floodplain Overlay Zone
(FPO).
§ 204-22. Airport Overlay Zone (APO).
 



























































204:1
 
§ 204-23. Historic Resources Overlay
Zone (BRO).


ARTICLE III
General Provisions

§ 204-24. Applicability.
§ 204-25. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 204-26. Buffering and screening.
§ 204-27. Common open space
requirements.
§ 204-28. Corner lots.
§ 204-29. Height limit exceptions.
§ 204-30. Landscaping and vegetation preservation.
§ 204-31. Minimum habitable floor area.
§ 204-32. Lot access.
§ 204-33. Materials and waste handling requirements.
§ 204-34. Number of principal
use/structure per lot.
§ 204-35. Off-street parking
requirements.
§ 204-36. Off-street loading facilities.
§ 204-37. Performance standards for aU uses.
§ 204-38 . Required licenses, certificates, and permits.
§ 204-39. Roadway classifications.
§ 204-40. Setback modifications and obstructions prohibited in easements and rights-of-way.
§ 204-41. Signs.
§ 204-42. Temporary construction trailers or sheds.
§ 204-43. Temporary personal storage.




01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE

 
§ 204-44.  Unenclosed storage.
§ 204-45.  Use of on-lot sewage disposal systems.


ARTICLE IV
Specific  Criteria  and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses

§ 204-46. Applicability.
§ 204-47. Principal agricultural/forestry uses.
§ 204-48. Principal residential uses.
§ 204-49. Principal nonresidential uses.
§ 204-50. Accessory uses.
§ 204-51. Temporary uses.


ARTICLE V
Nonconformities

§ 204-52. Continuation.
§ 204-53. Abandonment.
§ 204-54. Extension of a nonconforming use of land.
§ 204-55. Expansion or alteration.
§ 204-56. Substitution or replacement.
§ 204-57. Restoration.
§ 204-58. Previously expanded
nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 204-59. Nonconforming lots.


ARTICLE  VI
Zoning Hearing Board

§ 204-60. Establishment and
membership.
§ 204-61. Organization of Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 204-62. Expenditures for services.
§ 204-63. Hearings.
 

































































204:2
 
§ 204-64. Zoning Hearing Board's functions.
§ 204-65. Parties appellant before Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 204-66. Time limitations.
§ 204-67. Stay of proceeding.
§ 204-68. Appeal.


ARTICLE VII
Administration

§ 204-69. Administration and
enforcement;  violations  and penalties.
§ 204-70. Permits.
§ 204-71. Determination of fees.
§ 204-72. Amendments.
§ 204-73. Conditional uses.

Area and Design Re.quirements Table, AG

Area and Design Requirements Table, RR

Area and Design Requirements Table,  R-1

Area and Design Requirements Table, R-2

Area  and Design Requirements Table, VMU

Area and Design Requirements Table, NC

Area and Design Requirements Table, C/LI

Area and Design Requirements Table, IND

Permanent Sign Requirement s
Table

Temporary Sign Requirements Table






01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-1	ZONING	§ 204-3

 
Signage for Planned Center Sites Less than 50,000 Square Feet
 

Signage for Planned Center Sites 500,000 Square Feet or More
 

[HISTORY: Adopted  by the Board  of Supervisors  of the Township of North Middleton 6-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES

 
Anima ls -See Ch.70.
Building construction -See Ch. 80. Unifor m construction codes -Sec Ch. 95. Floodplain management -Sec Ch. 112. Junkyards -Sec Ch. 120.
 
Outdoor wood -fired boilers -Sec Ch. 137.
Sewers and water -See Ch. 164.
Storm water management -See Ch. 175.
Subdivision and land developm ent- See Ch. 180.



ARTICLE I
Background Provisions
 

§ 204-1. Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as  the "North Midd leton Township Zoning Ordinance of 20 13."


§ 204-2. Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical commu nity development, proper density of population, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection , vehicle parking and loading space, transportation , water, sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements , as well as to prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire,  flood  panic  or  other dangers. This chapter is enacted in accordance with an overall planning program and with considerati on  for the character of the Township , its various parts and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.


§ 204-3. Scope.

From and after the effect ive date of this chapter, the use of all land  and every building or structure or portion of a building or structure erected, altered with respect to height and area, added to or relocated and every u se within a building or structure or use accessory thereto in the Township shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any lawfully existing use, building or land not in conformity with the regulation s on the effective date  of this chapter herein prescribed  shall be regarded as nonconforming bu t may be continued, extended or changed subject to the special regulations herein provided with respect to nonconforming buildings, structures or uses.






204:3	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-4                                     NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                     § 204-7

§ 204-4. Interpretation.

A	In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, said provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirement s for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Township.

B.	In interpreting the language of zoning ordinances to determine the extent of the restriction upon the use of the property , the language shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the language written and enacted by the governing body, in favor of the property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.


§ 204-5. Conflict with other provisions.

It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with any existing ordinances or resolutions or with any rule, regulation or permit adopted or issued thereund er, except as provided and only to the extent permitted by § 508(4) of the  Municipalities Planning Code.1 Where this chapter imposes greater  restrictions upon the use or development of structures, buildings, or land or upon the height and bulk of buildings or prescribes larger open spaces than the provisions of such other ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or permit , then the provisions of this chapter shall control. Furthermore, except as provided for in Article IV of this chapter, if a discrepancy exists betwe en any regulations  contained  within  thi s chapter and any other Township regulation s, the regu lation which imposes the greater restriction shall apply.


§ 204-6. Uses not provided for.

Whenev er, under this chapter, a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied and an application is made by an applicant to the Zoning Officer for  such  use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Board of Supervisors to hear and decide such request as a conditional use. The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to permit  the use or deny the use in accordance with the standards governing conditional use applications. The use may be permitted if it is similar to and compatible with the permitted uses in the zone in which the subject property is located, is not permitted in any other zone under the terms of this chapter and in no way is in conflict with the general purposes and intent of this chapter. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use would not be detrimenta l to the public health , safety and welfare of the neighborhood.


§ 204-7. Municipal exemption.

The requirement s of this chapter shall not apply to municipal-owned uses, land, facilities or structures owned by North Middleton Township, nor to  land,  uses or  structures owned  by those municipal authorities or agents authorized or created by it to provide governmental or public health and safety services . Further, the requirement s of this chapter do not apply to private uses permitted by North Middleton  Township, or its authorized municipal  authorities or  agents,  to  be  conducted  on,  upon,  or  in  Township/authority  land  or  structures . In any



I.	Editor's Note: Sec 53 P.S.§ I 0508(4).


204:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-7                                                       ZONING                                                     § 204-10

instance in which applicable zoning provisions would be violated but for the exemption provided herein, the Board of Supervisors shall provide at least 21 days' prior written not ice to the owners of property within 200 feet of the exempt tract.


§ 204-8. Establishment of zones.

A.	For the purpose of this chapter, Nort h Middleton Township is hereby divided into zones,
which shall be designated as follows:


 
AG RR R-1
R-2 VMU NC C/LI
fND
 
Agricultural Zone (AG)
Rural Resource Zone (RR)
Low-/Medium-Den sity Residential Zone (R-1) Medium-/High-Density Residential Zone (R-2) Village Mixed-Use Zone (VMU)
Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC)
Commercial/Light Indu strial Zone (C/Ll)
Indu strial Zone (fND)
 


B.     The following overlay zones are in addition to the above-referenced zones:


FPO	Floodplain Overlay Zone (FPO) APO	Airport Overlay Zone (APO)
HRO	Historic Resources Overlay Zone (HRO)



§ 204-9. Zoning Map.

The areas within Nort h Middleton Township, as assigned to each zone and the location of the zones established by this chapter, are shown upon the Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is attached to and incorporated herein and is declared to be a part of th.is chapter.2


§ 204-10. Zone boundary lines.

The zone boundary lines shall be as shown on the Zoning Map . Zone boundary lines are intended to coincide with lot lines; center lines of streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way and streams at time of passage of this chapter; the corporate boundary of the Township; or as dimensioned on the map. In the event of dispute about the location of the boundary of any zone, the Zoning Officer shall invest igate and render a decision on the location of the line. Appea ls from this decision shall be made to the Zoning Hearing Board.



2.	Editor's Not e: The Zon ing Map is on file in the Township offices.


 
204:5
 

01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-11	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

§ 204-11. Community development objectives.

This chapter is enacted in accordance with the most recent version of the North Middleton
Township Comprehensive Plan and has been formulated to implement the purpose set forth in
§ 204-2 above. This chapter is enacted with regard to the community development object ives
listed in the most recent version of the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan.


§ 204-12. Definitions; word usage.

A.	General word and phrase usage. Words and phra ses shall be presumed to be used in their ordinary context unless such word or phra se is defined differently within this section. In situations where a term is not defined in  this chapter  the most recent version of  the Webster' s Unabridged Dictionary, or other dictionaries, shall be used to assist with interpreting, administering, and enforcing this chapter.

B.	Language interpretation . In this chapter, when not inconsistent with the context:

(1)	Words in the present tense imply also the future tense.

(2)	The singular includ es the plural.

(3)	The male gender includes the female gender.

(4)	The word "person" includes an individu al, incorporator's  association, member(s) of a partnership or the officers of a corporation, as well as any similar entity.

(5)	The terms "shall" or "must" are always mandatory.

C.	Specific words and phra ses. The following words and phrases  shall have the part icular meanings assigned by this section or in other appropriate sections of this chapter:

ABUT - Areas of contiguous lots that share a common property or lot line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street or a waterway. See Diagram 204- l 2A. See a l so definition of "adjacent."


Diagram 204-12A


LOT 1	LOT3





LOT4	LOT6





ABUT	ADJACENT





204:6	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

ACCESS DRIVE A private  improved  surface  other  than  a  street  or  driveway designed and constructed to provide for vehicular movement from a street to a parking area, garage, dwelling, building or other structure within a lot or property containing any use other than one single-family dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, access drives shall be requ ired for a ll nonresidential and multifamily uses, and all other uses not served by a driveway as defined in this chapter.

ACCESSORY APARTMENT - A separate dwelling unit that is contained upon the same lot as an owner -occupied, single-family detached dwelling and is contained within the principal dwelling building or occupies a portion of one of its accessory bu ildings.

ACREAGE, NET - The total land area contained within a property or proposed site, exclusive of lands within a public or private street right-of-way. (Note: one acre equals 43,560 square feet.)

ACT - The latest version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.J

ADJACENT - Two or more lots that share a common property or lot line, or that are separated only by a street or waterway from each other. See Diagram 204-12A. See also definition of "abut. "

ADULT-RELATED TERMS AND PHRASES - Unless specifically defined elsewhere herein this chapter , the following words and phrases when used in this chapter relating to the adult -related uses shall have the meaning given to them herein this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(I)	)	ADULT-RELATED USES -An establishment that engages in one or more of the following areas of sales, services, or entertainment:

(a)	ADULT BATH HOUSE - An establishment or business that provides the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy during which specified anatomical area s are  displayed or specified sexual activity occurs. This section shall not apply to hydrotherapy treatment practiced by, or under the supervision of a medical pract itioner. A medical practitioner , for the purpose of this chapter , shall be a medical doctor, physician, chiropractor, phy sical therapi st, or similar professional licensed by the commonwealth.

(b)	ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO - Any establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transpa rent or nontran sparent , to or on the human body when specified anatomical areas are exposed.

(c)	ADULT BOOKSTORE - Any establishment that has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade:





3.	Editor's Note:See 53 P.S. § 10101 ct seq.


204:7	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

[1] Books, films, magazines or other periodical s or other forms of audio or visual representation which are distingui shed or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and

[2] Instruments , devices or paraphernali a that are designed for use m connection with specified sexual activities.

(d)	ADULT CABARET -A nightclub, theater, bar, or other establishment that features live or media representation s of performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers , where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(e)  ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT  -Any establishment  that provides the services of ma ssage and body manipulation , including exercises, heat and light treatment s of the body , and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not operated by a medical pra ctitioner, chiropractor  or professional physical therapist licensed by the commonwealth, or a person having graduated from a massage therapy training program approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools or equivalent agency if trained in another state; by a person certified through a massage therapy certification examination approved by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person certified through the Nat ional Certification Board  for Therapeutic  Massage and Bodywork ; or is a practitioner or member of either of the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or Internationa l Massage Association (IMA). This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, massage therapy establishment   school,   gymnasium,   reducing   salon,    spa,    or    similar esta blishment where ma ssage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incident al or accessory service.

(£) ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment within an enclosed or unenclosed building or structure with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting any form of audio or visual material , and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time measured on an annual ba sis is devoted to the showing of materia l that is distingui shed or character ized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomica l areas.

(g)	ADULT MODEL STUDIO - An establishment where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure model s who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted , sculptured , photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, except that this provision shall not apply to any figure studio or school of art or similar establishment that meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authori zed thereunder to issue and confer a diploma.



204:8	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

(h)	ADULT  HOTEL/MOTEL  - A  hotel,  motel,  or  similar  establishment offering public accommodations for  any  consideration,  that  provides  patrons with mat eria l distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description  of  specified  sexual  activit ies or  specified  anatomica l areas.

(i)   ADULT  MOTION  PICTURE  ARCADE -Any establishment  in which  the pu blic is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug operated or electronica lly or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,  projectors  or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images  to  five  or fewer per sons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual act ivities or specified anatomical areas.

U) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment within an enclosed or unenclosed building or structure wit h a capacity of 50 or more persons u sed for presenting any form of audio or visual materia l, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentat ion time, measu red on an annua l basis, is devoted to the showing of material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(k)	ADULT NEWSRACK - Any coin-operated machine or device that dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(I)	ADULT OUT-CALL SERVICE ACTIVITY - Any establishment or business that provides an out-call service that consists of individual s leaving the premises upon request or by appointment to visit other premises for a period of time for the purpose of providing any service during which time specified anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.

(m)	ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER  CENTER  -Any estab l ishment,  agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or exposing specified anatomica l  areas,  excluding psychosexua l works hops operated by a medical practitioner licensed by the commonwea lth to engage in sexual therapy.

(n)	ADULT THEATER - A theater, concert ba ll, au ditorium or other similar esta blishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, that regularly features live performanc es that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexu al activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

(o)	ADULT VIDEO STORE - An establishment that has 50% or more of its stock-in-trade consisting of videotapes, video discs, or both, which are distinguished or character ized by an emphasis, depiction or description of specified sexua l activities or specified anatomical areas.




204:9	01 - 0 1 - 20 14
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

(p)	ADULT OTHER - An establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characteri zed by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

(2)	SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS -Includes but is not limited to:

(a)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions; buttocks; and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;  and

(b)	Human male genitals in a  discernibly  turgid  state, even  if completely and opaquely covered.

(3)	SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES -Includes any of the following:

(a)	Actua l or simulated sexual  intercourse,  ora l  copulation,  anal  intercourse, oral-anal  copulation,  bestiality,  direct   physical   stimulation   of  unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship  or the use  of excretory functions in the context  of a sexual relationship and any of the  following depicted sexu ally oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery , coprophagy ,  coprophilia ,  cunnilingus,  fellatio,   necrophilia,   pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism,  sapphism, zooerasty;

(b)	Clearly depicted  human  genitals  in a  state of sexual  stimulation, arousal  or
tumescence;

(c)	Use of human or animal masturbation , sodomy, oral copulation , coitus, ejaculation ;

(d)	Fondling  or  touching  of  nude  human  genitals,  pubic  region,  buttocks  or
female breast;

(e)	Masochism , erotic or  sexually  oriented  torture,  beating  or  the  infliction  of
pain;

(f)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or
(g)	Human excretion, urination , menstruation , vagina l or anal irrigation. AGRIBUSINESS - Agricu ltural uses that involve, but are not necessarily limited to,
one or more of the following conditions:

(1)	CONCENTRATED	ANIMAL	FEEDING	OPERATION	(CAFO)	- An
agricultura l operation that meets the criteria established by the Department of Environmenta l Protection under authority of the act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the Clean Streams Law.

(2)	CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAO) - An agricultural operation that meets the criteria established by the State Conservation Commission in regulation s under the authority of 3 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5 (relating to nutrient




204:10	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

management and odor management) in Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 83, Subchapter D (relating to nutrient management).

(3)	OTHER AGRIBUSINESS - Any agricultural operation other than a CAFO or CAO, whether involving animal, animal product , or vegetable production, which occurs within an enclosed structure exceeding 10,000 square feet per building or a cumulative total of 15,000 square feet of building area.

AGRICULTURE - The principal use of land which shall include, but not be limited to, the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, apiculture, floriculture, viticulture and gardening . The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or persona l use, of p lants and animals u seful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy product s, poultry and poultry product s: livestock , including beef cattle, sheep, swine horses, ponies, mules, or goats, or any mutation s or hybrid s thereof , including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals: bees and apiary product s; fur animals; trees and forest product s: fruits of all kind s, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamenta l and greenhouse produ cts; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program , but excluding concentrated animal operation s (CAOs), concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), and forestry. This definition also includes the processing and accessory retail sale of goods produced and including one detached dwelling and other necessary structures and equipment to support the agricultural activity.

AGRICULTURAL OPERATION - An enterprise that is actively engaged  in  the commercial production and pr eparation  for  market  of  crops,  livestock   and  livestock products and in the produ ct ion, harvesting and  preparation  for  market  or  use  of agricultural,  agronomic,  horticultural ,  silvicultural  and  aquacultural   crops   and commodities. The term includ es an enterprise  that  implements  changes   in  production practices and procedures or typ es of crops, livestock, livestock product s or commodities produced   consistent  with  practices  and  procedures  that  are normally  engaged by  farmers or  are  consistent  w ith  technologica l  development  within  the agricultural  industry.

AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE TERMS AND PHRASES - Unless specifica lly defined elsewhere herein, the following words and phrases when used in § 204-22 of this chapter relating to the Airport Overlay Zone shall have the meaning given to them herein this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(1)	AIRPORT - Airport (N94) and any area of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for a irport buildings or air navigation facilities for rights-of-way, together with a ll airport buildings and facilities thereon. As used herein, the term "airport" includ es public airports, but excludes private airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in this section.

(2)	AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's u sable land area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevat ion for Carlisle Airport (N94) is 510 feet.





204:11	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

(3)	AIRPORT HAZARD - Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for flignt or aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR Part 77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.

(4)	AIRPORT  HAZARD  AREA -Any area of land or water  upon  which  an airport hazard  might  be established  if not  prevented  as provided  for in § 204-22 of this chapter and the Act  164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).4

(5)	APPROACH SURFACE ZONE - An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach.

(6)	CONICAL SURFACE ZONE - An imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizonta lly to one foot vertically or (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.

(7)	FAA - Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.

(8)	HEIGHT - For  the purpose of determining the height limits in all Airport Overlay Zone related zones set forth in § 204-22 of this chapter and shown on the Overlay Zoning Map , the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specifi ed.

(9)	HORIZONTAL SURFACE ZONE - An imaginary plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of variou s radii from  the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the planned approach.

(10)	LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pound s' maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.

(11)	NON-PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment , for which a straight-in non-precision-instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned .

(12)	OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by § 204-22 of this chapter.

(13)	PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runwa y ha ving an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (lLS) or a Preci sions Approach Radar (PAR). It also mean s a runway for which a precision



4.	Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.CS.A.§ 5911 et seq.


204:12	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan
or any other planning document.

(14)	PRIMARY SURFACE ZONE -An imaginary surface longitudin ally centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved runwa ys or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line.

(15)	RUNWAY - A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length .

(16)	TRANSITIONAL SURFACE ZONE - An imaginary surface that extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal surface at a  slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically.

(17)	TREE -Any object of natural growth.

(18)	UTILITY RUNWAY -A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used
by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight or less.

(19)	VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of  aircraft
using visual approach procedures.

AIRSTRIP - A principal or accessory use that is privately owned and operated at which the owners' a ircraft are stored, take off, land, or any combination thereof. Additionally, invited guests may use an airstrip so long as no fees or other remuneration are charged for such u se and such use only involves the temporary storage of aircraft.

ALLEY (or SERVICE DRIVE) - A strip of land over which there is a public or private right-of-way intended to provide vehicular access to the side, rear, or both, of properties with frontage on a street. An alley is not intended for general traffic circulation .

ALTERAT IONS - An action involving any of the following:

(1)	A change in the size of a bu ilding, structure, or both;

(2)	A change in the use of property ; and

(3)	A rearrangement or relocation of a building, structure, use, or any combination thereof, upon a property.

ALTERNATIVE SEWER - A public sewer system which principally relies upon natura l wastewater treatment systems, rather than a man-made/mecha nical treatment plant system. Exa mples include, but are not limited to, wetlands, aerated ponds, lagoons, and spray irrigation.

ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNIT  (AEU)  One  thousand  pounds  live  weight  of livestock or poultry, regardless of the number of individua l animals or birds comprising the unit.





204:13	01 -01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

ANIMAL HOSPITAL - An establishment offering veterinary services to all types of animals, which also includes outdoor and overnight boarding of animals.

ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY - An establishment engaged in the coordinated and centrally managed housing including self-contained units designed to provide a supportive environment and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. Such a development may contain a limited number of supportive services, such as meals, transportation , housekeeping , linen and organized social activities for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve persons 55 and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the developmentally disabled. Assisted-living facilities shall be licensed as personal care centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

ATTIC - That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. Within a dwelling unit , an attic shall not be counted as floor area unless it is constructed as or modified into a habitable room by the inclusion of dormer windows , an average ceiling height of five feet or more and a permanent stationary interior access stairway to a lower building story.

AUCTION - A public sale of property to the highest bidder.

AUCTION HOUSE - A building used for the conduct of auction sales of goods by a state-licensed auctioneer or apprentice auctioneer.

AUTOMATED BANKING FACILITY - An establishment whereby automated devices that perform banking or financial functions are operated by the consumer or patron primarily for those who remain in their automobile, but may also be operated by those customers who walk up to the device.

AUTOMOBILE ,  HEAVY  EQUIPMENT  AND  SIMILAR  MOTOR  VEHICLE
RENTAL/SALES - An establishment involving the indoor and/or outdoor display, sale, or rental of new and used automobiles, trailers , boats, heavy equipment, recreational vehicles, trucks, other similar private passenger, recreation and commercial motor vehicles, and mobile homes , and which may include serving and repairs, state inspections, oil changes and lubrications, and tune-ups be conducted within an completely enclosed building as an accessory use, incidental to the principal use.

AUTOMOBILE FILLING AND/OR SERVICE STATION - An establishment where motor fuel, oil, grease, batteries , tires, or automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed at retail, which may include making minor incidental repairs, state inspections, oil changes and lubrications, and tune-ups. This use specifically prohibits body work; straightening of body part s; painting; welding; storage of wrecked vehicles ; sales and rental of automobiles , trailers, boats, heavy equipment , recreational vehicles, trucks , other similar private passenger , recreation and commercial motor vehicles, and mobile homes; automobile , heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle repair centers; and other major mechanical work is not permitted as part of this use. This definition excludes general convenience stores.

AUTOMOBILE,  HEAVY EQUIPMENT  AND  SIMILAR MOTOR  VEHICLE  REPAIR
CENTER - An establishment where major and minor servicing and repair of automobiles, trailers, boat s, heavy equipment, recreational vehicles, trucks, other similar



204:14	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

private pa ssenger, recreation and commercia l motor vehicles, and mobile homes is conducted as a primary activity. Included in this definition are:

(1)	Repair or overhaul of engines, transmissions,  differentials,  axles, spring, clutches, radiators, etc.

(2)	Collision service, including body, fender  and frame repair, welding, painting and refinishing and glass replacement body work; but also may include tire sale, repair, wheel balancing , and front-end alignment facilities; and oil changes.

AUTOMOBILE    WRECKING,    JUNK   AND    SCRAP    STORAGE    AND    SALES
ESTABLISHMENTS (JUNKYARD) - An establishment used for the storage, collection, baling, packing , sorting, handling, disassemblin g, recycling, resource recovery , purchase or sale of any materia l which has been used , salvaged, scrapped or reclaimed, but is capable of being reused in some form including, but not limited to, metals, fiber, paper, cloth and rags, rubber, rope, bottles, machinery, tools, appliances , fixtures, utensils, lumber , boxes, crates, pipe and pipe fittings, tires, two or more motor vehicles which are inoperable and do not have a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and motor vehicle parts, but not including garbage or other organic wastes. No material which fails to meet this definition because it is discarded and incapable of being reused in some form shall be placed in any establishment as herein defined. In no zone shall this use be considered to be accessory or incidental to another use. See "junkyard."

BED-AND -BREAKFAST - An owner-occupied or manager-occupied business which occupies an existing single-family detached dwelling and/or associated accessory structures where limited overnight lodging and breakfast is provided for compensation to guests and where said use may or may not also host acconunodations for private events (e.g., such as wed dings and conferences). The dwelling may or may not include a publicl y accessib le resta urant as a related use. Overnight lodging occurs within individua l guest rooms which do not contain cooking facilities.

BILLBOARD - A sign disp laying changeable advertising copy which pertains to a bu siness, organization, event , person , place, service or product not principally located or sold on the premises upon which said sign is located, and shall include public service messages , political campaign advertisements and other nonconunercia l speech.

BOARD - The Zoning Hearing Board of North Middleton Township. BOARDINGHOUSE (including "ROOMING HOUSE") -
(l)	A residential use in which:

(a)	Room(s)  that do not meet  the defmition of a lawful dwelling unit are rented
for habitation; or

(b)	A dwelling unit  includes greater than the permitted  maximum number of
u nrelated  persons.

(2) A boardingh ouse shall not include a use that meets the definition of a treatment center, hotel, motel,  life-care center, personal care, bed-and-breakfast , group home,
>


204:15	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE	§ 204-12

group care facility, nursing home, or similar type group living use. A boardinghou se may involve the  provision of meals to residents, but shall not include a restaurant open to the public.  A boardinghou se shall primarily serve per sons residing on-site for five or more consecutive days.

BUFFER - An area within a property or site generally adjacent to and parallel with the lot line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs , fences and/or berms, designed to limit continuously the view, sound and/or light from the site to adjacent sites or properties.

BUILDING - Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind, including porches, decks, awnings, or vehicles situated on private property and u sed for purposes stated above. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "building" shall include ga s or liquid storage tank. See Diagram 204-12B .

(1)	ATTACHED BUILDING -A building  which is connected to another by two or more party walls in common, except for end units. For purposes of this definition, attached building s shall each have one front yard and one rear yard, and two party walls in common with , and attached to two other buildings, except for end units, which shall each have one party wall in common and one side yard.

(2)	DETACHED BUILDING - A building which is completely surrounded by permanent open space . For purposes of this definition , detached bu ildings shall have two side yards, one front yard and one rear yard.

(3)	SEMIDETACHED BUILDING - A building  which is connected to another building by only one party wall in common . For purposes of this definition, semidetached buildings shall each have one side yard, one front yard, one rear yard, and one party wall in common with, and attached to another building.


Diagram 204-128







 



I
I
I	I	0
I	O	I
I ATTACHED • ATTACHED I
 



ATIACMID END UNIT
 

.
:S TAC.HEO: SEMl ·OETACHED
 



BUILDING , ACCESSORY - A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinat e to that of the principal building, which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building. Buildings associated with agriculture and not intended for habitation are considered to be accessory buildings. See Diagram 204- l 2C.



204:16	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONTNG	§ 204-12

Diagram 204-12C
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES



POOL	GARAGE	SHED







PRINCIPAL
STRUCTURE

HOUSE    ,.	,




STREET
R.O.W.



BUILDING, PRINCIPAL ..: A building which is enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls , which is built , erected, and framed of component structural parts, which is designed for housing, shelter, enclosure, and support  of  individuals, or property  of any kind , and which is a main structure on a given lot. See Diagram 204-12C.

BUILDING AREA - The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the average grade level of the principal building or structure and all accessory buildings and structures, including covered porches, decks, and awnings.

BUlLDING FACADE - The front exter ior face, elevation, or wall of a principal building or structure, often the side of the building facing street right s-of-way (excluding alleys).

BUILDING FOOTPRINT - The area of a building or structure mea sured from the exterior surface of the exterior wall s at grade level. Where a building or structure is elevated above grade level, the buildin g footprint is the area the building wou ld cover if it were located at ground level.

BUlLDTNG HEIGHT - The vertical distance from the average finished grade in front
of the building or structure where the address is taken to:

(1)	The top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof;

(2)	The deck level on a mansard roof; and

(3)	The average distance between  the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and
gambrel  roofs.





204:17	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

 



PITCHED  ROOF  BUILDING
 
Diagram 204-12D
FLAT ROOF BUILDING


Highest
Point
 
Highest . ..
Point


 


Average
<-Ground
Level
 
Average
-Ground
Level
 


 


BUILDING ORIENTATION - Generally refers to the manner in which a building or
structure is positioned on a lot (e.g., a front building facade parallel to a front lot line).

BUILDING SETBACK LINE - The line within a property defming the required distance between any enclosed building or structure and the abutting right-of-way, or otherwise, front, rear , and side lot lines. In the case of lot where a front and/or rear lot line does not coincide with a recorded right-of-way, the building setback line shall be measured from the associated recorded right-of-way. See Diagram 204-12E.


Diagram 204-12E
A	Driveway
13	Frontage
C	Lot line
D	Lot depth
E	Lot width
F	Setback line
G	Setba ck, front
II	Setback , rear
1	Setback , side
J	Right-of-way (R OW)
K	Yard, front
L	Yard, rear
M	Ya rd, side
N	Structure,accessory
0	Structure, principal Rights-of-way, setbacks and other lines not drawn to scale


CAMPER - Any individual who occupies a campsite or otherwise assumes charge of,
or is placed in charge of, a campsite.

CAMPGROUND	or  RECREATIONAL	VEHICLE   PARK  -	A  state-permitted establishment , throu gh the Pennsylvania Department of Health , in which a portion of land is used for the purpose of providing a space for trailers, recreat ional vehicles, or tents for camping purpo ses, regardles s of whether a fee has been charged for the leasing, renting or occupancy of the space, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 28,



204:18	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

Chapter 19. The campground may be an organized camp which includes a combination of programs and facilities established for the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group living experience for children, youth and adults with social, recreational, and educational objectives and operated and used for five or more consecutive days during one or more seasons a year .

CAMPSITE - Any plot of ground within a campground intended for exclusive occupancy by a camping unit or units under the control of a camper.

CAMPING UNIT - Any tent , trailer, cabin, lean-to, recreation vehicle, or similar structure established or maintained and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.

CARPORT - An unenclosed structure for the storage of one or more vehicles in the same manner as a private garage, which may be covered by a roof supported by columns or posts.

CARTWAY or ROADWAY - The improved surface of a street, access drive, driveway or a lley available for vehicular traffic, including travel Ian.es and parking lanes, but not including curbs, sidewalks or swales.

CAR WASH - An establishment whereby structures equipped with apparatuses is used for the interior and/or exterior cleaning, vacuuming, washing, polishing, or waxing or any combination thereof, of motor vehicles is provided.

(1)	AUTOMATIC CAR WASH -A self-serve car wash in which the vehicle enters a
washing bay and is cleaned solely by a mechani zed process.

(2)	FULL-SERVICE CAR WASH -A car wa sh in which attendants are responsible for some portion of the washing process.

(3)	SELF-SERVICE CAR WASH - A car wash in which the vehicle enters a washing bay and is cleaned by the vehicle's occupants .

CEMETERY - A parcel of land used as a burial ground for human or animal rem ains, including columbarium s, crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within the boundaries thereof.

CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE - An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street center lines.

CLINIC, MEDICAL - An establishment where patient s are admitted for examination and treatment to the general public without overnight accommodation and shall include such uses as reception areas, offices, consultation rooms, and X-ray, but may also include a pharmacy, provided that such use has access only from the interior of the buildin g or structure, on an outpatient ba sis by three or more licensed medical professionals including physicians, dentists, opticians, psychologists, other similar medical personnel and vocations.





204:19	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

CLUB, CLUBHOUSE OR LODGE, PRIVATE - A building , structure, or part thereof, used to hou se an organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, or premises or building s for social, recreational and administrative purposes which are not conducted for profit, provided there are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial act ivities except as required for the membership or fund-raising of such club. This use shall not include bar , boardinghou se, nightclub , restaurant, or tavern open to the general public, or an auditorium, unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the applicable requirement s of that use are met, provided they are operated primarily to serve members and their guests.

CO-LOCATION - Installation of a communication antenna on an existing structure other than a communication tower. Co-location includes the installation of communication equipment on or near the existing structure. No part of the communication antenna or communication  equipment may extend more than 20 feet above the highest point of the structure on which the communication antennas are attached.

COMMERCIAL RECREATION  Any  establishment  whose  main  purpose  is  to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity, and where ticket s are sold or fees are collected for the activity:

(1)  INDOOR  COMMERCIAL  RECREATIONAL  ESTABLISHM ENT  - An
establishment operated as a gainful business, open to the public, for the purpose of leisure-time activities, public recreation or entertainment, includin g, but not limited to, amusement arcade, arena, assembly hall, bingo parlor, bowling alley, gymnasium, health and fitness club, miniature golf course, skating rink, swimming pool , dance or gymnastic instructional school, tennis courts, etc., when operated within a completely enclosed building. This use does not includ e a theater.
(2)  OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL . ESTABLISHMENT - An
establishment operated  as a  gainful business,  open to the public upon open land,
wholly or partially outside of a building, for the purpose of leisure-time activities, public recreation or entertainment such as a swimming pool, tennis court, batting and pit ching cages, go-carts and skating rinks, but also includes amusement rides or regu lar Jive entertainment. For purposes of this chapter, this use excludes a park, golf course and an outdoor shooting range.

COMMON OPEN SPACE - Any area of land or water, or a combination of land and water , within a development site designed and intended for use by all residents of the development or the general public. Land included within the right-of-way lines of streets and stormwat er detenti on basins with impervious surfaces shall not be classified as common open spa ce. Common open spaces shall not include required setbacks between buildin gs and street rights-of-way, driveways, access drives, parking areas and lot lines of the development. No dwelling unit , residential accessory buildings or parking or loading areas may be located within common open spaces.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The most recent version North Middleton Township
Comprehensive Plan, including any amendments.





204:20	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA - Any device u sed for the transmission  or recept ion of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communicatio ns signals including, without limitation, omnidirectional or whip antenna s and directional or panel antenna s, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federa l Communicatio ns Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes or television antenn as or amateur radio equipment, including wit hout limitation ham or citizen ban radio antenna s.

COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING - An unmanned building or cabinet containing communi cations equipment required for the operation of communication s antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater than 350 square feet.

COMMUNICATIONS TOWER - A structure other than a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting, or guyed tower, designed and used to support communications antenna.

COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING FACILITY - A
communications tower or other facility which transmits or receives a radio, television, or
other communications signal(s).

CONDITIONAL USE - A permitted use which may be appropriate to a particular zone district, only when specific conditions and criteria prescribed for such uses have been comp lied with . Conditional uses are reviewed by the Board of Supervisors after recommen dations by the Plannin g Commission, in accordance with § 204-73 of this chapter.

CONDOMINIUM - A form of property ownership providing for individua l ownership of a specific dwelling unit or other space, together with an undivided interest in the land or other parts of the structure in common with other owners.

CONSERVATION PLAN - A plan including a map(s) and narrative that outlines an erosion and sedimentation control plan for an identified parcel of land.

CONTINUING  CARE  RETIREMENT  COMMUNITY  - An  age-restricted
development or establishment that provides a continuum of accommodat ions and care for independent living to long-term bed care,  and  enters  into contracts  to provide  lifelong care in exchange for the payment of monthly fees and an entrance fee.

CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE AND STORAGE YARD - An establishment of any general contractor or builder where equipment a nd materials are stored and/or where a contractor performs shop or assembly work but does not include any other yard or establishment otherwise defined or classified herein .

CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE - An establishment of any general contractor or buil der in which one or more persons are employed in the management, direction or conducting of bu siness and whose staff/employees serve clients who seek advice and consultation regarding business. Equipment and mat erials may not be stored nor may a contractor perform shop or assembly work at this establishment.





204:2 1	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

CONVENIENCE STORE - An establishment primaril y engaged in the retail sale of frequently or reoccurring needed goods for hou sehold consumption, including but not limited to prepackaged food and beverages, foods prepared on site, magaz ines, lottery tickets, tobacco product s, and limited hou sehold supplies, and hardware ; and the rental of videotapes, DVDs and videogames, provided that an adult bookstore is specifically prohibited. Convenience stores shall not include the dispensing of gasoline or other vehicle fuels and/or the washing of automobi les, unless the dispensing of fuel and washing of automobiles are permitted in the zone and the appropriate approvals for an automobile filling/service station and car wash (as defined herein) have been obtained as applicable.

CONVENTION CENTER - A group of u ses designed and constructed as an integra ted development to serve those attending consumer trade show s, association conferences and meetings, sports shows, banqu ets, receptions and other similar functions.

COPY SHOP/BUSINESS SERVICE - An establishment  primarily engaged  in providing custom printing, photocopyin g, faxing, mailing, courier service and/or other similar bu siness and officer support services , along with accessory sales of material s and items related to copying and mailing.

CRAFTSMAN OR ARTISAN STUDIO - An establishment primarily engaged in the on-site production , display, and sa le of goods created on-site by hand manufacturing involving only the u se of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding eight kilowatt s (kW). Typica l uses include painting and other media art, ceramics, fabric crafts, candle-making , and jewelry manufa cturing. All such production associated with this use shall occur within a completely enclosed building.

DAY CARE - An establishment offering care or supervision of persons under the age of 16, special needs adults in lieu of care or supervision by family members, or elderly persons (generally 60 yea rs of age and older) and/or mentally retarded and/or physically handicapped who need such daily assistance because of their limited physical abilities, Alzheimer's disease, mental abilities or menta l retardation. This use shall not include persons who need oversight because of beha vior that is criminal or violent. This u se may involve occasional overnight stays, bu t shall not primarily be a residential use. The use shall involve typica l stays of less than a total of 60 hours per week per person:

(1)	DAY CARE, ACCESSORY -An accessory use to a dwelling unit, whereby care and supervision is offered to no more than three nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. An accessory day care does not require zoning approval.

(2)	DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL -An establishment operated as a gainfu l bu siness which  the care and supervision to more than six nonresidents of the site during any calendar  day. Commercial day-care facilities can be operated  as principal uses or as  accessory  uses  associated  with  other  u ses  (e.g.,  schools,  places  of  worship, industries,  residential complex, etc.); however, in no case shall a commercial day care be  considered an accessory use to an individu al dwelling unit.  Commercial da y-ca re  facilities shall include "group child day-care homes" and "child day-care centers," as  defined and regulated by the Department of Public Welfare of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.



204:22	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

(3)	DAY CARE, FAMILY -An accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling, in which the care and supervision is offered to between four and six nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. Family day-care facilities must be registered with the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

DENSITY, NET - The number of dwelling units permitted in relation to the land area actually in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes, exclusive of any public, private, or both, street s.

DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Enviromnen tal Protection.

DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations.

DEVELOPMENT AL DISABILITY - A disability of a person which has continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely; a disability which is:

(1)	Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy,  epilepsy,  autism,  injury, trauma, or any combination thereof.

(2)	Found to be attributable to any other conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation because such condition results in similar impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior to that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment and services similar to those required for such persons.

(3)	Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described in Subsections (1) and
(2) of this definition.

 
DEVELOPMENTALLY   DISABLED   PERSON
disability.
 
A  person  with  a  developmental
 

DISTRIBUTION - A process whereby materials, goods or products are imported,
stored by one person and then delivered to another.

DOMESTIC PETS - The noncommercial keeping of no more than six adult nonfarm animals that are locally available for purchase as pets, as an accessory use to a dwelling unit.

DRIVE-IN - A business establishment, including an eating establishment, offering refreshments , entertainment, goods or services to patrons , who purchase and/or consume such refreshments, entertainment, or services on the premises and/or outside of the building or structure, including patrons who may receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.

DRIVE-THROUGH - A portion of a business establishment dependent on providing an access drive approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure.

DRIVEWAY - A private improved surface designed and constructed to provide
vehicular  movement  from  a  street  to  a  parking  area,  garage, dwelling,  building  or


204:23	01-01 -2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

structure  within  a  lot  or  property  containing  one single-family  dwelling unit  or  an
agricultural  activity.

DWELLING - Any  building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including those listed below , but not including hospitals, hotels, motel s, boarding, rooming and Lodging houses, institutional houses, tourists courts, and the like, offering overnight accommodat ions for guests or patients. In addition, all dwellings shall be properly connected to approved and perman ently designed public or on-lot sewer, public or on-Lot water, electrical and other uti l ity systems . See Diagram 204-12F.

(l ) MULTIFAMILY DWELLING -A detached building , or a group of attached or semidetached building s, containing three or more dwelling units for hou sing three or more families or hou sekeeping units.

(2)	SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING -An attached building containing one dwelling unit for housing one family or housekeepin g unit. For purposes of this definition, "row house" and "townhouse" are considered single-family attached . dwellings.

(3)	SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING -A detached building containing one dwelling unit for hou sing one family or housekeeping unit. For purposes of this chapter, recreational  vehic les, as defined herein, shall not be constru ed as dwellings .

(4)	SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING - A semidetached building contain ing one dwelling unit for housing one family or hou sekeeping unit.

(5)	TWO-FAMILY DWELLING - A detached buildin g containing not more than two  dwelling units for hou sing not more than two families or hou sekeeping units.




























204:24	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 204-12
 
ZONING	§ 204-12
 

 


DWELLING • MULTl·FAMILY


 

I
 
Diagram 204-12F
DWELLING ·SINGLE FAMILY
ATTACHED
 


DWELLING ·SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED





.......
 

 
DWELLING· SINGLE FAMILY
SEMl-OETACHEO

FAMILY 1





----
 
DWELLING lWO FAMILY









_,
 

FAMILY1
FAMILY2




SIDE BY SIDE
OR OVER I UNDER

FAMILY 1
FAMILY 2
 


DWELLING UNIT - A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more per sons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY - Any construction or other activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, excavations, embankments, land development, subdivision development, mineral extraction and the moving, depositing or storing of soil, rock or earth, excluding the tilling of the soil.

EASEMENT - A  right granted for the use of private land for certain public, quasi-public, or private purposes; also the land to which such right pertains.

ESSENTIAL SERVICES - The provi sion by public utilities, municipal or other governmen tal units regulated by the Public Utility Commission (PUC) or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrica l, steam or water pipes, sewer and storm sewer facilities, and wires , mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrant s and similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or governmenta l units or for the public health, safety or genera 1 welfare.




204:25	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL - A person duly registered as a professional engineer
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP - The Township Engineer , who will be a registered professional engineer, or any registered professional engineer or any consultant designated by the Board of Supervisors to review a subdivision plan and perform the duties of engineer on beha lf of the Township.

FAMILY - One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single hou sekeeping unit, or a number of persons living and cooking together as a single hou sekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage.5

FARM OCCUPATION - A business activity administered or that is clea rly conducted as an accessory use to and/or within a principal agricultural u se, within an accessory structure.

FENCE - A structure designed as a barrier to restrict  the  movement or view of persons, animals, property, vehicles , or any combination thereof. This definition shall not include ornamental fence treatment s that are located in the front yard and extend less than 1/2 the width, depth, or both, of the front yard.

FILL - Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the surface elevation of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments and causeways.

FINANCIAL INSTITUTION - A bank, savings and loan association, credit union, finance or loan company, etc.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS - The total of all floor areas of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings , excluding uninhabitable cellar, basement , and attic areas used only for storage and the operation and maintenance of the building.

FLOOR AREA, NET - The total of all floor areas of a building or structure, excluding stairwells and elevator shaft s, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when u sed or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.

FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE - The total of all floor areas of all rooms used for habitation in a building or structure , such as living room, dining room, kitchen, or bedroom, but not excluding hallways, stairways, cellars, basements , attics, service rooms or utility rooms, bathroom, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at lea st one window or skylight opening onto an outside yard or court. At lea st half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area .




5.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I, General Provisions, Ari. II).


204:26	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204- 12	ZONING	§ 204-12

FLOOR AREA RETAIL, NET - The total of all floor area space relegated to use by the customer and the retail employee to consummate retail sales; and to include display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for the customer; but not to include office space, storage space, and other general administrative areas.

FOOD SERVICE FACILITY - An establishment in which food is processed and/or prepared on the premises , and which may be sold on the premises. This term shall also include bakeries and catering establishments.

FORESTRY - The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing , cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.

FRONTAGE - The linear measurement taken along a property's common boundary with an adjoining street right-of-way, other than that of a limited access highway. See Diagram 204- l 2E.

FUNERAL HOME - An establishment conducting embalming and cremation which may include the viewing of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith prior to burial or cremation , but not including cemeteries, columbariums, mausoleums, and entombments.

GARBAGE - All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, pieces, part s, remains of meat, fish and fowl, vegetables and other parts thereof and all other articles or material ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or which are, for any reason, discarded. See "waste."

GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory building for the storage of one or more automobi les, other vehicles accessory and incidental to the primary use of the premises, or both; provided , however, that one commercial vehicle of not more than one-ton capacity may be stored therein where the use of such vehicles is not incidental to the use of the premises. No bu siness, occupation or service shall. be conducted therein, nor shall space therein for more than one vehicle be leased to a nonoccupant of the premises. (UNLESS  OTHERWISE  PERMITTED  IN THIS  CHAPTER)  Where a garage is an
attached integral part of a dwelling unit , the garage shall not be counted as habitable floor area unles s it is constructed or modified into a habitable room by the removal of all vehicu lar access doors and provided adequate off-street parking is still available on the same lot as the dwelling unit.

GARAGE/YARD SALE - The public sale of household and personal items, and/or items common to the use of home ownership.

GOLF COURSE - A pub lic or private recreational area primarily used for playing golf and which has a minimum of 5,000 yards of play in 18 holes or 2,500 yards in nine holes, and which may include accessory facilities such as a driving range, pro shop, and/or restaurant.

GOVERNING BODY - The North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors.





204:27	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

GROUP CARE FACILITY - An estab lishment providing shelter, counseling, and other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for nine but fewer than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may be required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Resident s may not be legally related to  the  facility  operators or super visors and, by rea son of mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems , require a minimum level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or general supervision. A group care facility must be licensed and/or approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.

GROUP HOME A dwelling unit directly  associated  with  and  operated  by  a responsible individual, family or organization with a program to provide  a  supportive living arrangement for individuals where special  care  is needed  by  the persons  served due to age, emotiona l, mental , developmental or physical disability.  Such administration is through the direction of paid professional staff and for supervision of residents by full-time resident staff. This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care of persons with disabilities subject to protection  under the Pennsylvania and Federal Fair Housing Acts, as amended. Group homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any such license must  be delivered  to the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the use.

(1)	Group  homes  shall  be  subject  to  the  same  limitations  and  regu lations  by  the
Township as the type of dwelling unit they occupy.

(2)	It is the express intent of the Township to comply with a ll provlSlons of the Pennsylvania and Federal Fair Hou sing Acts, as amended, and regula tions promulgated thereunder , in the construction of this term.


*	NOTE: The Federa l Fair Hou sing Act Amendment s defined "handicap" as follows: "l) a physical or mental impa irment which substantially limits one
or more of such per son's major life activities; 2) a record of having such an impairment; or 3) being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in § 802 of Title 21." This definition was subsequent ly adjusted by § 512 of the American s with Disabilities Act to address certain situations related to substance abuse treatment.


HALFWAY HOUSE - A non-institution al living arrangement with treatment and support services for persons with substance abu se problem s or for inmates and parolees approaching parole release date or release from a corrections institution. The halfway house (community corrections center) operates under the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health or Department of Corrections or similar authorities. The residents are provided full-time supervi sion and counseling on employment, vocations , finances and community living.

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL - Material s which have the potential to damage health, endanger human life or impair safety.




204:28	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204- 12	ZONING	§ 204-12

HAZARDOUS WASTE - Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air pollution faci lity and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricu ltural operations and from community activities, or any combination of the above, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:

(1)	Cause or significant ly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or

(2)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when  improperly treated, stored, transported, exposed of or otherwise managed.

HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY - Any structure, group of structures, aboveground or underground storage tanks or any other area or buildings used for the purpose of permanently hou sing or temporarily holding hazardous waste for the storage or treatment for any time span other than the normal transportation time through the Township .

HEAVY EQUIPMENT - Machinery, veh icles and other devices that are not normally used for domestic purposes upon a residential dwelling lot. Examples include, but are not limited to, agricultural machinery, excavation equipment, commercia l trucks and trailers, Class II recreation vehicles (as defined herein), yachts, industrial machinery, etc.

HELICOPTER PAD (PRIVATE) - An accessory use where no more than one
helicopter may land/take off and be stored.

HELIPORT - A principa l (or accessory , like airstrip) use where one or more helicopters may land/take off and be stored. Such use may also include support services such as fueling and maintenance equipment , passenger termina ls and storage hangars.

HISTORIC RESOURCES PHRASES AND TERMS - U nless specifically defined el sewhere herein, the following words and phrases when used in § 204-23 of this chapter relating to the Historic Resources Overlay Zone shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(1)	ADAPTIVE USE (REUSE) -The process of converting a building to a use other than that for which it was designed.

(2)	ALTER or ALTERATION -A cha nge in the appearance of a building, structure, site or object.

(3)	ARCHITECT - An individual wit h a degree from a recognized university and registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the profes sion of design and construction of buildings and structures.

(4)	ARCHITECTURE - The art/science of building design and construct ion; a method or style of bu ilding; the product of construction; the recognizable features for any kind of structure; the material s and method s used to produce a structure.

(5)	DEMOLISH or DEMOLITION -To tear down, raze, destroy, do away with.



204:29	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

(6)	HISTORIC PROPERTY - A parcel of land containing one or more historic resources.

(7)	HISTORIC RESOURC E - Any building, structure, site, object or district that is listed in the National Register of Hi storic Places; designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a contributing resource within a National Register listed or locally designated historic district; or with an opinion of certification that the property is eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing resource to a historic district. For purposes of this chapter, resources classified as Class 1 and Class 2 shall be considered historic resources.

(8)	INTEGRITY - Historic integrity is the composite of seven qualities: location, design, setting, materi als, workmanship, feeling, and association. All seven qualities do not need to be present as long as the overall sense of pa st time and place is evident. All properties change over time. The retention of integrity depends upon the nature and degree of alteration or change. It is not necessary for a property to retain all the physical features or charact eristics that it bad during its period of significance. However, the property must retain the essential physical features that enable it to convey  its past identity or character and therefore its significance.

(9)	MAINTENANCE -To keep in its existing state, preserve from failure or decline, upkeep .

(10)	NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - The official federal list of district s, sites, buildings, structur es, and objects significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture.

(11)	OBJECT -A construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale and simply constructed , such as a statue, milepost, hitchin g-post, etc.

(12)	RECYCLE or SALVAGE - When used in connection with historic resources, shall  mean retention of reusable building materials for reu se.

(13)	SITE -The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintain s.

HOME   IMPROVEMENT   CENTER,  LUMBER,  BUILDING   MATERIALS   SALES
FACTLITY - An establishment providing for the sale of home, lawn, and garden supplies, lumber, and other similar building materials and produ cts, including hardware stores.

HOME OCCUPATION - A business activity administered or that is clearly conducted
as an accessory use to and within a single-family detached dwelling.

HORTICULTURE - The growing of fruits, vegetables , flowers, or ornamental plants.

HOSPITAL - An establishment which provides medical, psychiatric , obstetrical , or
surgical care on a twenty-four-hour basis. The term "hospital" shall include facilities used



204:30	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

for medical research and training for health-care professions, general hospitals, mental hospitals, tuberculosis hospitals , children's hospitals , and any such other facilities which provide inpatient care. A hospital use can also include attached and detached accessory uses, provided that all uses are contained upon the hospital property. A hospital shall be licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The term "hospital" shall not include any facility in which is conducted the housing of the criminally insane or provides treatment for persons actively charged with or serving a sentence after being convicted of a felony.

HOTEL - A facility which provides lodging to boarders for compensation , which contains more than eight rooms with less than 25% of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building and which may provide meals and other services as a part of the compensation.

IMPERVIOUS AREA - Any portion of a lot covered by material impenetrable by precipitation , including buildings, structures and paved areas.

IMPERVIOUS COVER- Any natural or man-made material utilized to cover, pave or resurface any portion or area of a lot, whether permeable or impermeab le, excepting only soil, plants or vegetat ive coverings. "Impervious cover" shall include, among other materials , any form or mixture of concrete, stone, asphalt, tar, or other substance designed and intended to alter the natural state of the land.

IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE-   See "lot coverage."

INDUSTRIAL USE - Any  enterprise in which goods are generally mass produced from raw materials on a large scale through use of an assembly line or similar proces s, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or  manufacturing uses. This term includes but is not  limited to those involving manufacturing; processing;  packaging; printing, publishing and binding; production ; testing of materials, goods and products; conversion and assembly; industrial laundries; repair of large appliances and equipment; machine shops, and welding shops.

(1)	GENERAL INDUSTRIAL -An industrial use:

(a)	Involving the processing and manufacturing of semi-finished and/or finished materials or products predominately from extracted, raw, and/or recycled materials ; and/or

(b)	Engaged in the storage of, manufacturing processes u sing, and/or shipping of flammable or explosive materials; and/or

(c)	Engaged in the storage,  manufacturing  processes,  and/or  shipping  of materials or products that potentially involve  hazardous  or  commonly offensive  conditions; and

(d)	Due to the more intensive nature of the processes,  materials , products, etc.
such uses may disturb or endanger neighboring properties.

(2)	LIGHT INDUSTRIAL -An industrial use:




204:31	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-12	


(a)	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

Involving	the   manufacturing,	predominately	from  previ ously  prepared
		semi-finished  or  finished  materials  product s or parts,  finished  materials  and
		products , including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
		incidental  storage,  sales  and  distribution,  as  well  as  the  repair  of  such
		finished products ; but
	(b)	Excluding the processing of extracted, raw, and/or recycled materials; and
	(c)	Due  to  the  lower   intensity   nature  of  processes,   materials,  or  product s,
		produce no noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard or noxiou s emission,
		which wou ld disturb or endanger neighboring properties.
	(d)	Such establishments involved in the production and/or repair services when
	such  facilities  are  in  a  completely  enclosed  building  including  home
	appliances;   electrical   instruments;   office  machines;  precision   instruments;
	electronic devices; timepieces; jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments ;
	novelties; mass-produced furniture; wood product s such as cabinetry, printed
	material;  lithographic   p lates;   type  composition;   machine   tools;   dies  and
	gauges;  ceramics;  apparel;  lightweight  meta l  castings;  film processing;  light
sheetmetal product s; tinsmithing, welding, plumbing, heating, ventilating and
	air-conditioning pla stic goods; pharmaceutical goods; and food products , bu t
	not anima l slaughtering or curing nor rendering of fats.

INDUSTRY - The manufacturing, compoundin g, processing, assemb ly, or treatment of
materials, articles, or merchandise.

JOINT-USE ACCESS DRIVE - An access drive shared by and constructed to provide vehicular access between mu ltiple nonresidentia l or multifamily u ses and a street.

JOINT-USE DRIVEWAY - A driveway shared by and constructed to provide access
to two or three properties.

JUNK - Used materials, discarded materials, or both, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, metal , building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, which are being stored awaiting potentia l reuse or ultimate disposal.

JUNKYARD - Any place where activity of storing or accumulating junk occurs or where business of selling, buying or dealing in junk is carried on or where two or more motor vehicles are stored which are unlicensed , inoperable, and do not have a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the Vehicle Code and other laws of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania. See "automobile wrecking, junk and scrap storage and sales establishments Gunkyards)."

KENNEL, COMMERCIAL - An establishment operated as a gainful business licensed through the Department of Agriculture, conta ining indoor and outdoor housing facilities for the sheltering of four or more canines, or other animals in accordance with the Penn sylvania Code, as amended or revised.

LARGE SOLAR ENERGY PRODUCTION FACILITY - An area of land or other area used for a solar collection system principally used to capture solar energy and convert it to electrical energy. Large solar energy production facilities consist of one or


204:32	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

more freestanding ground- or roof-mounted solar collector devices,  solar-related equipment and other accessory structures and buildings , including light reflectors , concentrators, and heat exchangers,  substations,  electrical  infrastructure,  transmission lines and other appurtenant  structures and facilities. A facility is considered a large solar energy production facility if it supplies electrica l or thermal power solely for off-site use.

LARGE WIND ENERGY PRODUCTION FACILITY - An area of land or other area used for a wind energy conversion system principa lly used to capture wind energy and convert it to electrical energy. Large wind energy product ion facilities consist of one or more wind turbines, tower, and associated control or conversion electronics and other accessory structures and  buildings  including substations, electrical  infrastructure , transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. A facility is considered a large wind energy production facility if it supplies electrical power solely for off-site use.

LANDOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner , or other person ha ving a proprietary interest in land.

LAUNDRY   AND   DRY-CLEANING   ESTABLISHMENT   (INDUSTRIAL)              An
establishment  equipped  with  large-scale clothes-washing and dry cleaning equipment.

LAUNDRY AND DRY-CLEANING  ESTABLISHMENT  (PERSONAL) - An
establishment equipped with individual clothes-washing equipment for the use of retail customers or the dropoff and pickup of clothing for dry cleaning off-site).

LIBRARY - An establishment in which literar y, musical , artistic or reference material
(such as book s, manu scripts, recordings or films) are kept for use but not for sale.

LIGHTING -RELATED TERMS AND PHRASES - Unless specifically defined elsewhere herein, the following words and phra ses when used in § 204-37 of this chapter relating to the outdoor lighting shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. See Diagram 204-12G.

(1)	FOOTCANDLE - Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be horizontal unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance meter , aka light meter.

(2)	FULL CUTOFF -Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is emitted at or  above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than  10% of the lamp's intensity is emitted at or above an angle I0° below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture.

(3)	FULLY SHIELDED - Attribute of a lighting fixture provided with internal and/or external shields and lou vers to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at norma l viewing angles.

(4)	GLARE - Excessive brightne ss in the field of view that is sufficiently greater than the brightness to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance or loss in visual performance and visibility, so as to jeopardize health, safety or welfare.


204:33	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

(5)	ILLUMINANCE -Quantity of light, measured in footcandles.

(6)	LIGHT TRESPASS -Light emitted by a lighting fixture or installation, which is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the lighting installation is sited.

(7)	LUMEN -As used in the context of this chapter, the light-output rating of a lamp (light bulb).


Diagram 204-12G
••::::::::-_-::::::.·::  J:HOR IZONTAL   Pl.M







FUll. CU'fOFF LIGHTING	FULLY SHIELOEO LICHTINC



LIVESTOCK - Large animals, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: horses, ponies, donkeys, mules , cattle, sheep, goats or swine, but also includes poultry. For purpo ses of this chapter , livestock shall not be considered domestic pets.

LOADING SPACE - An off-street paved space suitable for the loading or unloading of
goods and having direct usable access to a street or alley.

LONG-TERM-CARE NURSING FACILITY - A facility defined and licensed by the Commonw ealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health in accordance with Title 28 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 201. The facility provides skilled or intermediate nursing care services 24 hour s a day and seven days a week to individuals who do not require more intensive hospital-based care.

LOT - Any parcel, plot or tract  of land intended as a single unit for purposes of ownership, transfer of ownership, u se, rent, improvement or development. Contiguous nonconforming lots of record under single and separate ownership shall be considered one lot for the purposes of this chapter. A lot, as herein defined, may or may not coincide with a lot of record. See Diagram 204-12H.

(1)	LOT, CORNER - A  lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of two street lines. A  lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a comer lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°. Corner lots, including multiple frontage lots, shall have two front yards (abutting the street), one side yard and one rear yard. For purposes of this chapter, the front lot line of the street in which the lot is addressed shall be the primary front lot line, and the other front lot line shall be the secondary front lot line. The rear lot line





204:34	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

shall be the Jot line directly opposite of the primary front lot line. The side lot line shall be the lot line directly opposite the secondary front lot line.

(2)	LOT, FLAG - A lot whose frontage does not satisfy the minimum lot width requirements for the respective zone but that does have su fficient lot width away from the lot's frontage.

(3)	LOT, INTERIOR -A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a
street right-of-way.

(4)	LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE, THROUGH OR REVERSE-FRONTAGE -A lot
having frontage on two or more parallel or approximately parallel streets. In such cases, the front yard setback will be determined by the street address, which yard a long the addressed street shall be considered the front yard. The yard along the opposite parallel or approxima tely parallel street will be considered the rear yard for determining the minimum required rear setback. The minimum required rear setback line shall be used for all pr incipal, accessory and temporary structures.

(5)	LOT, MULTIPLE-FRONTAGE -A corner lot that is adjacent to a street on three
or more sides. (Multiple-frontage lot is not depicted in Diagram 204-12H below.)


 


BLOCK
 
Diagram  204-12H
 

















INTERIOR LOT

" YARD






LOT AREA - The area contained within the lot lines of individual parcel s of land,
excluding any area within a street right-of -way, but including the area of any easement.

LOT COVERAGE - That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious cover.



204:35	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

LOT LINE - A line of record which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private road (right-of-way) or any other publ ic space. Where a lot abuts a public or private right-of-way, t he lot line for regulatory purposes shall be the right-of-way line; also known as "road or street line." See Diagram 204- l 2E.

LOT OF RECORD - A lot identified on a subdivision plan or on a deed or other instrument of conveya nce recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Cumberl and County, Pennsylvania.

LOT WIDTH - The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines at the minimum front setback line for the district in which the lot is located. On corner lots, lot width sha ll be measured between the right-of-way line for the non -address street and the directly opposite lot line. Unless otherwise noted , lot width shall be measured at the building setback line and the street frontage. For purposes of determining compliance with required lot width standard s of this chapter, in calculating required lot width, the term shall mea n the "contiguous" or "unbroken" horizontal distance measured between side lot lines. See Diagram 204-l 2E.

MANUFACTURE - A function involving either the process ing, conversion or
production of materials,  goods or products .

MANUFACTURED HOME - See "mobile home."

MANURE - The fecal and urin ary excrement of livestock and poultry, often containing some spilled feed, bedding or litter.

MANURE DIGESTER - A facility whose main purpose is to u se anaerobic digestion processes to convert  livestock and poultry manure (primary catalyst) into biogas, which is genera lly burned on-site to produ ce electricity, heat, and water; as well as to manage livestock and poultry manure. Manure digesters may include "codigestion" in which the livestock and poultry manure (primary catalyst) may be mixed wit h other  organic materials (secondary catalysts). Types of manure digesters include covered anaerobic lagoons, plug-flow, and/or complete mix (or continua lly stirred tank reactor), along with other appurtenant sites, structures and buildings,  electrical  infrastruct ure,  transmission lines and other appurtenant structur es and facilities.

MANURE STORAGE FACILITY - A detached structure or other improvement built to store manure for future use or disposa l. Types of storage facilities are as follows: underground storage, in-ground storage, earthen bank, stacking area, and aboveground storage. Manure storage facilities sha ll comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulation s.

MASSAGE THERAP Y ESTABLISHMENT - An establishment where massage services are provided by a person having graduated from a massage therapy training program approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools or equivalent agency if trained in another state; by a person certified through a massage therapy certification examinat ion approved by the Na tional Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person certified through the Nat ional Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; and/or is a practitioner or member of either of the American Massage   Therapy   Association    (AMTA),   Associated   Bodywork   and   Massage



204:36	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

Professionals (ABMP), or International Massage Associat ion (IMA). Massage therapy establishments shall not be construed to be  an  adult-related use as defined  herein, and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.

MASSAGE THERAPIST - A person trained, and licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , in manipu lation of the soft tissues of the body by rubbing, stroking, kneadin g, etc. for therapeutic or healing purposes.

MINERAL EXTRACTION OR RECOVERY OPERATION - An enterprise engaged in the searching for or removal of rock, soil or mineral from the earth by excavating, stripping, minin g, leveling, or any other process, but exclusive of excavations or grading involved in the construction of a building. Also includes any processing opera tions in connection with the above activities.

MINERALS - Any aggrega te or ma ss of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, eart h, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and cru de oil and natural gas.

MINI-STORAG E WAREHOUSES - An establishment providing for the enclosed storage of household items or recreational equipment, where said items are retained for direct use by their owner, who shall have direct access thereto without intermediate handling by the propr ietor of the facility.

MOBILE HOME - A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit , or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable again of being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations. Mobile homes placed in pa rks shall meet the requirements for mobile home parks listed in the North Middleton Township Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Ordinance, as may be amended. 6 Mobile homes pla ced on individual lots shall be considered dwellin gs and be bound by the requirements there imposed.

MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connection s and other appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.

MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been so designated and improved that they contain two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.

MOTEL - An establi shment which provides transient lodging accommoda tions to the general public in sleeping units which each have separate access directly to the outside and which may prov ide such additional supporting services as restaurants, recreation facilities and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.

MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL - An area or bu ilding where freight transported by
motor truck,  motor carriers, or rail (full loads or less than full loads) is stored, handled,


6.	Ed itor 's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development, Art. VI II, Mobile Hom e Park Regulations.


204:37	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH  MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

or transferred in the routine inter/intrastate shipment of said freight. It shall also include any area of such operations such as vehicle repair and service, truck parkin g, driver facilities and administrative operations located on the same parcel or tract.

MOTOR VEHICLE AUCTION - An establishment where new and used automob iles, trailers, boats, heavy equipment, recreational vehicles, trucks, other similar private passenger, recreation and commercial motor vehicles, and mobile homes, are stored, readied, and displayed on a recurring scheduled ba sis primarily for wholesale, but may also include retail sales.

MULTIUNlT RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION - The conversion of a single-family
detached dwelling into accommodation s for more than one dwelling unit.

MUNICIPAL-OWN ED USES - Any establishment, use, facility, and/or structure owned and/or operated by North Middleton Township , or its authorized municipal authorities or agents.

MUNICIPALITY - North Middleton Township, Cumberla nd County, Penn sylvania.

NATURE PRESERVE AND WILDLIFE SANCTUARIES - An area maintained in a
natural state for the preservation of both animal and plant life.

NEW CONSTRUCTION - Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.

NIGHTCLUB - Any  building used for on-site consumption of alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages where live entertainment is offered . For the purposes of this definition , "live entertainment" is meant to include the use of disc jo ckeys for the purposes of supplying mu sical entertainment. Nightclubs may also provide for on-site consumption of food. Additionally, nightclubs can offer the retail sale of carry-out beer and wine as an accessory use. This is also meant to include an "under 21" club which features entertainment.

NONCOMMERCIAL KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK - An accessory use to a principal single-family detached dwelling, whereupon livestock are kept exclusively by the residents of the site.

NONCONFORMING LOT - A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption  or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirement s of the zone in which it is located by rea sons of such adoption or amendment.

NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - A structure or part of a stru cture manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in this chapter, or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such chapter or amendment or prior to the application of such chapter or amendment to its location by rea son of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to nonconforming signs.

NONCONFORMING USE - A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or



204:38	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully  in existence  prior  to  the enactment  of such chapter or amendment  or prior  to the application  of such chapter or amendment  to its location by reason of annexation.

NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL - Any aspect of a use that does not comply with any size, height, bulk, setback, distance, landscaping, coverage, screening or any other design or performance standard specified by this chapter, where such dimensional nonconformity lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this chapter or amendment thereto.

NONPROFIT USE - A use whose purpose or purposes do not involve pecuniary profit, incidental or otherwise.

NO-IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION - A business activity administered or that is clearly conducted as an accessory use to and within residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with the residential use. (Also known as "no-impact home based business" per the MPC.)

OBSTRUCTION - Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification , culvert , building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or which is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.

OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS - An establishment in which one or more persons are employed in the management , direction or conducting of business/commerce and whose staff/employees serve clients who seek advice and consultation regarding business/commerce. A business office may include the administrative, corporate or professional offices for profit, nonprofit or charitable organizations, but also includes real estate, stock and bond brokers , accountants , adjusters, appraisers, utility companies , lawyers, clergymen , teachers, architects, engineers, insurance agents, and similar office-oriented  uses.

OFFICE, MEDICAL - An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment to the general public without overnight accommodation and without a pharmacy, and shall include such uses as reception areas, offices, consultation rooms, and X-ray, provided that such uses have access only from the interior of the building or structure, on an outpatient basis by not more than two licensed medical professionals including physicians , dentists, opticians, psychologist s, other similar ·medical personnel and vocations.

OFF-TRACK BETTING PARLOR - A commercial u se at which persons can visit to wager upon and observe by remote television the outcomes of events that are taking place elsewhere.





204:39	01-01-2014
 
§ 204- 12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

ON-LOT SEWER SERVICE - The disposal of sewage generated by one principal use with the use of safe and healthful means within the confines of the lot on which the use is located, as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

ON-LOT WATER SERVICE - The provision of a safe, adequate and healthful supply
of water to a single principal use from a private well.

OPEN SPACE - A space unoccupied by buildings or paved surface and open to the
sky on the same lot with the building.

ORNAMENTAL POND AND WADING POOL - A man-made body of water that contains less than 26.6 cubic feet (200 gallon s) of water, has a maximum length or diameter of 15 feet and has a maximum depth of 18 inches.

OUTDOOR FARM ERS/FLEA MARKET - A reta il sales use where more than one vendor displays and sells general merchandise that is new or used in an outdoor setting.

OUTDOOR CAFE/DINING - A portion of an establishment which includes an exterior seating area associated with a food services, restaurant , tavern/bar, or other similar establishment.

OUTSIDE DISPLAY AND SALES - The display and sales of products and services primari ly outside of a building or a structure.

PADEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protect ion.

PARK - A use of land, which may include accessory buildings and structures, for active and/or passive outdoor recreation for the purpose of pleasure, leisure, fellowship or exercise, commonly involving a sporting activity, camping, hiking, jogging , bicycling , swimming, picnicking and other related activities which is open to the public . A park may include amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, trails, playground equipment, rest rooms, picnic tables, cooking grills and similar facilities. For purposes of this chapter, parks shall not include improvements for or permit uses considered commercial recreational uses.

PARKING - The temporary stopping or standing of a licensed, inspected and operable vehicle, whether occupied or not, off the roadway.

PARKING COMPOUND - A publ ic or private lot, building or structure that is designed and used for the temporary off-street storage and parking of passenger vehicles. This use shall include surface parking lots and parking structures including buildings and decks.

PARKING LOT - Any area of a lot used for off-street parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of automobiles, and other motorized and nonmotorized vehicles .

PARKING STRUCTURE - A building or structure where passenger vehicles may be stored for temporary off-street parking, including decks and buildings.

PARKING SPACE - A space within an off-street parking compound for the parking of
motor vehicles or trailers.




204:40	OJ -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

PAVED AREA - Any area of a lot which is covered with a hard surface materia l, including asphalt or concrete, but not including, required public concrete sidewalks, curbs or cartways and shoulder s of publi c streets.

PENNDOT - The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation .

PERSON - An individual, form, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

PERSONAL CARE HOME - An establishment defined and licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylva nia Department of Public Welfare in accordance with Title 55 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 2600. A personal care home is a premises in which food, shelter and personal assistance or  supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed long-term-care facility, but who do require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration . A halfway house shall not be considered a persona l carehome.1

PERSONAL CARE HOME CENTER - See "assisted living facility."

PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS - An establishment where service-oriented activities for personal needs are provided to the general public, but which do not primarily involve retail sales of goods or does not involve professional advisory services. Such activities shall include and be similar to barbershops, beauty salons, health spas; photographic studios; small home appliance repair including radios and televisions; repair shops for tools, bicycles, guns, locks, shoes and watches; tailor,  dressmaking,  and uphol stering shops, and pet groomin g with no overnight boarding. Personal service establishments shall not be construed to be an adult-related use as defined herein.

PERVIOUS MATERIAL OR SURFAC,E - Any material that covers the land that would allow the percolation of stormwater directly into the soil, including plants or vegetat ive covering s or as otherwise which would permit water to penetrate and as approved by the Township Engineer. Shall not include any permeable man-made material utilized to pave any portion or area of a lot.

PESTICIDE - Any substance or mixture of substances intended for u se in preventing, destroying, repelling, sterilizing or mitigating any  insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals, fungi, weeds or other forms of plant or animal life.

PLACE OF WORSHIP - An establi shment wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religiou s body organized to su stain public worship, together wit h all buildings, accessory buildings , structures and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose including rectories, convents and church-related schools and day-care facilities. Includes synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious activities.





1.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (sec Ch. I , General Provisions , Ar t. II).


204 :41	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

PLANNED CENTER - A group of uses planned and designed as an integrated unit with controlled ingress and egress and shared off-street parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit. Such centers also may include planned center signs as regulated herein.

 
PLANNING  COMMISSION
Township.
 
The  Planning  Commission  of  North  Middleton
 

POST OFFICE - An establishment operated by the United States Postal Service, where mail is received, sorted, and delivered, and where stamps and other posta l materials are sold.

PREMISES - The property upon which the activity is conducted as determined by physical facts rather than lot lines. It is the land occupied by the buildings or other physical uses that are necessary or customarily incident to the activity, including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be used in connection with such buildings or uses. The following are·not considered to be a part of the premises on which the activity is conducted and any  signs located on such land are to be considered off-premises advertising:

(1)	Any land w hich is not used as an integral part of the principal activity, including land which is separated from the activity by  a roadway, highway or other obstruction and not used by the activity; and extensive undeveloped highway frontage contiguous to the land actually used by a commercial facility, even though it might be under the same ownership.

(2)	Any land which  is used for or devoted to a separate purpose unrelated  to the advertised activity.

(3)	Any land which is in closer proximity to the highway than to the principal activity and developed or used only in the area of the sign site or between the sign site and the principal activity and whose purpose is for advertising  purposes  only.  In no event sha ll a sign site be considered part of the premises on which the advertised activity is conducted if the site is located on a narrow strip of land which is nonbuildable land or is a common or private roadway or is held by easement or other lesser interest than the premi ses where the activity is located.

PRINCIPAL WASTE-HANDLING FACILITY - A principal use whereby waste is brought to the site for storage, processing , treatment, transfer or disposal.

PRIVATE AIRPORT - An airport which is privately owned and which is not open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.

PROCESSING - A function which involves only the cleaning, sorting, sizing, packaging, or any combination thereof, of products and materials.

PUBLIC  - Owned,  operated,   or  both,   by  the  Township,  its  authority,  a
Township-supported  fire company or a Township-supported  ambulance association.

PUBLIC AIRPORT - An airport which is either publicly or privately owned and which
is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.



204:42	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

PUBLIC HEARING - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the North Middleton Township Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission (as applicable), intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action on zoning-related matters.

PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986
(P.L. 388, No.  84), known as the "Sunshine Act," and subsequent amendments.8

PUBLIC NOTICE - Notice publi shed once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. Public notice for rezoning, specia l exception, variance, or any combination thereof, requests shall also include the posting of a sign(s) at a conspicuou s location(s) upon the site to notify potentially interested citizens; this sign(s) shall be posted at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the nature, date, time and location of the hearing.

PUBLIC SEWER - A municipal sanitary sewer or a comparable common or package sanitary	facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmenta l Protection. Such systems are capable of serving multip le users.

PUBLIC UTILITIES - Use or extension thereof which is operated, owned or maintained by a municipality or municipal authority or which is privately owned and approved by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for the purpose of providing public sewage disposal, treatment, or both; public water supply, storage, treatment , or any combination thereof ; or for the purpose of providing the transmission of energy or telephone service.

PUBLIC WATER - A municipal water supply system or a comparable common water facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such systems are capable of serving multiple users.

PUBLIC/PRIVATE WORKS FACILJTY - The erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance of buildings, power plants, towers, substations, water treatment plant s or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants, public transportation and road maintenance facilities, and other similar public service structures by a utility, whether publicly or privately owned, or by government agency other than Nort h Middleton Township (it s authorities or agents), including the furnishing of electrical, gas, communica tion, water supply and sewage disposal services .

RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL - Any natural or artificially produced substance which emits radiation spontaneou sly.

RADIO STATION - One or more transmitters or receivers or a combination of transmitters and receivers, including the accessory equipment, necessary at one location for the transmission of AM or FM radio broadcasts.




8.	Ed itor's Note: See 65 Pa.CS.A.§ 701 et seq.


204:43	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

RAIL YARD or RAILROAD YARD - A rail yard, or railroad yard , is a complex series of railroad tracks for storing, sorting, or loading/unloading, railroad cars and/or locomotives. Railroad yards have many tracks in parallel for keeping rolling stock stored off the main line, so that they do not obstruct the flow of traffic.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A portable structure, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation , camping or travel purposes. In addition to the above, any of the following attributes are characterist ic of a travel trailer:

(1)	The unit is of such size or weight as not to require a special highway movement permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when self-propelled or when hauled by a standard motor vehicle on a highway.

(2)	The unit is mounted or designed to be mounted on wheels.

(3)	The unit is designed to be loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck.

(4)	The unit  contains  or  was  designed  to  contain  temporary  storage  of  water  and sewage.
(5)	The unit contains some identification by the manufacturer as a travel trailer. RECYCLING BUSINESS/CENTER , COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL -  A facility,
other  than  a  facility  open  to  the  public  to  receive  commercial/industrial   recyclable
material, where any method, technique, or process is utilized to  separate,  process, modify, or convert waste so that component materials or substances  may  be  u sed or reused or sold to third parties for such purposes. The use or reuse, or a solid waste may not be used in a manner that would constitute solid waste disposal.

RECYCLING BUSINESS/CENTER, HOUSEHOLD WASTE - A facility, other than a facility open to the public to receive household waste and recyclable material, where any method , technique, or process is utilized to separate, process, modify, or convert waste so that component materials or substances may be used or reused or sold to third parties for such purposes. The use or reuse of a solid waste may not be used in a manner that would constitute solid waste disposal.

RENTAL - A procedure by which services or personal property are temporarily transferred to another person for a specific time period for compensation.

REPAIR - A function involved in correct ing deficiencies of products that affect its performance, appearance, or both.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT An  establishment which  carries  on investigations in the natural, physical, technical or social science or engineering and development as an extension of such investigation with the objective of creating end products.

RESEARCH LABORATORY - An establishment involving facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation , but not facilities for the ma nufacture or sale of products except as accessory and incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.



204:44	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

RESTAURANT - An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink and that routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food on the premises. A restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages. However, if such sales is a primary or substantial portion of the total trade, the requirement of a tavern or bar as applicable must be met.

RETAIL BUSINESS - An establishment which sells goods or merchandise and repair services for goods or similar merchandise sold on the premises to the general public for personal and household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Retail businesses shall not be construed to be an adult-related u se as defined herein.

RETAIL - Those businesses whose primar y activities involve the display and sales of goods and product s to the general public. This term shall not include adult-related uses as defined herein.

RIDING SCHOOLS and HORSE BOARDING STABLES - An establishment where hor ses are boarded and cared for, or where instruction in riding, jumping , and showing is offered, or where horses may be hired for riding.

RIGHT-OF-WAY - A strip of land acquired by reservation , dedication, forced dedication , prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary, storm sewer, and other similar uses, whether public or private. (See also "street line.") See Diagram 204-12E.

ROADSIDE STAND - An accessory structure which primarily involves the retail sale of agricultural and/or garden products such as fresh fruits, vegetables, herbs, flowers or plants produced on site or on property contiguous to the property on which they are offered for sale during the harvesting season.

RURAL OCCUPATION - A business activity administered or that is clearly conducted as an accessory use to a single-famil y detached dwelling, within an accessory structure.

SAWMILL - An establishment where timber is cut, sawed, or planed, either to finished lumber , or as an intermediary step and may include facilities for the kiln drying of lumber and may include the distribution of such products on a wholesale or retail basis.

SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA - A device incorporating a reflective surface which is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit , receive, or both, radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially  ba sed uses, orbitally based uses, or both. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations," "TVROs" and "satellite microwave antennas."

SCHOOL - An establishment offering instruction in any branch of knowledge under
the  supervision  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania  or  a  lawfully  constituted






204:45	01  -01-2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership, or corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania .

(1)	SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL - A school conducted for profit for such instruction as business, art, drama, music, handicraft, dancing, and other similar type low-impact uses conducted within a completely enclosed structure.

(2)	SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE -Any public, sectarian, or private nonprofit establishment approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania offering formal academic instruction and services for state-required  or  largely  state-funded programs at the kindergarten, elementary, and secondary levels. This term shall not include those u ses considered commercial  schools.

(3)	SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL - Same as public or private school except that the primary activity is training in a trade or vocation, which may be conducted wholly or partially outside of an enclosed structure. This term shall not include those uses considered commercial schools.

(4)	SCHOOL, POSTSECONDARY -Any public, sectarian, or private establishment approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania offering  formal  academic instruction and services to students who have typically achieved their high school or  bachelor's diploma.

SCREENING - The provision of a barrier to visibility, airborne particles , glare and noise between adjacent properties , uses, and/or zoning districts composed of a mixture of landscaping, trees, berms, shrubs, fences, walls and/or other similar type materials , that is intended to mitigate negative impacts, such as visua l and noise, of the more intense use on the less intense use or zoning district.

SCREEN PLANTING - A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to conceal from the view of passing motorists and property owners on abutting and/or adjacent properties the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen planting is located.

SETBACK - The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a property or
street right-of-way line. See Diagram 204- 12E.

(1)	SETBACK, FRONT - The distance between the street line and/or private right-of-way line and the front line of the principal building and/or structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front setback shall be measured between the front line of principal building and/or structure and the street right -of-way line. Attached porches and decks, whether covered or uncovered , enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of principal building and/or structure and shall not project into a required front setback.

(2)	SETBACK, REAR - The distance between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the principal building and/or structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear setback shall be measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the principal building and/or structure. Attached porches and decks, whether covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered



204:46	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

as part of principal building and/or structure and shall not project into a required
rear setback.

(3)	SETBACK, SIDE -The distance between the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. Attached porches and decks, whether covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as  part   of  principal building and/or structure and shall not project into a required side setback.

SETBACK LINE - A line within a property and parallel to a property or street right-of-way line which delineates the required distance between some particular use of property and that property or street right-of-way line. See Diagram 204-12E.

SHOOTING RANGE - A place where firearms and other projectile-type weapons (e.g., guns, rifles , shotguns, pistols, air guns, archery crossbows, etc.) can be shot for recreation, competition, skill development, training, or any combination thereof. Nothing within this definition shall be construed to include bunting when conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Commonwea lth of Pennsylvania.

SHOPPlNG CENTER - A planned center of four or more tenant leasable units or stores designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with shared off-street parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.

SIGN - A device for visual communication that is u sed to bring the subject to the attention of the public. A sign shall not include flags or other insignia of any goverrunent, fraternal, civic, charitable or similar organization , or legal notices and signs posted prohibiting trespassing, hunting or fishing.

(I)	FLAT WALL SIGN - A sign that is displayed, mounted, or both, upon or genera lly parallel to the same plane as the face of a wall, such that no portion of the sign extends more than 12 inches from said wall.

(2)	FREESTANDING  SIGN  - A  sign  erected  upon  a  permanently  affixed,
independent  structure (legs or base).

(3)	OUTPARCEL SIGN -A sign affixed to a unit of occupancy contained within a
planned center.

(4)	PERMANENT SIGN - A sign that is expected to be continuou sly displayed during the presence of a principal land use.

(5)	TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign that is only for specified periods of time, associated with some temporary event or work conducted on the site.

(6)	UNDER CANOPY SIGN - A sign that identifies one leasable unit within a shopping center and is hung from an overhead canopy of the shopping center or is prov ided as a wall projecting sign attached to the front wall of the unit where no canopy is provided.







204:47	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

(7)	WALL PROJECTING SIGN - A sign that is mounted to a building wall such that its principal display area is not para llel to the building wall. A wall projecting sign can also be attached to a marquee.

SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP - The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, which owner ship is separate and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot. Owner ship shall be considered separate and distinct where lots have been separately described as such , by metes and bounds, in a recorded deed or instrnment of conveyance pr ior to the enactment of this chapter or an amendment thereto and have continued since that date to be so separately described in all subsequent recorded deeds or instruments of conveyance.

SKILLED OR INTERMEDIATE NURSING CARE - Professionally supervised nursing care and related medical and other health services  provided for a period exceeding 24 hours to an individual not in need of hospitalization, but whose needs are above the level of room and board and can only be met in a long-term-care nursing facility or an inpatient basis because of age, illness, disease, injury, convalescence or physical or mental infirmity.

SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - A solar collection system consisting of one or more roof- and/or ground-mounted solar collector devices and solar-related equipment , and is intended to primari ly reduce on-site consumption of utility power. A system is considered a small solar energy system only if it supplies electrical or thermal power solely for on-site use, except that when a property upon which the facility is installed also receives  electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company.

SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM - A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power. A system is considered a small wind energy system only if it suppl ies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supp lied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company.

SOIL SURVEY - The most recent published version of the United States Department
of Agriculture's  Soil Survey for Cumberland County, Pennsylvania.

SOLAR COLLECTOR SYSTEM - A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation as an energy source for collection, inversion, stora ge, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation or transfer of stored heat.

SOLAR-RELATED EQUIPM ENT - Items including a solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device panels,  lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets , framing and possibly foundations used for or intended to be u sed for collection of solar energy.






204:48	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

SPECIAL EXCEPTION - A use that is generally compatible with a particular zone once specified criteria have been met. Special exception u ses are listed by zone and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with § 204-64C of this chapter.

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (SALDO) - The most
recent version of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as may be amended.9

STORAGE - A function involving the deposition of materials, goods, products, or any combination thereof , for safekeeping, including the parking or storage of unlicensed, uninspected or inoperable motor vehicles.

STOREFRONT - The wall of a unit of occupancy which faces the front yard (oriented toward the street) within a planned center , as defined herein.

STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  BASIN  - Any  facility  u sed  to  retain  or  detain
stormwater, that is part of a stormwater management  system.

STORY - That part of a building located between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first story of a bu ilding is the lowest story, having 75% or more of its wall area above grade level. A half-story is a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plate of which on at least two opposite exterior walls is not more than two feet above such story.

STREET - Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, viaduct and any other dedicated and adopted public right-of-way or private right-of-w ay, used or intended to be used by vehicu lar traffic, pedestrians, or both.

STREET CENTER LINE - The horizontal line paralleling the street that bisects the street right-of-way into two equa l widths. In those instances where the street right-of-way cannot be determined, the street center line shall correspond to the center of the cartway.

STREET FRONTAGE - The linear or curvilinear mea surement taken along a property's street line with or street right-of-way , other than that of a limited-access highway. Street frontage must be a contiguous length when used to meet the minimum lot width requirement s of this chapter.

STREET LINE or STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE - A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separat ing the street from abutting property or lots. The street line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way line currently in existence, a dedicated right-of -way, or a reserve right-of-way. See Diagram 204-12E.

STREET, PRN ATE - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, but not intended to be dedicated for public use.

STREET, PUBLIC - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended to be dedicated for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation by the public.



9.	Editor's Note: Sec Ch. 180, Subdivision  and Land  Development.


204:49	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. See Diagram 204-12C.

(1)	STRUCTURE,  ACCESSORY  - A  structure  customarily  incidental   and subordinate to and detached from the main or principal building  or structure on the same lot, the use of which is customarily  incidenta l to that of the principa l building or structure on  the  lot.  An  accessory  structure  shall  exclude  any  vehicle as defined by the Penn sylvania Motor Vehicle Code, and  cannot  be  constructed  without  a principal  structure  on  the  property.

(2)	STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL -The main, primary, or predomin ant structure on a given lot, tract, or parcel. Any structure that is physically attached to a princ ipal structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.

(3)	STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY - A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEME NT - Any repair , reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equa ls or exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is bein g restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first a lteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structura l part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

SWIMMING POOL - Any pool not located within a completely enclosed building and containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than two feet. Agr icultural ponds , ornamental ponds and lakes are not included, provided that swimming wa s not the primary purpose for their construction. See Diagram 204-12C.

TAVERN/BAR - An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic beverages for mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board . Taverns/bar s may also serve food.

TESTING - A function involving the examination and assessment of qualities,
performances, capabilities, or any combina tion thereof, of a product , good or material.

THEATER, INDOOR - An establishment with a building or port ion thereof devoted to
the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions  on a commercia l basis.

THEATER, OUTDOOR AND DRIVE-IN - An establishment upon an open lot or part thereof , with its appurt enant facilit ies, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, on a paid admission basis, to patrons seated in automobiles, or on outdoor seats.

TRAVEL PLAZA - An establi shment where a  range of services and goods to professional drivers and the general public are congregated, such as fuel sales, vehicle service, overnight accommodations and restaurants.





204:50	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

TREATMENT CENTER - A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing hou sing for three or more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling becau se of:

(I)	Criminal rehabilitation , such as a criminal halfway house;

(2)	Current  addition to alcohol or  a controlled  substance  that  wa s used  in an illegal manner; and/or

(3)	A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to be a threat to the physical  safety of others.

TOWNSHIP - The Township of Nort h Middleton, Cumberland County, Pennsylvania ,
Board of Supervisors, its agents or authorized representatives.

TRUCK DROP LOT - An establishment providing for the temporary parking and transient storage of trucks and/or related truck-trailer s used in cargo and  freight transportation.

TURBINE HEIGHT - The distance measured from the highest point of the wind
turbine rotor plane to the ground level.

USE - The specific purpose or activity for which land, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land, structures, or building s are occupied or maintained.

(1)	USE, ACCESSORY - A use  customarily  incidental  and  subordinate  to  the principal use or the principal structure or building and  located  on  the same lot with such principal use or principal structure or building. If no principal use or principal structure or building  exists  on  a  lot  with  a  lawful  accessory  use,  then  such accessory use  shall  only  be  considered  a  principal use,  if the  use wou ld otherwise be allowed as a permitted principal use  in  the  zone,  and  which  shall  then  be subject to provi sions in th.i s chapter relating to principal uses. The  accessory  use cannot not exceed 75% of the gross area square footage  of the principal  use on the property.

(2)	USE, PRINCIPAL -The main, primary, or predominant use of any lot or parcel
of land.

(3)	USE, TEMPORARY -A use established for a limited duration with the intent to
discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.

USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT - A permit issued by the Zoning Officer certifying
a use's compliance with information reflected on the zoning permit and this chapter.

VARIANCE - A modification of any provision of this chapter granted by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to findings specified by the Act.








204:5 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-12

VEHICLE, MOTOR - A vehicle which is self-propelled except an electric personal assistive mobility device or a vehicle which is propelled solely by human power, and governed by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.10

VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL  - A large motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating in excess of 26,000 pounds  primarily designed to carry cargo or freight including goods, products, supplies, and equipment. For purposes of this definition, the gross vehicle weight rating shall be the value specified on the Federal Weight Certification label by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle and the gross combination weight rating shall be the value specified by the manufacturer as the load weight of a combination.

VETERINARIAN'S OFFICE - An establishment used primarily for the treatment, by a veterinarian, of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl. No outdoor boarding of animals is permitted.

WAREHOUSING , DISTRIBUTION AND WHOLESALING - An establishment
engaged in the bulk storage and distribution of cargo or freight including manufactured goods, products, supplies, and equipment. Wholesaling of goods, products, supplies, and equipment shall not be open to or accessible by  the general public,  unless incidental  to the principal  warehousing  operation.

WASTE - Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including but not limited to solid, semisolid, contained gaseous and liquid materials resulting from municipal , industrial, institutional, commercial, agricultural, residential and other activities. Such wastes shall also include biological excrement and hazardous waste materials, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1, 1984, or as amended. "Waste" shall expressly include those materials defined, at any given time, as "waste" by the Pennsylvania Department of Envirorunental Protection and the United States Envirorunental Protection Agency. For the purposes of this chapter, the difference between "waste" and "junk" or "recyclables" is that "waste" shall include materials that have entered a reasonably continuous process by which their ultimate disposal is imminent; whereas "junk" includes materials that may be stored for longer periods of time awaiting potential reuse or ultimate disposal; and whereas "recyclables" include materials that have entered a reasonably continuous process whereby their reuse is imminent.

WATERCOURSE - A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale, pond, lake or other body of surface water carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or artificial.

WATERSHED - All the land from which water drains into a particular watercourse.

WETLANDS - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands


10.	Editor's Note: Sec 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.


204:52	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	ZONING	§ 204-12

Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin commission . This definition is  used  by  the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)

WHOLESALE - Any distribution procedure involving persons who, in the norma l
course of business, do not engage in sa les to the general public.

WIND CHARGER - A wind-driven direct-current generator used for charging storage
batteries.

WIND ENERGY CONSERVATION SYSTEM (WECS) - A device such as a wind charger, wind turbine or windmill and/or other electric-genera tion facility whose main purpose is to convert wind power into another form of energy such as electricity or heat, consisting of one or more wind turbine and other structures and buildings,  including substations, meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities.

WIND TURBINE - A device that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad transformer , if any.

WIND TURBINE TOWER - The vertica l component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbin e generator and attached blades above the ground.

WINDMILL - A device that runs on the energy generated by a wheel of adjustable
blades or slats rotated by the wind.

WINDOW - An opening to the outside other than a door which provides all or part of the required natural light, natural ventilation, or both, to an interior space. The glazed portion of a door in an exterior wall may be construed to be a window in regard to provision of natural light.

YARD - An unoccupied and unobstructed open space between the permitted structures and the lot line. See Diagram 204- l 2E.

(1)	YARD, FRONT - The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the principal structure and the front lot line or street line (excluding alleys), measured perpendicular to the structur e at the closest point to the front lot line. Corner lots, including multiple-frontage lots, shall have two front yards.

(2)	YARD, REAR - The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the principal structure and the rear lot line, which may include street lines created by alleys, measured perpendicular to the structure at the closest point to the rear lot line.

(3)	YARD , SIDE -The yard area(s)  extending from the front yard to the rear yard contained between a principal structure and any side lot line(s), measured perpendicul ar to the structure at the closest point to the nearest side lot line.




204:53	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-12	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-13

ZONING - The designation of specified zone districts within the Township, reserving them for certain uses together with limitations on lot size, heights of structures and buildings, and other stipu lated requirements.

ZONING CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY - A statement signed by the Zoning Officer, setting forth t hat a building, structure, or use legally complies with this chapt er, other applicable codes and regu lations and the zoning permit.

ZONING OFFICER - The duly constitu ted municipal official designated to administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.

ZONING PERMIT - A document signed by a Zoning Officer, as required in this chapter, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use, or the erection, construct ion, reconstruction, restoration, alteration , conversion or installation of a structure or building, that acknow ledges that such u se, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter or authorized variance therefrom.


ARTICLE II
Zone  Regulations

§ 204- 13. Agricultural Zone (AG).

A	Purpose. The primary purpose of this zone is to promote and encou rage the continuation of agricultural activities and related suppor t bu sinesses in those areas most suitable for such activities. Consequ ently, residential uses are generally secondary and limited, and any future inhabitants in this zone must be willing to accept the impacts associated with normal farming practices and related support bu sinesses. This zone also acknowledges the rural and agrarian character of the area, characterized by a mixture of farms, sparsely developed residential uses , and rura l businesses; this zone will continue this development trend. These areas are not likely to be served by public sewer or water facilities.

B.	Permitted uses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204-1 3A are permitted within this zone, provided that in  addition  to  the  specific  criteria  for  certain  uses  established  in Art icle IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approva l by the Zoning Hearing Board pu rsuant to a public hearing set forth w ith the provisions of Article VI. Uses permit ted by conditional use are subject to approva l by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a public hea ring set forth with the provisions of Article VII.


Table 204-13A Permitted  Uses AS?:ricultural Zone (AG)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional
Use
Agricultural/ Forestry
Airstrips	NIA			x



204:54	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-13	ZONING	§ 204-13


Table 204-13A Permitted Uses A2ricultural Zone (AG)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Agribusiness	§  204-47A			x
Agriculture  (excluding agribusiness)	§ 204-47B	x		
Forestry	§  204-47C	x		
				
Natural areas or wildlife refuges	NIA	x		
Riding schools and stables	§  204-47D		x	
Residential
Bed-and-breakfasts	§  204-48A	x		
Flag lot residences	§   204-48D	x		
Group homes	§  204-48£	x		
Single-family  detached dwellings	N IA	x		
Nonresidential
Animal
hospitals /veterinary offices	§ 204-49C	x		
Conununication antennas, tower s and eauioment	§ 204-490			x
Kennel s, commercial	§  204-49Z		x	
Large solar energy
production  facility	§ 204-49AA			x
Large wind energy
production  facility	§ 204-49BB			x
Municipal-owned uses	NIA	x		
Place of worship	§  204-49MM		x	
Public/private utility building or structure	§ 204-4900			x
Schools, public or private	§  204-49RR			x
Shooting range, indoor	NIA			x
Accessory
Accessory structures and
uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
uses	NIA	x		
  Day care, accessory 		§  204-50C 		x		



204:55	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-13	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204- 13

Table 204-13A Permitted Uses A2ricultural Zone (AG)	



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Ri2ht	Special
Exception	Conditional Use
Day care, family	§ 204-50D	x		
Farm occupations	&   204-50F	x		
Home  occupations	§ 204-50G	x		
No-impact  home
occupation	§ 204-50H	x		
Noncommercial  keeping of livestock	§ 204-501	x		
Roadside stand	§ 204-50M	x		
Rural occupation s	§ 204-50N	x		
Temporary  farm employee
housing	§ 204-51 A	x		



NIA -Not applicable


C.	Locational criteria . Applications for subdivision or land development  shall  be accompanied by the following information. The following information  is  required  to allow the Township to ensure that the highest quality farmland is protected, and to ensure that new development affects agricultural operations to the minimum extent feasible. Unless otherwise required by Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, the following information is not  requir ed  for proposed subdivi sions comprised  of the lesser of 10 lots or  15% of the parent tract, as of the effective date of this chapter:

(1)	The  size,  shape,  contour  and  dimensions  of  the property  and  the  size,  use  and
location of all existing buildings.

(2)	All lots previou sly approved.

(3)	Land  under  active  cultivation,  land  used  as  pasture,  and  forested  land  or  land
within woodlots.

(4)	Soil information for the property, including soil series and soil  capability class, subclass, and unit , as classified within the most recent Soil Survey of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania and Agricultural Handbook 210 of the United  States Department  of Agriculture Natural  Resources Conservation  Service.

(5)	The  size,  shape,  contour,  dimension,  location ,  and  use  of  all  proposed  lots, buildings and on-lot sewage disposal lots. The developer shall demonstrate that the following location  and design considerations have been fully addressed:




204:56	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-13	ZONING	§ 204-14

(a)	All uses or lots shall be established on non-prime agricultural land  (Soil Capability Classes TV-VIII), when such land is available, or on lands which cannot feasibly be fanned , due to existing features of the site such as rock outcroppings or heavily wooded areas, or due to the fact that the size and/or shape of an area suitable for farming is insufficient to permit the efficient use of farm machinery .

(h) Where a property is comprised entirely of prime agricultural land (Soil Capability Classes I, II, and III), the least suitable land shall be utilized  for the development.

(c)	Where all non-prime agricultural land areas have been shown by the developer to be unsuitable for development because of slope, drainage, flooding, sewage disposal, or other characteristics, the least suitable remaining farmland shall be utilized for development.

(d)	Lots and uses shall be grouped, where possible, adjacent to other similar lots and uses, both within the subject property and in consideration of adjacent propertie s, to avoid a scattering of development.

(e)	Wherever feas ible, lots shall be located such that disturbance of slopes greater than 15% is minimized.

(f)	Wherever feasible, lots sha ll be located such that  disturbance  to  ex1stmg hedgerows , orchards, and other significant native vegetation is minimized.

D.	Area and design requirements. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional requirements set forth in Table 204-13B.11

E.	Compliance with other standards of this chapter. All uses  shall  comply  with  all applicable provisions contained within:

(I)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone(§ 204-21).

(b)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Alticle III, General Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-14. Rural Resource Zone (RR).

A.	Purpose . This zone is meant to encourage the continued use of the land for rural, forest, and agricultural purposes, and to permit low-density residential development  which will not  require  extensive  public  services  or  facilities.  This  area  is  not  meant  to  support


11 .  Editor's Note: Table 204-138 is included as an attachment to this chapt er.


204:57	01-01 -2014
 
§ 204-14	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-14

intensive agricultural operations. Areas of the Township classified as rura l resource are, for the most part, not served by public utilities and are rural, forested, or agricultural in nature. These areas are designed to support rura l-style living and development, and are designated separately from the agricu lture classification because they are either predominantly wooded, or are located in proximit y to ex isting  or  plann ed  residential areas. They are not  intended to encourage large influxes of residential growth.

B.	Permitted uses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204- L4A are permitted with.in th.is zone, provided that , in addition, the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provi sions in Article III are met. Uses permitted  by special exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provision s of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approva l by the Board of  Supervisors pursuant  to a public  hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VII.


Table 204-14A Permitted Uses
Rural Resource Zone (RR)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional
Use
AgriculturaVForestry
Agriculture  (excluding
agribusiness)	§ 204-478	x		
Forestry	§ 204-47C	x		
Natural areas or wi ldlife refuges	NIA	x		
Riding school s and stables	§ 204-47D	x		
Residential
Bed-and-breakfasts	§ 204-48A	x		
Flag lot residences	§ 204-480	x		
Group homes	§ 204-48E	x		
Single-family detached
dwellings	NIA	x		
Nonresidential
Airports/airpads/heliports/
helipads	§ 204-49B			x
Animal  hospitals/veterinary
offices	§ 204-49C	x		
Campgrounds and recreationa l vehicle parks	§ 204-491		x	
Cemetery	§ 204-49K	x		




204:58	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-14	ZONING	§ 204-14

Table 204-14A
Permitted Uses
Rural Resource Zone (RR)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted bv
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Club, clubhouse or lodge,
meet ing grounds - private	§ 204-49L	x		
Commerc ial recreation,
outdoor	§ 204-49N		x	
Communication antennas,
towers and equipment	§ 204-490			x
Conventio n  centers	§ 204-490			
Golf courses	§ 204-49T			x
Kennels, commercial	§ 204-492			x
Large solar energy
production  facility	§ 204-49AA			x
Large w ind energy production  facility	§ 204-49BB			x
Mineral extraction and recovery  establishments	§ 204-49DD			x
Municipal owned uses	NIA	x		
Outdoor  shooting ranges	§ 204-49KK			x
Parks, playgrounds,  and other  noncommercial recreationa l uses	§ 204-49LL	x		
P lace of worship	§ 204-49MM		x	
Public/private ut ility building  or  structure	§ 204-4900		x	
Sawmills	§ 204-49PP		x	
Schools, public or private	§ 204-49RR			x
Shooting range, indoor	NIA			x
Accessory
Accesso ry structures and
u ses customarily incidental to the above permitt ed u ses	NIA	x		
Dav care, accessory	§ 204-SOC	x		
Day care, family	§ 204-SOD	x		
Farm occupations	§ 204-SOF	x		
Home occupations	§ 204-SOG	x		





204:59	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-14	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-15

Table 204-14A Permitted Uses
Rural Resource Zone (RR)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
No-impact  home
occupation	§ 204-50H	x		
Noncommercial  keeping of
livestock	§ 204-501	x		
Road side stand	§ 204-50M	x		
Rural occupations	§ 204-50N	x		



NIA - Not applicable


C.	Area and design requirement s. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and buildi ng dimensional requirement s set forth in Table 204-14B. 12

D.	Compliance   with   other   standards   of  this   chapter.   All  uses  shall  comply   with   all
app licable provisions contained within:

(I)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone(§ 204-21).

(b)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Article III, General Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-15. Low-/Medium-Density Residential Zone (R-1).

A.	Purpose. This zone is meant to accommodate  suburban  detached  residential  growth within the Township. This zone coincides with availability of sewer and  water  utility service areas; however, the actual availability of these services is likely to occur  at different times , in different areas. As a result, permitted densities have been adjusted according to the availability of these public utilities.

B.	Permitted  uses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204-15A are permitted within this zone, provided  that, in addition, the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general  provisions in Article 111 are met. Uses permitted by special


12.	Editor's Note: Table 204-148 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204:60	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-15	ZONING	§ 204-15

exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VII.



Table  204-15A Permitted  Uses
Low-/Medium-Density  Residential  Zone  (R-1)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Rfa.ht	Special Exception	Conditional
Use
A2ricultural/Forestry
Agricu lture (excluding agribusiness)	§ 204-47B	x		
Forestrv	§ 204-47C	x		
Residential
Bed-and-breakfasts	§ 204-48A		x	
Flag lot residences	§ 204-48D	x		
Group homes	§ 204-48E	x		
Long-term-care nursing home or personal-care facility	§ 204-48F		x	
Single-family detached dwellings	NIA	x		
Nonresidential
Comrnunica tion antennas
and equipment only	§ 204-490			x
Golf courses	§ 204-49T			x
Municipal-owned  uses	NIA	x		
Parks, playgrounds , and other  noncommercial recreational uses	§ 204-49LL	x		
Place of worship	§ 204-49MM		x	
Public/private utility building or stmcture	§ 204-4900		x	
Schools, public or private	§ 204-49RR			x
Accessory
Accessory structures and
uses customarily incidenta l
to the above permitted uses	NIA	x		
Dav care, accessory	§ 204-SOC	x		




204:61	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-15	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-16


Table 204-lSA Permitted Uses
Low-/Medium-Densitv   Residentia l  Zone  <R-1)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional
Use
Dav care, family	§ 204-SOD		x	
Home occupations	&  204-SOG		x	
No-impact home
occupation	§ 204-SOH	x		
Roadside stand	&  204-SOM	x		



NIA -Not applicable


C.	Area and design requ irements. Unless further specified in the specific criter ia for certa in u ses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and bu ilding dimensiona l requirements  set forth in Table 204-lSB.'3

D.	Compliance  with  other  stand ards  of  this  chapter.  All  uses  sha ll  comply  with  all
applicable provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay Zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone (§ 204-2 1).

(b)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Art icle III, General Provis ions.

(3)	Article IV,  Specific Criteria.


§ 204-16. Medium-/High-Density Residential Zone (R-2).

A.	Purpose. This zone seeks to accommodate the higher -density housing needs of the Township . A wide range of hou sing types are encouraged with densities exceeding those permitt ed elsewhere in the Township. These zones are  located  around  existing multifamily development s and major transportation routes. Both public sewer and water facilities can be mad e available to these areas.

B.	Permitted uses . Only the following uses listed in Table 204-16A are permitted w ithin this zone, provided that in addition  to the specific criteria  for certain uses established  in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approva l by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a


13.	Editor's Note: Table 204-158 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204 :62	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-16	ZONING	§ 204-16

public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board  of Supervisors pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VII.


Table 204-16A Permitted  Uses
Medium-/Hh?:h-Density Residential Zone <R-2)

	Permitted by	
	Specific		Special	Conditional
Use	Criteria	Right	Exception	Use
Agricultural/Forestry				
Agricu lture (excluding	§ 204-47B	x		
agribusiness)				
Forestry	&   204-47C	x		
Residential				
Bed-and-breakfasts
Continuin g care retirement	§ 204-48A
§ 204-48C		x x	
community facility				
Flag  lot residences Grou p homes
Long-term-care nursing	&   204-48D
§ 204-48E
§ 204-48F	x
x	


x	
home or personal care				
facility				
Mobile home parks Multifamily	§ 204-48G
§ 204-48H	
x		x
dwellings/apartments				
Multiunit  residential	§ 204-481			x
conversions				
Single-fa mily attached	§ 204-48J	x		
dwellings				
Single-family detached	NIA	x		
dwellings				
Single-family semidetached	§ 204-48K	x		
dwellings				
Two-fami ly detached	§ 204-48L	x		
dwellings				
Nonresidential				
Communicat ion antennas	§ 204-490			x
and equipment only				
Golf courses	&  204-49T			x
 Municipal-owned  uses	NIA	x		



204:63	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 204-16	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-16

Table 204-16A Permitted Uses
Medium-/High-Density  Residential Zone (R-2)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted  by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional
Use
Parks, playgrounds,  and other noncommercial recreational uses	§ 204-49LL	x		
Place of worship	§ 204-49MM		x	
Public/private utility building or structure	NIA		x	
Schools, public or private	§ 204-49RR			x
Accessory
Accessory  structures and
u ses customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses	NIA	x		
 Day care, accessory 	
Day care, familv	§	204-SOC
204-SOD	x		
	&			x	
Home occupations	§ 204-500		x	
No-impact  home
occupation	§ 204-SOH	x		
Roadside stand	§ 204-SOM		x	



NIA- Not applicable


C.	Area and design requirements. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article Ill are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional requirements set forth in Table 204- I6B.14

D.	Compliance with other standard s of this chapter . All uses  shall  comply  with  all applicable provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone (§ 204-21).

(b)	Airport Overlay Zone(§ 204-22).

(c)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).




14.	Editor's Note: Table 204-168 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204:64	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-16	ZONING	§ 204-17

(2)	Article Ill, General Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-17.  Village Mixed-Use Zone (VMU).

A.	Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide for a mix of different types of residential and neighborhood commercia l uses in a traditional village-type setting. This zone includes those areas where there is currently a mix of residential and business-type uses. The locations of the village/mixed-use areas are convenient for the residents in the surrounding neighborhoods, and as such, are intended to encourage them to support the businesses in the village areas. Uses have been limited to those that residents are likely to need on a daily or regular basis. Overall, retail size has been restricted to prevent the establishment of intensive commercial uses that exceed the local orientation of this zone. These zones have been sized to permit  a grouping of several businesses at locations efficiently serving several residential neighborhoods, simultaneously.

B.	Permitted uses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204- 17A are permitted within this zone, provided that , in addition, the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors  pursuant  to  a  public  hearing  set  forth with the provisions  of Article VII.


Table 204-17A
Permitted Uses
Village Mixed-Use Zone (VMU)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Agricultural/Forestry
Agriculture (excluding agribusiness)	§ 204-478	x		
Forestry	&   204-47C	x		
Residential				
Bed-and-breakfasts	§ 204-48A	x		
Boardinghouse	&  204-48B		x	
Continuing  care retirement
communitv  facility	§ 204-48C		x	
Flag lot residences	§ 204-48D	x		
Group homes	&  204-48E	x		






204:65	OJ - 01 - 2014
 



	



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted  by
		

Ri2ht	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Long-term-care nursing home or per sonal care facility	§ 204-48F			x
Multifamily dwellings/apartments	§ 204-48H		x	
Mult iunit residential conversion s	§ 204-481		x	
Single-family  attached
dwellings	§ 204-48J	x		
Single-family detached dwellings	NIA	x		
Single-fa mily semidetached dwellings	§ 204-48K	x		
Two-family  detached
dwellings	§ 204-48L	x		
Nonresident ial				
Animal  hospita ls/veterinary offices	§ 204-49C	x		
Clinic, medical	NIA	x		
Club, clubhouse or lodge, meeting grounds - private	§ 204-49L	x		
Communication  antennas
and equipment only	§ 204-490	x		
Contractors' office
(excluding storage yard)	NIA			x
Copy shop/bu siness service	NIA	x		
Craftsman/arti san  studio	NIA	x		
Day  care, commercia l	§ 204-49R	x		
Financial institution	NIA	x		
Food service facility	NIA			x
Funeral homes	§ 204-49S	x		
Laundry and dry-cleaning establishment  (personal)	N IA	x		
Library	NIA	x		
Massage therapy	NIA	x		
Municipal-owned  uses	NIA		x		


204:66	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	ZONING	§ 204-17

Table 204-17A Permitted Uses
Village Mixed-Use Zone (VMU)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Office, business professional	NIA	x		
Office, medical	NIA	x		
Parks, playgrounds,  and other  noncommercial recreational  uses	§ 204-49LL	x		
Personal service business	NIA		x	
Place of worship	§ 204-49MM		x	
Post office	NIA	x		
Public/private utility building or structure	§ 204-4900		x	
Restaurants	NIA	x		
Retail bu siness	NIA	x		
Schools, commercial	&   204-4900	x		
Schools, public or private	§ 204-49RR			x
Taverns/bars	&   204-49UU		x	
Accessory
Accessory apartments	&   204-SOA	x		
Accessory u ses customarily
incidenta l to the above permitt ed uses	NIA	x		
Automated banking
facilities	§ 204-SOB	x		
Day care, accessory	&  204-SOC	x		
Day care, family	&  204-SOD	x		
Home occupations	§ 204-SOG	x		
No-impact home
occupation	§ 204-SOH	x		
Outdoor  cafe/dining	&  204-SOJ	x		
Outside display and sales	§ 204-SOK	x		
Roadside stand	&  204-SOM	x				



NIA -Not applicable




204:67	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-17

C.	Area and design requirements. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional requirements set forth in Table 204-l7B.15

(1)	Required  front building setback.

(a)	Unless otherwise noted herein this subsection below, for a lot propo sed for development , the distance the front facade of the principal building is set back from the street right-of-way shall generally be similar to those distances between existing principal buildings on the abutting lots and the abutting street right-of-way in accordance with the following standard:

[1] Identify the existing principal buildings on the lots abutting the lot proposed  for development.

[2] Using these results, calculate the average setback distance between the existing principal buildings on the abutting lots and the street rights-of-way line.

[a] If an abutting lot is vacant, the required setback of the abutting vacant lot shall be assumed to be  the minimum front setback standard defined in the  underlying zone  district in which it is situated.

[b] For comer lots, the standards  set  forth  in  this  subsection  above shall be calculated using each abutting lot, which includes those abutting lots having frontage on and  the  existing  principal buildings  oriented toward the intersecting street.

[3] The required front building setback for the building on the lot proposed for development shall be the average setback distance calculated in Subsection C(1)(a)[l] and [2] above, which may be adjusted by not more 15%,  unless all buildings on the abutting lots have the same setback distance.

[a]  Front  building  facades  and/or  covered  front  porches  shall  be
permitted  to fulfill this requirement.

[4]  However, no building shall extend into any street right-of-way.

[5] Otherwise, the building on the  Jot  proposed  for  development  shall comply with all front setback standards defined in the underlying zone district in which it is situated.

(2) Building footprint. Unless otherwise noted herein this subsection below, for a lot proposed for development , the building footprint of the principal building shall be similar to those for existing principal buildings on abutting lots in accordance with the following standard:


15.	Editor's Note: Table 204-178 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204:68	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	ZONING	§ 204-17

(a)	Building footprints shall respect and maintain the development pattern and context of the principal buildings  on the abutting lots, and when feasible, should incorporate the scale and character of the majority of the existing principal buildings on the same shared block face (between two intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.

(3)	Building orientation. Unless otherwise noted herein the subsections below, for a lot proposed for development , the orientation  or  location  of  a  front  entrance  (door) and windows for the principal building shall be  similar  to  those  building orientations for existing principal buildings on abutting lots in accordance with the following  standard:

(a)	Interior  lots.  Principal  buildings  shall  have   their   primary   front   facades provided   with  a  front  entrance  (door)  and  windows  oriented  toward  and facing the public  street right-of-way.

(b)	Corner lots. Principal buildings on lots abutting more than one public street shall  have their primary  front  facades provided  with a front entrance (door) and windows oriented towards and facing (in order of preference):

[1]   The corner; or

[2] The street right-of-way upon which the maJonty of the principal buildings on the adjacent lots are oriented towards.

(4)	Lot access:  See Figure 1 below . This figure graphically represents the recommendations of this section. Unless otherwise noted herein the  subsections below, for a lot proposed for development,  lot  access  (driveways  and  access drives) shall be provided  in accordance with the following standard:

(a)	Lots abutting alleys.
[l]  Lot access shall be provided at the rear of lots for lots abutting alleys. [2]   Lot access shall not be taken from the front of the property  for lots
abutting alleys.

[3] No lot access shall be provided along a public street for lots abutting alleys.

(b)	Lots: general  recommendations.

[l] Along arterial or collector streets as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter, all principal nonresidential uses within the VMU Zone shall be encouraged to share access with an abutting property within the VMU Zone. When access is available on an abutting property, the applicant may use this access, as outlined in Subsection C(4)(b)[l][a] below. If joint use access cannot be provided by an existing lot access on an abutting property, the applicant is encouraged to provide access in a way that maximizes the potential for joint use access in the future, as outlined in Subsection C(4)(b)[l][b] below .



204:69	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-17

[a]   Joint use access via existing access drives.

[i]	When the nearest  edge of an existing access drive on an abutting nonresidential property in the VMU Zone with frontage on the same arterial or collector street is within 50 feet of the appl icant's tract, the applicant's tract may utilize the access drive on the abutting tract as a joint use access drive, provided a cross-access easement granting access to the applicant's tract has been recorded.

[ii]	Joint use access may be located entirely  on one lot or  may be split along a common lot line.

[b]   Joint use access via a new access drive on the property.

[i]	Where feasible, the joint  use access drive shall be located on a side lot line bordering a property in the VMU  Zone  for future shared access.

[ii]	The location of the access drive intersection with the street and the cross-access easement connection to the closest adjacent lot shall be subject to approval of the Township based on the access drive's ability to minimize the need for future access drives, preserve existing buildings , and/or maximize the distance from existi ng street and access drive intersections , including consideration of safe sight distances.

[iii] Parking lot entranceways taking access from existing or future joint use access drives shall generally be located in the rear or side yard behind the front  facade of the principal bu ilding and shall not be located in the front yard. Parking shall not be permitted along joint use access drives between the street right-of-way line and the rear edge of the cross-access easement granting access to the abutting lot.

(c)	Each nonresidential use may provide cross-access easements in accordance with § 204-32B(9) of this chapter, for its parking aisles and access drives permitting access and use to all abutting lots within the VMU Zone.

[1] When applicab le, the applicant shall be respons ible to prepare the cross-access easements and submit to the Township Solicitor for review. The cross-access easements shall be recorded at the Cumberland County Recorder of Deeds' Office, or if part of a  subdivision  or  land development plan, recorded with the plan.











204:70	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	ZONING

Figure 1


\11 h:unpll' of llm\ Mrnh•I \1•!111 ul.1r
i\11 <"'' St.111d..1111<. Might \\mk

Ex&in  Conditions
 
§ 204-17
 

 

,_   I	I'
,_
 
legend
 
- -  D	D	D




Property3 DM!q>s
 
&htingDrimmy c New Dii:ew,;y X  {loiedDriveMy
CJ Elilung Bu'lding
-'lffiB lding
Af(es5tase!JieQ!
 

J'/h n .Ut>/10 #''·
tff1t11( 1lt"(r\""I r."-.,.lrts 1Jo'liN tJ1,!# prop
,.,1, Ml/SI'  Onl' f1f"t• dnu·t•-ll 1u· ll'
0
/>f' '/NTH 4 J>ro/lffl -,. JJ:t,1.Jl1S •t«'I ''
rt1"1'1tUV1ts tu ptt•/M'l'tll' f .! ..,rld ./.
Do

3



Source: General Commercial District: Creating Commercial Areas with Character; Montgomery  County Planning Commission,  2008.


(d)	Off-street parking and loading.

[1] Unless  otherwise noted herein this subsection below,  for a lot proposed for development, parking shall be provided in accordance with the following  standard:

[a]   Off-street parking and loading location.

[i]	Required off-street parking (lots and areas) and loading facilities shall generally be located in the rear or side yard behind the front facade of the principal building. However, off-street parking and loading for nonresidential, multifamily dwellings/apartments, single- family attached, or mixed uses, shall not be located in the front yard.

[ii]	Off-street parking areas and loading facilities for nonresidential,  multifami ly  dwellings/apartm ents, single-family attached, or mixed uses on comer lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two streets shall maintain all necessary  clear-sight  triangles  and  comply  with  applicable



204:71	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-17	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-18

yard requirements of the underlying zoning district in which they are located. For corner lots, the distance from the center line of the parking lot entrance to the curbline or pavement edge of the street intersection shall be adequate to, in the opinion of the Township, provide a safe and sufficient margin for normal traffic patterns and pedestrians at or about the intersection in question.

(5)	Hours of  operation. For  proposed  nonresidential  and/or  mixed use developments, the hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect the existing  neighborhood and residentia l uses from detrimental  noise,  disturbance or intenuption.  Hours of operation  for nonresidential  uses  shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

D.	Compliance with other standards of this chapter. All uses shall comply with all applicable provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone(§ 204-21).

(b)	Airport Overlay Zone (§ 204-22) .

(c)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Article III, General Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-18. Neighborhood Commercial Zone (NC).

A.	Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide basic convenience commercial goods and services to local residents. Uses have been  limited  to those that  residents  are likely  to need on a daily or regular basis. Overall, retail size has been restricted to prevent the establishment of intensive commercial uses that exceed the local orientation of this zone. These zones have been sized to permit a grouping of several businesses at locations efficiently  serving  several  residential  neighborhoods,  simultaneously.  Finally,  several larger and more intensive uses have been  allowed  because  of  their  provision  of commercial conveniences for local residents; however, numerous protective requirements have been imposed to protect adjoining land uses.

B.	Permitted uses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204- l 8A are permitted within this zone,  provided that in addition to the specific criteria for certain uses established in Artic le IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to a public  hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VIL





204:72	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-18	ZONING	§ 204-18

Table 204-18A Permitted Uses Table
Neighborhood  Commercial Zone (NC)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Agricultural/Forestry
Agriculture  (excluding
agribusiness)	§ 204-47B	x		
Forestry	§ 204-47C	x		
Residential
Bed-and -breakfast s	§ 204-48A	x		
Boardinghouses	§ 204-48B	x		
Flag lot residences	§ 204-48D	x		
Group homes	§ 204-48E	x		
Multifamily dwellings/apartments	§ 204-48H	x		
Multiunit  residential
conversions	§ 204-481	x		
Single-family  attached
dwellings	§ 204-48J	x		
Single-family detached
dwellings	NIA	x		
Single-family  semidetached dwellings	§ 204-48K	x		
Two-family detached
dwellings	§ 204-48L	x		
Nonresidential				
Animal hospitals/veterinary
offices	§ 204-49C	x		
Auction hou se	NIA			x
Automobile  filling and/or service  station	§ 204-49D			x
Clinic, medical	NIA	x		
Club, clubhouse or lodge - private	§ 204-49L		x	
Communication antenna s
and equipment only	§ 204-490			x
Commercial  recreation,
indoor	§ 204-49M	x		
Co	nvenience store	NIA	x		



204:73	01 - 01-2014
 
§ 204-18	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-18

Table 204-lSA Permitted Uses Table
Neighborhood  Commercial Zone (NC)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional Use
Contractors' office
(excluding storage yard)	NIA			x
Coov shop/bu siness service	N IA	x		
Craftsman/artisan studio	NIA	x		
Day care, commercial	§ 204-49R	x		
Financial  institution	.NIA	x		
Food service facilitv	NIA			x
Funeral homes	§ 204-49S			x
Laundry and dry-cleaning
establishment  (personal)	NIA			x
Library	N IA	x		
Massage therapy	NIA			x
Municipal-owned  uses	NIA	x		
Office, busines s
professional	N/A	x		
Office, medical	NIA	x		
Parks, playground s, and other  noncommercial recreational  uses	§ 204-49LL	x		
Personal  service business	NIA		x	
Place of worship	§ 204-49MM			x
Post office	NIA	x		
Public/private utility building or structure	NIA	x		
Recycling business/center - household waste	NIA			x
Restaurant s	N/A	x		
Retail business	N/A	x		
Schools,  commercial	§ 204-4900			x
Schools, public or private	§ 204-49RR			x
Shopping centers	§ 204-49TT			x
Taverns/bars	§ 204-49UU			x
Accessory
Accessory apartments	§ 204-SOA	x		




204:74	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-18	ZONING	§ 204-18


Table 204-18A
Permitted Uses Table
Neiehborhood  Commercial Zone (NC)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted  by
		

Rieht	Special Exception	Conditional
Use
Accessory  uses customarily incidenta l to the above permitted uses	NIA	x		
Automat ed banking facilities	§ 204-SOB	x		
Day care, accessory	§  204-SOC	x		
Day care, family	§  204-SOD	x		
Drive-through  facilities for
permitted uses	§ 204-SOE		x	
Home occupations	&   204-SOG	x		
No-impact  home
occupation	§ 204-SOH	x		
Outdoor cafeldining	§  204-SOJ	x		
Outside display and sales	§ 204-SOK	x		
Roadside stand	§  204-SOM	x		



NIA - Not applicable


C.	Area and design requirement s. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses  established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new  permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional  requirements set forth in Table 204-18B.16

(1)	Building footprint. Unless  otherwise noted  herein the subsection  below , for a lot proposed  for development , the building footprint of the principal build ing shall be similar to those for existing principa l buildings on abutting lots in accordance with the following standard:

(a)	Building footprints shall respect and maintain the development pattern and context of the principa I buildings on the abutting Jots, and when feasible, should incorporate the scale and character of the majority of the existing principal building s on the same shared block face (between two intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.

(2)	Lot access. See Figure  1 in the Village Mixed-Use District. This figure graphically
represent s the recommend ations of this section. Unless otherwise noted herein the


16.	Editor's Note: Table 204-188 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204:75	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-18	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-1 8

subsection below ,  for a  lot proposed for development, lot  access (driveways  and
access drives) shall be provided in accordance with the following standard:

(a)	Lots abutting alleys.

[l]  Lot access shall be provided at the rear of lots for lots abutting alleys.

[2] Lot access shall not be taken from the front of the property for lots abutting alleys.

[3]   No  lot access  shall  be provided  a long a public  street  for lots abutting
alleys.

(b)	Lot s general recommendations.

[1] Along arterial or collector street s as provided in § 204-39  of  this chapter, all principal nonresidential uses within the NC Zone shall be encouraged to share access with an abutting property  within  the  NC Zone. When access is available on an abutting property , the applican t may use this access, as outlined in  Subsection  C(2)(b)[l][a]  below.  If joint use access cannot be provided by an existing lot access on an abutting property , the  applicant is encouraged  to  provide  access  in  a way that maximizes  the potential for joint use access in the future, as outlined in  Subsection  C(2)(b)[l][b]  below.

[a]   Joint-use access via existing access drives.

[i] When the nearest edge of an existing access drive on an abutting nonresidential property in the NC Zone with frontage on the same arterial or collector street is within 50 feet of the applicant's tract, the applicant's tract may utilize the access drive on the abutting tract as a jo int-use access drive, prov ided a cross-access easement granting access to the applicant's tract has been recorded.

[ii]	Joint -use access  may  be located  entirely on one lot  or may
be split along a common lot line.

[b)   Joint-u se access via a new access drive on the property.

[i]      Where feasible, the j oint-use access drive shall be located on a side lot line bordering a property in the NC Zone for future shared  access.

[ii]	The location of the joint-use access drive intersection with the street and the cross-access easement connection to the closest adjacent lot shall be subject to approval of the Township ba sed on the access drive's ability to minimize the need for future access drives, preserve existing bu ildings, and/or maximize the distance from existing street and access




204:76	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-18	ZONING	§ 204-18

drive   intersections,   including   consideration   of  safe   sight
distances.

[iii] Parking lot entranceways taking access from  ex1stmg  or future joint use access drives shall generally be located in the rear or side yard behind the front facade of the principal building and shall not be located in the front yard. Parking shall not be permitted  along  shared  access  drives  between the street right-of-way line and the rear edge of the cross-access  easement granting access to the abutting lot.

(c)	Each nonresident ial use may provide cross-access  easements  in  accordance with § 204-32B(9) of this chapter, for its parking aisles and access drives permitting access and use to all abutting lots within the NC Zone.

[1] When applicable, the applicant shall be responsible to prepare the cross-access easements and submit to the Township Solicitor for review. The cross-access easements shall be recorded at the Cumberland County Recorders' Office, or if part of a subdivision or land development plan, recorded with the plan.

(d)	Off-street  parking  and  loading. Unless otherwise noted herein this subsection below, for a lot proposed for development,  parking  shall  be  provided  in accordance with the following standard:

[1]   Off-street parking and loading location.

[a] Required off-street parking (lots and  areas)  and  loading  facilities shall generally be located in the rear or side yard behind the front facade of the principal building . However, off-street parking and loading for nonresidential , mu ltifamily dwellings/apartments, single-family attached, or  mixed uses, shall not  be located in the front yard.

[b] Off-street parking areas and loading facilities for nonresidential , multifamily dwellings/apartments, single-family attached or mixed u ses on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two streets shall maintain all necessary clear-sight triangles and comply with applicable yard requirements of the underlying zoning district in which they are located. For corner lots, the distance from the center line of the parking lot entrance to the curbline or pavement edge of the street intersection shall be adequate to, in the opinion of the Township , provide a safe and sufficient margin for normal traffic patterns and pedestrians at or about the intersection in question.

(3)	Hours of operation. For proposed nonresidentia l and/or mixed use developments , the hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect the existing  neighborhood and residential uses from detrimental noise, disturbance or




204:77	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-18	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-19

interruption.   A  hours  of  operations  p lan   shall  be  submitted  as  part   of  any
application  for such developments.

D.	Compliance  with  other  standards  of  this  chapter.  All  uses  shall  comply  with  a ll
applicable provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone (§ 204-21 ).

(b)	Airport Overlay Zone(§ 204-22).

(c)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Article III, General Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-19. Commercial/Light Industrial Zone (C/LI).

A.	Purpose. The intent of this zone is to allow for more intense commercial uses, office uses, and high-tech, light industrial uses, in appropriate areas of the Township. This zone is not  intended to accommodate heavy industrial uses, such as heavy manufac turing, truck terminals, or warehousing , as this zone is intended to encourage additional commercia l and light industrial type uses in those areas of the Township where there is currently these and other similar type uses that will also help to bu ild the tax ba se and are more compatible with other types of development.

B.	Permitted u ses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204- l 9A are permitted within this zone, provided that in addition to the specific criteria for certain u ses established in Article IV and all applicable genera l provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearin g Board pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a public hearing set forth with the provisions of Article VII.


Table 204-19A Permitted Uses
Commercial/Lh bt Industrial Zone (C/LI)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional
Use
Agricultural/Forestry
Agriculture (excluding agribusiness)	§ 204-47B	x		
Forestry	&   204-47C	x		
Nonresidential



204:78	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-19	ZONING	§ 204-19

Table 204-19A Permitted Uses
Commercial/Light Industrial Zone (C/LI)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted bv
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional Use
Adult-related uses	§   204-49A			x
Animal  hospitals/veterinary
offices	§ 204-49C	x		
Auction house	NIA			x
Automobile  filling and/or
service stations	§ 204-49D	x		
Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle rental/sales	§ 204-49F	x		
Automobile , heavy
equ ipment and similar
motor vehicle repair centers	204-490			x
Car washes	§  204-49J	x		
Clinic, medical	NIA	x		
Club, clubhouse or lodge -
private	§ 204-49L	x		
Commercial  recreation, indoor	§ 204-49M	x		
Communication antennas and equipment building transmitting and receiving facilities	§ 204-490			x
Contractors' office (excluding storage yard)	NIA			x
Convenience store	NIA	x		
Copy shop/business service	NIA	x		
Craftsman/artisan studio	NIA	x		
Day care, commercial	&   204-49R	x		
Financial  institution	NIA	x		
Food service facility	NIA			x
Funeral hom es	&  204-49S	x		
Home improvement  center, lumber , and building materia ls sales	§ 204-49U	x		
Hospitals	&   204-49V			x
Hotels and motels	§ 204-49W	x		



204:79	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-19	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-19
	Table 204-19A
Permitted Uses
Commercial/Light Industrial Zone (C/LI)	



















































Accessory uses customarily
incidenta l to the above
 permitted u ses 	




204:80	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-19	ZONING	§ 204-20









Use	
Table 204-19A
Permitted Uses Commercial/Lh!ht Industrial Zone <C!Ln
		

Specific
Criteria	Permitted bv
			

Ri2ht	Special
Exceotion	Conditional Use
Automated  banking
facilities	§ 204-SOB	x		
Day care, accessory	&    204-SOC	x		
 Dav care, family 	 Drive-through facilities for
permitted  uses	&   204-SOD	x		
	§ 204-SOE	x		
Outdoor cafe/dining	&   204-SOJ	x		
Outside display and sales	&   204-SOK	x		
Railroad spurs (branch
lines)	§ 204-SOL	x		



NIA - Not applicable


C.	Area and design requ irements.  Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain u ses established in Article IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional requirements set forth in Table 204-19B.17

D.	Compliance with other standards of this chapter. All  uses  shall  comply  with  all applicable provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone(§ 204-21).

(b)	Airport  Overlay Zone(§ 204-22).

(c)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Article III, General Provision s.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


§ 204-20. Industrial Zone (IND).

A.	Purpose. This zone provides for a wide range of industrial activities that contribute to the
well-being  of  the  Township  by  diversifying  its  economy  and  providing  valuable



17.	Editor's Note: Table 204-198 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204:81	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-20	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-20

employment opportunities. The required lot sizes have been kept small to accorrunodate the startup industries that are likely to emerge; however,  larger  and  heavier  industries have also been permitted . This zone provides for light industrial uses  as permitted  by right, but requires acquisition of a conditional use for heavier and potent ially more-objectionable types of industrial uses. These areas have been located near existing public utility service areas  and along major  roads. Design standards have been imposed to create  attractive site designs and moderate the objectionable impacts associated  with indu strial uses. Substantial setbacks are u sed to protect adjoining residences.

B.	Permitted  u ses. Only the following uses listed in Table 204-20A are permitted within this zone, provided  that  in  addition  to  the  specific  criteria  for  certain  uses established  in Article IV and all applicable genera l provisions in Article III are met. Uses permitted by special exception are subject to the approval by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuan t to a public hearing set forth with  the provisions of Article VI. Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to a pu blic hearing  set forth with the provisions of Article VII.


Table 204-20A Permitted  Uses Industrial  Zone  (IND)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted  by
		

Ri2ht	Specia l Exception	Conditiona l
Use
A2ricultural/Forestry
Agr iculture (excluding
agribu siness)	§ 204-47B	x		
Forestry	&  204-47C	x		
Nonresidential
Auction house	NIA			x
Automobile filling and/or
service station s	§ 204-49D	x		
Automobile wrecking, junk and scrap storage and sales Uunkyards)	§ 204-49E			x
Automobile,  heavy equipment  and similar motor  vehicle rental/sales	§ 204-49F	x		
Automobile, heavy equipm ent and similar
motor vehicle repair centers	§ 204-49G			x
Billboards	§ 204-49H			x
Copy shop/business service	NIA	x		





204:82	01 - 0 1 - 20 14
 
§ 204-20	ZONING	§ 204-20

Table  204-20A Permitted Uses Industrial Zone (IND)



Use	

Specific Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special Exception	Conditional Use
Communications antennas, towers, and equipment building transmitting and receiving facilities	§ 204-490			x
Contractors' office and storage yard	§ 204-49P	x		
Home improvement center, lumber, and building materials sales	§ 204-49U	x		
Industrial use, heavy	§ 204-49X	x		
Industrial use, light	&   204-49Y	x		
Kennels,  commercial	§ 204-49Z	x		
Laundry and dry-cleaning establishment (industrial)	§ 204-49CC	x		
Mini-storage  warehouses	&   204-49EE	x		
Motor  freight terminal	&   204-49FF			x
Motor  vehicle auction	§ 204-49GG	x		
Municipal -owned uses	NIA	x		
Offices, bu siness professional	NIA	x		
Parking  lot	NIA	x		
Parking structure	NIA	x		
Place of worship	§ 204-49MM	x		
Principal  waste handling
facilities	§ 204-49NN			x
Public/private utility building or structure	§ 204-4900		x	
Recycling bu siness/center - household	NIA		x	
Recycling business/center -
commercial/industria l	NIA			x
Research and development
laborator y	NIA	x		
Retail business	NIA	x		
Sawmills	&   204-49PP	x		
Schools, commercial	§ 204-4900	x		


204:83	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-20	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-20


Table 204-20A Permitted Uses
Indu strial Zone (IND)



Use	

Specific
Criteria	Permitted by
		

Right	Special
Exception	Conditional Use
Schools, vocational	&    204-49SS	x		
Travel pla zas	&   204-49W	x		
Treatment  center	§ 204-49WW			x
Truck drop lot	&    204-49XX	x		
Warehousing,  distribution, and wholesaling	§ 204-49YY	x		
Accessory
Accessory  uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses	NIA	x		
Aut omated banking facilities	§ 204-SOB	x		
Drive-through facilities for permitted uses	§ 204-SOE	x		
Outside disolav and sales	&    204-SOK	x		



NIA -Not applicable


C.	Area and design requirements. Unless further specified in the specific criteria for certain uses established in Art icle IV and all applicable general provisions in Article III are met, all new permitted uses within this zone shall comply with the following area and building dimensional requirements set forth in Table 204-20B.18

D.	Compliance with other standards of this chapter.  All uses shall comply with all applicable  provisions contained within:

(1)	Overlay zones set forth herein Article II.

(a)	Floodplain Overlay Zone(§ 204-2 1).

(b)	Airport Overlay Zone(§ 204-22).

(c)	Historic Resources Overlay Zone(§ 204-23).

(2)	Article III, Genera l Provisions.

(3)	Article IV, Specific Criteria.


18.	Editor's N ote: Table 204-208 is included as an attachment to this chapter.


204 :84	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-21	ZONING	§ 204-22

§ 204-21. Floodplain Overlay Zone (FPO).

See Chapter  112, Floodplain Management,  relating to floodplain areas.


§ 204-22. Airport Overlay Zone (APO).

A.	Purpose. The purpose of the Airport Overlay Zone is to:

(1)	Create  an  overlay  zone  that  considers  safety  issues  around  the  Carlisle  Airport (N94);

(2)	Regulate  and  restrict  the  heights  of  established  uses,  constructed  structures and objects of natural growth;

(3)	Create related and appropriate  zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such related and appropriate zones;

(4)	Create  a  permitting  process  for  certain  uses,  structures,  and  objects  within  the
overlay zone.

B.	Relation to other zones . The Airport Overlay Zone shall not modify the boundaries of any underlying zone. Where identified, the Airport Overlay Zone shall impose certain requirements on land use, construction, and development in addition to those contained in the other applicable zones for the same areas.

C.	Conflict. Wherever and whenever the requirements of § 204-22 of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other section of this chapter, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.

D.	Establishment of airport zones and boundaries. There are hereby created and established certain zones within this § 204-22 , Airport Overlay Zone, defined in § 204- 12C of this chapter and depicted on Figure 2, which include:

(1)	Approach  surface zone.

(2)	Conica l  surface  zone.

(3)	Horizontal surface zone.

(4)	Primary  surface zone.

(5)	Transitional  surface zone.














204:85	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-22	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE

Fi  ure 2
 
§ 204-22
 





























"'"""
500



1.000











 
1-ln, ffff
l ... \en than 12.SOOlb\ mu1mum cerrlied t1keoff C-'1
t - Grtattf tk•.n U. lb maximum tf'ft!cc:d Htteoff tii1.'t.:Vt
 
V•V1w.et appt 'Xt l
NP • NOt"ore<..."l ap OKh 34:1
NP .Nonprt()t.On	wAh Vtil!>lbry MRl!"".m<l at   '".SUl\14.. r'\ole\, M 1
P • P<etHAOn appr411(._ "C>:1
 
Not(·Ll istlw: l4!nllh of the P'Z •nd Wl iS u:t outtrw• h of the RPZ H d4!hntd by o1 fOK'tl viJ.W1vmln.m1.:tns



Source: Model Zoning Ordinance La nguage for an Airport District Overlay; PennDOT ,
2010.


E.	Permit applications.




204:86	0 1 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 204-22	ZONING	§ 204-22

(1)	As  regulated  by  Act  164 and  defined  by  14 Code  of  Federal  Regulations  Part
77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), proposals for applications to:

(a)	Erect a new structure or establish a new use;

(b)	Add to or increase the height of an existing structure; or

(c) Establish, erect, and/or maintain any use, structure, or object (natural or man-made), in the Airport Overlay Zone, shall first notify PennDOT's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitt ing PennDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. PennDOT 's BOA response must be included with this permit application for it to be considered complete. If PennDOT's BOA returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered in compliance with the intent of this Airport Overlay Zone. If PennDOT's BOA returns a determination of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance from such regulations as outlined in§ 204-22F of this chapter.

(2)	Exceptions.    In   the   following   circumstances   notification   of   an   approval   by PennDOT's  Bureau of Aviation (BOA) shall not be required:

(a)	No permit is required for the routine maintenance and repairs to, or the replacement of parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.

(b)	In the areas lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no  permit shall be required for any tree or structure  less  than  75  feet  or vertical   height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or  topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.

(c)	In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the   ground,  except  then,  because  of   terrain,   land   contour   or topographic  features,  such  tree  or  structure  would  extend  above the  height limit prescribed  for such approach zones.

(d)	In the area s lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except  when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land  contour,  or  topographic feature, wou ld extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones.

(e)	Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions  shall be construed as permitting or  intending  to  permit  any  construction,  or  alteration  of  any structure, or growth of any tree  in  excess  of  any  of  the  height   limits established  by  this  overlay  zone,  except  that  no permit  is required  to make



204:87	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-22	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-22

maintenance  repair s to or to replace part s of existing structu res which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.

F.	Variances. In addition to the provision s set forth in Article VI of this chapter relating to variances, any request for a variance shall include documentati on in compliance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77, Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1 as amended or replaced). Determination s of whether to grant a variance will depend on  the determination s made by the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA)  and  PennDOT's BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space. In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction m:

(1)	No objection. The subject construction is determined not exceed obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination , a variance shall be granted.

(2)	Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this determination, a variance shall be granted contingent  upon  implementation  of mitigating measures as described in Subsection I, Obstruction marking and lighting.

(3)	Objectionable. The propo sed construction/alteration is determined to be a hazard and is thus objectionable . A variance shall be denied and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the applicant. Such requ ests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regu lations will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantia l justice , and will be in accordance with the intent of this § 204-22 of this chapter.

G.	Use restrictions. Notwithstanding  any other  provisions  of this  § 204-22  of this chapter, no use shall be made or established within the Airport Overlay Zone in such a manner as to:

(1)	Create  electrical  interference  with  navigational   signals  or  radio  communications
between the airport and aircraft;

(2)	Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others;

(3)	Impair visibility within the Airport Overlay Zone;

(4)	Create bird strike hazards; or

(5)	Otherwise   endanger   or  interfere  with  the  landing,  takeoff  or  maneuvering   of
aircraft utilizing the airport(s).

H.	Preexisting  nonconforming  u ses, structures,  and trees. The regulati ons prescribed by this
§ 204-22 of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or otherwise change to, or alteration of any use, structure, or tree not conforming to the



204:88	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-22	ZONING	§ 204-23

regulations of this § 204-22 of this chapter as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use, structure, or tree. No nonconforming use or structure shall be altered and tree permitted  to grow higher, so as to increase the nonconformity (relating to height and the use restrictions set forth in Subsection G). A nonconfonning use, structure  or  tree, has  been  abandoned  for  more than one year or more than 80%  tom  down,  physically  deteriorated , or  decayed , may only be reestablished  consistent with the provisions herein this § 204-22.

I.	Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this § 204-22 of this chapter may be conditioned according to the process described in of this Subsection F to require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit North Middleton Township, at its own expense, or require the applicant requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air safety.


§ 204-23. Historic Resources Overlay Zone (HRO).

A.	Purpose.  The purpose of  the Historic Resources  Overlay Zone is to promote the general welfare of North Middleton Township through the following goals:

(1)	To discourage the demolition of historic resources; and

(2)	To implement the following sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Plamling Code (MPC):19 Section 603(b)(5), which states that z01ling ordinances may permit, prohibit, regu late, restrict and determine protection and preservation of natura l and historic resources ... Section 603(g)(2), which states that "zoning ordinances shall provide for protection of natural and historic features and resources"; Section 604(1), which states that "the provisions of zoning ordinances shall be designed to promote protect and facilitate any or all of the following: ... preservation of the natural, scenic and historic va lues. ..."; and Section 605(2)(vi), whereby uses and structures at or near places having unique historical , architectura l or patriotic interest or value may be regu lated.

B.	Applicability.

(1)	Boundaries. The Historic Resources Overlay Zone shall conform to the boundar ies of North Middleton Township. The overlay zone includes each parcel containing one or more historic resource. An identification and inventory of historic resources has been completed as part of the most recent version of the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan.

(a)	All of the provisions of the applicable underlying  zones  shall  continue  to apply in addition to the provisions of this section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the overlay zone and the underlying zone, the provisions of this overlay zone shall apply.





19.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.


204:89	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-23	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-23

(b) Should the boundaries of the overlay zone be revised as a result of legislative or	administrative actions or judicial decision, the underlying zone requirements shall continue to be applicable.

(2) Covenants and easements . It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.

C.	General  provisions.

(1)	Identification. The inventory shall contain a listing of parcels within the overlay
zone that contain one or more historic resources.

(a)	The overlay Zoning Map identifies  every historic resource by historic name, location/street address, parcel number,  and category of each resource.

(b)	All  parcels  identified  as containing one or more historic resource(s) governed
by this section are shown on the overlay Zoning Map.

(2)	Criteria for determination. This criteria is used to determine if a building, structure, object, site, or district is historic or not historic thereby enabling appropriate classification on the local survey. A building, structure, object, site, or district is historic  if:

(a)	It  is  associated  with  events  that  have made  a  significant  contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state, or national  history;

(b)	It is associated with the lives of people, local, state, or national, who were
significant in our past;

(c)	It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,  or  that  represent  the  work  of  a  master, , or  that  possess  high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction (a  neighborhood  or village  for example); or

(d)	It  has  yielded  or may be likely to yield, information important in history or
prehistory.

(3)	Classifications.

(a)	Historic  resources .

[ ]   Class I: Buildings, objects, sites, or districts that are:

[a]   Listed on or have received a Determination of Eligibility (DOE) to be listed on the National Register; or

[b]  Resources within a district that contribute to a National Register listed or eligible district.

[2]    Class II: Buildings, objects, sites, or districts that are:





204:90	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-23	ZONING	§ 204-23

[a] Resources that  are deemed by the Township  to substantially  meet one or more of the criteria at the local level as per Table 4-5, Inventory of Historic Resources in the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan, dated December 4, 2008, or subsequent revisions .

(b)	Nonhistoric  resources.

[l] Class III: These are buildings that are less than 50 years old or, if more than 50 years old, have lost their integrity. These buildings are not subject to the provisions herein this overlay zone.

(4)	Revisions. The Resource Inventory List and Map may be revised from time to time by a resolution from the Board of Supervisors with recommendation s from the Planning Conunission at a public meeting where the proposed changes shall be presented.

(a)	Revisions are defined as additions to, deletions from the Resource Inventory List  and Map, or changes in classification. Revisions do not include routine list  maintenance to update ownership information or to add information about a change that occurred.

D.	Demolition, removal or relocation of historic resources (Class I or II).

(1)	General requirements. Demolition, removal or relocation of a historic resource shall be regulated in accordance with this section. No historic resource shall be demolished, removed or otherwise relocated without a permit obtained under this provision except for emergency demolitions.

(a)	Emergency  demolitions   to  protect   the  health,  safety  and  welfare  of  the citizens of North Middleton  Township  are  regulated  under  the  Township Building Code,20 or its successors and the provisions of that code shall take precedence over the provision s contained  herein.

(2)	Application procedures. All applications for demolition, removal or relocation of historic resources shall be referred by the Zoning  Officer  to  the  Board  of Supervisors to hear and decide such request as a conditional use. The Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to permit or deny demolition, removal or relocation of the historic resource in accordance with the standards governing conditional use applications in accordance with Article VII of this chapter.

(3)	Criteria for review. Applicants for a permit to demolish, remove, or  relocate  a historic resource in whole or in part must provide, as part of their  conditional use application, a written statement as to whether the following statements are correct and provide detailed substantiation for each statement which is believed  to  be correct. In each instance, the burden of proof  is on the property owner to demonstrate that the property owner has been deprived any profitable use of the relevant  parcel  as a whole.  The recommendation  of the Planning Commission and



20.	Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.


204:91	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-23	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-23

the decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be based upon a review of the information submitted by the applicant against all criteria and not any one criterion . The goals and development objectives of the Township shall also be considered.

(a)	It is not fea sible to continue the current use.

(b)	Other uses permitted within the underlying zone district, either as permitted uses, special exception uses, or conditional uses, have been deni.ed or are not feasible due to constraints  on the building or structure.

(c)	Adaptive use opportunities  do not  exist due to  constraints related  to the
building , structure or property.

(d)	The building, its permitted uses, and adapt ive use potential does not provide a  reasonable rate of return, based on a reasonable initial investment. Such reasonab le rate of return shall be calculated with respect to the property taken as a whole.

(e)	The applicant has not  contributed to the existing  conditions,  either  through neglect or prior renovation , conversion, alteration or similar physical  action.

(f)	The  demolition  will  not  adversely  affect  the  character  of  the  property,
streetscape, neighborhood or  community.

(g)	A proposed new building, structure or u se (if applicable) on or of the property	will not adversely affect the character of the streetscape, neighborhood or communjty.

(h)	The building is structurally unsound.

(i)    The denial of demolition  would  result in unreasonable economic hardship to
the owner.

U)    Sale of the building or structure is impossible or impract ical.

(k)    Denial  of  demoliti on  will  deprive  the property  as a  whole  of all beneficial
use.

(4)	Associated land development plan. If the application for a permit for demolition, removal or relocation of a historic resource is being requested to facilitate future development of the land, the said permit shall not be issued until the following additional requirements have been satisfied.

(a)	Approval of the land development plan by the Board of Supervisors;

(b)	Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals ; and

(c)	The recording of the approved subdivision or land development plan for the
parcel where the demolition, removal or relocation is proposed.

(5)	Pre-demolition	requirements.   In   those  instances   where  an   applicat ion   for
demolition  is approved, the  buildjn g(s) to be demolished shall be historically  and


204:92	01-01- 20 14
 
§ 204-23                                                      ZONING                                                      § 204-25

photographically documented. The extent of the documentation will be determined by the significance of the building(s). When documentation is complete, the building shall be dismantled and recycled to the greatest extent possible.

(6) Enforcement. In addition to the enforcement provisions found in Article VII of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors may authorize action to withhold issuance of any and all zoning and building permits for a period of up to one year for any property that at the time of the enactment of these provisions, was occupied by a Class I or Class II historic resource that was subsequently demolished, removed or relocated without obtaining a permit as provided for herein. In addition, the Board of Supervisors may take other appropriate legal action, which may include equitable and injunctive relief, to enforce the provisions of this section.


ARTICLE III
General  Provisions

§ 204-24. Applicability.

Unless otherwise specified elsewhere herein this chapter, the regulations contained in this
article shall apply to all uses within the Township.


§ 204-25. Accessory uses and structures.

Accessory uses and structures shall not be allowed in the front yard except as permitted by this section, and in the AG and RR Zones, where the principal structure is set back greater than the required minimum front building setback line, an accessory use or structure may be located between the minimum front building setback line and principal structure, but, however shall be set back no less than 50 feet.

A.	Accessory repair of personal motor vehicles . The routine  maintenance,  repair  and servicing of personal motor vehicles owned or leased by the person performing such services when performed outside of a completely enclosed building is permitted by an occupant of the residence,  but only in compliance with the following:

(1)	Excepting one vehicle,  all vehicles shall be maintained with proper registration.

(2)	All work shall be performed on the vehicle owner's (lessee's) property of residence.

(3)	All work shall be Limited to small repair and routine maintenance, excluding major engine repair or replacement, transmission work, carriage  or  drivetrain  work,  or body repair, replacement,  or painting.

(4)	All by-product or waste fuels, lubricants, chemicals and other products shall be properly  disposed of.

(5)	No vehicle shall be stored in a jacked-up position or on blocks for more than 72 continuous  hours.

(6)	Work on vehicles must end at 10:00 p.m.




204:93	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-25	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-25

B.	Alternative energy systems. Except  for  those  associated  with  active  farming  and agr icultural operations and u ses on farms, alternative energy systems shall not be permitted in the front yard area of any property. However , if the principal structure is set back greater than the required front building setback line in the AG and RR Zones, the alternative energy use may be located between the minimum front building setback line and principal structure.

(1)	Small solar  energy systems.  Small solar  energy  systems  shall be permitted  in all
zones subject to the following conditions:

(a)	The design and installation of small solar energy systems shall conform to applicable indu stry standa rds, including those of the American  Na tional Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories, the American Society for  Testing and Material s (ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations, and  shall comply with the North Middleton Township Building Code, and with all other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer specification s shall be submitted as part of the application.

(b)	All small solar energy systems shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited structu re on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street right s-of-way.

(c)	All  on-site  utility  and  transmission  lines  shall,  to  the  extent  feasible,  be
placed underground.

(d)	All   small   solar   energy   systems   shall   be   sited   as   inconspicuously   as
practicable.

(e)	Roof-  and  wall-mounted  small  solar  energy  systems  shall   be  sited  in accordance with the following:

[1]   Small solar energy systems loca ted on a pitched roof of any structure
shall not extend above the highest point of the existing pitched roof.

[2] Small solar energy systems located on a roof of any structure should be the same slope as, or parallel to the pitched roof.

[3] Small solar  energy  systems located  on a  flat  roof shall  not  exceed  15 feet in height above t he height of the roof, and shall be screened from view at ground level of nearby streets by parapets, walls, fences, landscaping, or other approved means.

[4] All small solar energy systems mounted on roofs and walls of any structure shall be subject to the maximum height regulations specified within each zone.

[5]  No small solar energy system shall be attached to, nor otherwise sited
along the front facade (wall) of any principal building.

[6]   Small solar energy systems located on a wall of any structure shall not
extend more than two feet into any required side or rear setback.



204:94	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-25	


(f)	ZONING	§ 204-25

If the small solar energy system is unable to be located on a roof or a wall of
	a  structure  as  is  preferred,  then  placement  of  detached,  ground  mounted,
freestanding small solar energy systems shall be provided in accordance with
	the following :
	[l]  Small solar energy systems detached, ground-mounted, freestanding
from the principal structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height.

[2] The total surface area of all  detached,  ground-mounted,  freestanding small solar energy systems  on the lot shall not exceed more than  15% of the total lot area.

(g)	Prior to the issuance of a permit  for the installation of a small solar energy system, the applicant  shall provide the Zoning Officer with evidence that the:

[1] Applicant 's insurance policy has been endorsed  to cover damage or injury that might result from the installation and operation of the small solar energy system.

[2] Roof, wall, or otherwise the structure in which the small solar energy system is proposed to be attached, is capable of holding the load, in the form of stamped plans certified by a licensed professional engineer registered  by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

[3] Authorization that the public utility company has been informed  of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator and also approves of such connect ion. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

(h)	The applicant shall maintain the small solar energy system in good and safe condition. Whenever a small solar energy system becomes structurally unsafe or  endangers the safety of the structure or premises, or endangers the public safety,   the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the premises on  which the small solar energy system is located that such small solar energy  system shall be made safe or removed.

(2)	Small wind  energy systems.  Small wind energy systems are permitted in all zones
subject to the following criteria:

(a)	The design and installation of all small wind energy systems shall conform to applicable industry  standards,  including  those  of  the  American  National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American  Society  for  Testing  and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying  organizations , or as approved under    an  emerging   technology   program   such   as  the  California   Energy Commission, International Electrotechnica l Commission, or any other small wind   certification   program   recognized   by   the   American   Wind   Energy Association (AWEA) or the United States Department of Energy.  All small wind   energy   systems   shall  comply  with  the  North  Middleton  Township


l
204:95	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-25		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-25

Building	Code,21  and	with	all	other	applicable	fire   and	life   safety
		requirements.  The  manufacturer  specifications  shall  be  submitted  as part  of
		the application.
	(b)	No more than one small wind energy wind turbine shall be pemtitted per
		property  in the R-1, R-2,  and VMU  Zones.  In the AG,  RR, NC, C/LI,  and
		IND Zones,  no more than two small wind energy turbines  shall be permitted
		per   property	by   right ,   and   if   more   than   two   are   proposed   in   the
		aforementioned  zones, the additional  small wind energy wind  turbines above
		two  shall  be  required  to  receive  conditional  use  approval  by  the Board  of
		Supervisors,
	(c)	All on-site utility and transmission lines shall be placed underground.
	(d)	All  wind  turbines  and  towers  shall have a  flat  finish as  applied  by  the
		manufacturer. The objective is to have the equipment as inconspicuous  as
		practicable.
	(e)	All small wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual-electronic or
		mechanical-and  automatic  overspeed  controls  to  limit  the  blade  rotation
		speed to within the design limits of the small wind energy system.
	(f)	Small wind energy systems shall not  be installed  in any location where  their
		proximity  would  interfere  with  existing  fixed  broadcast ,  retransmission,  or
reception	antenna.	This	includes	interference	with	residential	radio,
		television ,   or   wireless   phone,   or   other   personal   communication   system
		reception.  No  small  wind  energy  system  shall  be  installed  in  any  location
		along the major  axis of an existing microwave communication link where its
		operation   is   likely   to  produce   electromagnetic   interference  in  the  link's
		operation.
	(g)	Wind  turbines  shall be  set back  a  distance  equal  to the total  height  of the
		wind turbine from all  lot lines, and public  streets or rights-of-way (including
		alleys), and overhead utility lines.
	(h)	The maximum height of small wind energy systems shall comply with the
		following:

[1] For lots less than 112 acre in area, small wind turbines shall be roof-mounted and shall not be higher than 45 feet above the ground to the highest point of the rotor or blade. The maximum rotor diameter for small wind turbines shall be six feet.

[2]   For  lots between  1/2 acre but less than one acre, the tower height shall
be limited to 75 feet, or 20 feet above the tree line, whichever is lower.

[3] For lots greater than or equal to one acre,  the  tower  height  shall  be limited to 120 feet or 40 feet above tree line, whichever is lower.



21.	Editor's Note: Sec Ch. 95, Construction Codes, Uniform.


204:96	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-25	ZONING	§ 204-25

[4] For all small wind energy systems not otherwise mounted on a roof, unauthorized access to the turbine and tower shall be prevented by design, with a minimum of 12 feet from the ground to the bottom of the ladder. All doors to turbine and tower shall be locked.

(i)	The minimum height  of the lowest  position of the wind turbine shall be 30
feet above the ground .

U) Small wind energy systems mu st comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulation s.

(k)	No portion of any small wind energy system shall extend over parking areas,
access drives, driveways or sidewalks.

(l) Small wind energy systems shall not display advertising, except for reasonable identification of the small wind energy system's manufacturer. Such sign shall have an area of less than four square feet.

(m)	When  an  accessory  building  is  necessary  for  storage  cells   or   related mechanical equipment, the accessory building shall not  have  a  floor  area exceeding 144 square feet, and shall comply with the accessory building requirements specified within each zone.

(n)	All applications for small wind energy systems shall include the following
informat ion:

[1]   A site plan showing:

[a)   Lot  lines and  physica l dimensions of the subject property with.in two times the total height from the tower location.

[b)  Location , dimensions , and types of existing principal and accessory
structures on the property.

[c]  Locat ion  of  the  proposed  small  wind   energy  system  tower, foundations, guy anchor s, and associated equipment.

[d]   The  right-of-way  of  any  public  street  (including  a lleys)  that  1s
contiguou s with the property.

[e]  Any overhead utility lines.

[2] Small wind  energy  systems  system  specifications,  including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower type-freestanding   or   guyed.

[3] Tower and tower foundation blueprints  or  drawings  signed  by   a qualified professional engineer licensed and/or registered to practice  in the Commonw ealth of Pennsylvania.

(o)	Prior to the issuan ce of a permit  for the installation of a small wind  energy
system, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with evidence that the:



204:97	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-25	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-25

[1] Applicant's insurance policy has been endorsed to  cover  damage  or injury that might result from the installation and operation of the small solar energy system.

[2] Authorization  that the public utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator and also approves of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

(p)	The owner of the small wind energy system shall, at  the owner's expense, complete decommissioning within  12 months after the end of the useful  life of  the small wind energy system. It shall be presumed that the small wind energy  system is at the end of its useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous  period of 12 months.

(q)	The applicant shall maintain the small wind energy system in good and safe condition. Whenever a small wind energy system becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of the structure or premises , or endangers the public safety, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the premises on which the small wind energy system is located that such small wind energy system shall be made safe or removed.

(3)	Outdoor   wood   boilers.   Installation   of  an  outdoor   wood   boiler   shall  be   m
accordance with Chapter  137, Outdoor Wood-Fired Boilers.

C.	Fences and walls. No fence or wall  (except  livestock , required junky ard or tennis court walls or fences or a retainer wall of a building permitted under the terms of this chapter) shall  be erected to a  height  of more than three feet  in a front yard within the R-1, R-2, VMU,  and NC Zones, nor more than six feet in the AG, RR, C/LI and IND Zones. No fence shall block motorist view of vehicles entering or exiting the property nor be located within the street right-of-way or clear-sight triangle.

D.	Garage/yard sales. Within any zone, an owner, occupant, or both, may conduct up to four garage/yard sales per year. No garage or yard sale shall be conducted for a period longer than three consecutive days. Such sales shall be limited  to personal  possessions. Only two six square-foot signs shall be permitted advertising the garage/yard sale located upon the premises where the sale occurs and shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the sale. In no case shall any aspect of the garage/yard sale be conducted in a street right-of-way, except that parking may occur where  permitt ed. The conduct  of  garage sales beyond the extent described herein represents a commercia l business and requires appropriate zoning authorization.

E.	Man-made lakes, dams, ponds and impoundments .

(1)	All lakes, dams, ponds and impoundment s located along and connected to a stream that involve any of the following shall require the acquisition of a permit from the PADEP Bureau of Dams and Waterways, Division of Dam Safety, or a letter indicating that the propo sed use does not require a PADEP permit:





204:98	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-25	ZONING	§ 204-25

(a)	The dam, pond or impoundment contains a volume of at least 50 acre feet;

(b)	The dam reaches a height of 15 feet; or

(c)	The dam,  pond or impoundment  impounds the water  from a watershed  of at
least 100 acres.

(2)	All dams, ponds and impoundments not contiguous to a stream that have an intake, outlet, or both, have an embankment within 50  feet  of  a  stream,  or  any combination thereof, shall require the acquisition of a permit from  the  PADEP Bureau of Dams and Waterways , Division of Waterways and Stormwater Management.

(3)	All dams, ponds and impoundments meeting the requirements of Subsection E(l) sha ll be located 75 feet from all adjoining lot lines, as measured from the closest point of the adjoining lot line to the maximum anticipated water surface elevation. Furthermore,	all dams, ponds and impoundments , including stormwater management basins, shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any subsurface sewage disposal system or well.

(4)	All other dams, ponds  and impoundments require the sub1nission of statement by a qualified engineer that  the proposed use is properly constructed and will not pose a threat to the public safety nor the environment during nonnal flow conditions and those associated with the base flood. All dams shall be constructed to a height of one foot above the water surface elevation occurring during the base flood.

(5)	Requirements for fencing. All ponds constructed within areas subject to livestock shall be enclosed by fencing that prevents livestock from trampling the pond's shores and polluting the waters.

(6)	Maintenance . All pond s shall be regularly maintained and floating debris shall be removed from all pipes and spillways. All ground cover shall be trimmed. Weeds, brush and trees shall not be permitted to grow on the dam or spillway.

F.	Ornamental ponds and wading pools.

(1)	Such  structures  shall  comply  with  all  accessory  use  setbacks,  except  that  a
twenty-foot  setback shall apply from the street right-of-way.

(2)	All such ponds or pools shall be maintained so as to not pose a nuisance by reason
of odor or the harboring of insect s, vermin, or both.

(3)	No such pond(s) shall be used for the commercial hatching of fish or other species.

G.	Recreation courts. All  recreation court s and other related facilities shall be arranged and/or fenced so as to prevent safety hazards upon nearby roads, properties, or both. All recreation courts, excluding fences, shall be set back at least 20 feet from any adjoining lot lines and include an open mesh permanent fence 10 feet in height behind each baseline. Such fence shall extend parallel to said baseline at least l 0 feet beyond the court's playing surfa ce unless the entire court is enclosed. Any lighting fixtures shall be arranged so as not to cast directly on adjoining property, roads, or both.



204:99	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-25	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-26

H.	Satellite dish antennas. Satellite dish antennas are subject to all accessory use standards.
Furthermore, any satellite dish antenna located within the AG, RR, R-1, R-2, VMU, and NC Zones shall be used only to receive signals, not transmit them. All ground-mounted satellite dish antennas located within the C/LI and IND Zones that are used to transmit video format data shall be completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high, nonclimbable fence that includes signage warning of dangerous radiation levels. Any gates within the fence shall be locked when unattended. Satellite dish antennas within the C/LI and IND Zones shall comply with all principal  use standards.

I.	Swimming pools. No permanent structure  shall  be   permitted  without  an  operable filtration system utilizing chlorine, bromine or some other antibacterial agent. All swimming pools and enclosures shall comply with all state and local building codes. The water's edge of all pools must be set back at least 20 feet from all lot lines. No water from a pool  shall be discharged onto any public street or alley. These requirements shall not apply to man-made ponds, lakes or other impoundments, unless  the primary purpose for their construction is swimming.

J.	Wells. All wells shall be installed to Pennsylvania  Department  of  Environmenta l Protection regulations and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines. Any well that is proposed to be utilized as the primary source for water to serve the public or individual for any proposed use  other  than  agricultural  or for  single-family  residential uses must be tested for both water quantity and quality and be proven to be an adequate and safe source of water to serve the  proposed use. All  local,  state  and  federal regulations apply to the use of wells as required by law. When locating a well in or next to the AG Zone, the property owner shall be aware of and sensitive to existing and future agricultural activity on or adjacent to the property on which the well is being drilled. All efforts should be made to locate the well in an area of the property that will be the least impacted by existing or future agricultural activity.


§ 204-26. Buffering and screening.

A.	Buffering  and  screening  shall  be  generally  required  where  more intense/dense  uses  and
zones abut less intense/dense uses and zones, unless otherwise stipulated in this section.

B.	Where nonresidential zones (C/LI and IND) and mixed-use zones (VMU and NC) abut existing residential  uses and residentia l zones (R-1 and R-2), the required buffer yard width and levels of screening requirements herein this section and Table 204-26A shall be provided, unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.


Table 204-26A
Nonresidential Zones and Mixed Use Zones and Related Buffer Yards
Minimum Buffer Yard
 

Level of Screening
1
 
Nonresidential  Zones  and Mixed Use Zones
VMU
 
Width (feet)
15
 
1	NC	25
204:100	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-26	ZONING	§ 204-26

Table 204-26A
Nonresidential Zones and Mixed Use Zones and Related Buffer Yards
Minimum Buffer Yard
 

Level of Screening 2
3
 
Nonresidential  Zones and Mixed Use Zones
C/LI IND
 
Width
(feet)
40
100
 

C.	Where permitted nonresidential uses and higher-density residential uses (single-family attached dwelling and multifamily dwelling/apartment uses) abut an existing or planned single-family detached dwelling, single-family semidetached dwelling, and/or two-family dwelling, the required buffer yard width and levels of screening requirements herein this section and Table 204-26B shall be provided , unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.


Table 204-26B
Nonresidential and Higher Density Residential Uses Related Buffer Yards
Minimum Buffer Yard Width
 
Level of Screening
1
1
2
3
 
Zones	(feet)
VMU	15
AG, RR, R-1, R-2, and NC	25
C/LI	40
IND	75
 


D.	Where a lot  used  for  nonresidential  uses,  higher-density  residential  uses (single-family attached dwelling and multifamily dwelling/apartment uses) abuts another lot of the same or  similar use, no buffer yard or screening shall be required, unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.

E.	Any lot used for agricultural/forestry uses shall not be required to provide buffer yards or screening, unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.

F.	Buffer yard requirement s.

(1)	Required buffer yards and screening shall extend the entire length or width of the lot line of the adjoining zone or lot.

(2)	Buffer  yards  may  coincide  within  any  required  building  setback  and  yard
requirements .

(3)	The buffer yard shall be a landscaped, and where required, screen-planted area free of buildings; structures; dumpsters and refuse containers; commercial or industrial sales, storage and display; manufacturing or processing activity; materials; loading and unloading areas; and vehicle parking, sales, and display. Signs may be permitted in a buffer yard abutting a street right-of-way as provided in § 204-41 of this chapter.


204:101	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-26	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-26

(4)	Buffer yards may be crossed by access drives, driveways, sidewalks, or easements with a maximum width of 35 feet , provided that the center line of access drive, driveway or easement crosses the lot line and buffer yard at not less than 75°; however , no turning or maneuvering of vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer yard area .

G.	Levels  of screening.

(1)	Level l screening. This screening shall contain materials that, at maturity, provide intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of four feet, as well as intermittent visual obstruction from a height of four feet to a height of 30 feet. Vegetative screening materials within intermittent visual obstruction areas shall contain horizontal openings no greater than 20 feet in width upon the plants' maturity . Grouping of plant materials is encouraged to achieve a more natural appearance.

(a)	Evergreen trees: minimum  five-foot planting height.

(b)	Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot planting height.

(c)	Shrubs: minimum eighteen-inch planting height , reaching a minimum of 30 inches within two years. All shrubs (deciduou s or evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 inches to 15 inches when planted.

(d)	Minimum planting width: 10 feet.

(2)	Level 2 screening . This screening shall contain materials which, at maturity, provide semi-opacity from the ground to a height of six feet and intermittent visual obstruction from a height of six feet to a height of 30 feet. Vegetati ve screening materials within intermittent visual obstruction areas shall contain horizontal openings no greater than 20 feet in width; and vegetative screening material within semi-opaque areas shall contain openings no greater than 10 feet in width upon the plant s' maturity. Grouping of plant material is encouraged to achieve a  more natural appearance.

(a)	Minimum  six-foot-high freestanding/retaining  wall or solid fence.

(b)	Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot planting height at a minimum planting width of 10 feet.

(c)	Deciduou s trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot planting height at a minimum planting width of 10 feet.

(d)	Shrubs: minimum eighteen inch planting height, reaching a minimum of 30 inches within two years. All shrubs (deciduous and evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 inches to 15 inches when planted at a  minimum planting width of five feet.

(3)	Level 3 screening. This screening shall contain materials that , at maturity, provide opacity from the ground to a height  of 30 feet. Vegetative screening materials within opaque areas shall contain no horizontal openings upon the plants' maturity.



204:102	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-26	ZONING	§ 204-26

Trees within this buffer shall consist primarily of Eastern white pine and Norway spruce grouped to achieve a desired opacity. Screening shall consist of a combination, in longitudinal series, of at least two of the following options:

(a)	Option A: Fence screen.

[1]    Minimum six-foot-high freestanding/retaining  wall or solid fence. [2]    Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot tree planting height.
[3]    Minimum planting width:  12 feet.

(b)	Option B: Evergreen tree screen.

[1]  Evergreen trees: minimum eight-foot tree planting height.

[2]  Composition adequate to achieve a solid screen from zero to six feet in
height two years after planting.

[3]  Minimum planting width: 12 feet.

(c)	Option C: Berm screen.

[I]  Berm.

[a]  Minimum six foot planting height. [b]  Berm slopes 3:1 and less steep.
[c]   Eight feet minimum top width.

[2]	Lawn, ground cover, shrubs and trees.

[a]  Minimum six-foot tree planting height.

[b]   Adequate  to provide  a continuous bed of vegetative  ground cover over at least 95% of the berm area within two years of planting.

(d)	Option D: Steep berm screen.

[1]   Steep berm:

[a]  Minimum six-foot tree planting height.

[b]  Composed  of  lightly  compacted  soil  with  stability  measures adequate to retain stable soil structure and prevent erosion.

[2]   With slopes greater than 3:1 up to 2:1 maximum slope: [a]  Eight-foot minimum top width.
[3]   Ground cover, shrubs and trees:

[a]   Adequate  to achieve  a continuous  bed of vegetative cover over at
least 95% of the berm area within two years of planting.



204:103	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-26	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-26

[b] Ground cover and shrubs to be chosen from Subsection G(3)(d)(4), Vegetation acceptable for erosion control.

[4]  Vegetation acceptable for erosion control:

[a] Composition adequate to achieve a solid screen from zero to six-foot high two years after planting considering the expected plant size two years after planting .

H.	The following specific uses  or  features  shall be  screened  with  Level  3 screening  from adjacent properties and from public view from the street right-of-way in accordance with the following:

(1)	Dumpster, trash-handling , recycling,  and storage areas;

(2)	Loading docks or spaces;

(3)	Outdoor storage of any materials, stock, or equipment, including but not limited to motor vehicles , heavy equipment or other similar items (excluding the sales and display areas of permitted automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle rental/sales; home improvement centers, lumber, and building materials sales; motor vehicle auctions; outside display and sales; etc.); and

(4)	Service entrances,  essential  service structures, and utility facilities.

I.	Screen planting.

(1)	Each buffer yard shall include the required landscape screen plantings as set forth above in this section, located in  the exterior portion  of the required buffer  yards, and extending the length or width of the lot line in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The screen planting  shall be  maintained  permanently  in a healthy condition.
Any landscaping that dies or is severely damaged shall be replaced by the current property owner as soon as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of 150 days.

(b)	The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will be not be closer
than two feet from any street right-of-way or lot line.

(c)	In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential  for crime, planting shall  also be sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first- or   ground-floor windows from  the  street  and  from  within  the development  to   the greatest  extent  possible.  Planting  patterns  shall  not obstruct  sight  lines   or create isolated areas,  especially  near  pedestrian walking  paths.  A   clear-sight triangle shall be maintained at all  street intersections  and at all  points where access drives and driveways intersect public streets.

(d)	The screen planting shall be interrupted only at:





204:104	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-26		ZONING	§ 204-27

[l]  Approved  points  of  approximately perpendicular  [not less than  75°]
		vehicle or pedestrian ingress and egress to the lot;
		[2]   Locations  necessary  to  comply  with  safe sight  distance  requirements;
		and
		[3]   Locations  needed  to  meet  other  specific  state,  Township  and  utility
requirements.
	(e)	American  arborvitae and  similar weak-stem plants  shall not be used to meet
the buffer yard requirements .
	(f)	
In addition to the trees and shrubs mentioned above in this section, trees and shrubs that are used in the planting of a buffer yard and elsewhere on the lot shall be in accordance with those identified within Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
	(g)	Clear-sight  triangles  shall  be  provided  and  maintained  in  accordance  with
§ 204-32B(3) of this chapter.


§ 204-27. Common open space requirements.

In those instances where common open space is required elsewhere in this chapter or when an applicant proposes the use of common open space,  such  common  open  space shall comply with the following:

A.	Required common  open space shall be designed and arranged to achieve at least one of the following objectives , and the applicant shall demonstrate those specific measures employed  to achieve these objectives:

(1)	Protection of important natural resources (e.g., productive  agricultural  soils, streams, ponds, wetlands, steep  slopes, woodland s, unique  geologic  features, wildlife habitats, aquifer recharge areas, etc.).

(2)	Protection of important historical sites, archaeological  sites, or both.

(3)	Provision of usable play and recreation areas that are conveniently accessible to residents  within  the development and the Township .

(4)	Integration of greenbelts throughout the development that link residences with on-site or adjoining parks,  schools or other similar features.

B.	An essential element of the use of common open space is a writ ten description and plan for the disposition of ownership of common open space land designating those areas to be offered for dedication or to be owned by the specific form of organization proposed. The common open space shall be accomplished through one of the following:

(1)	An offer of dedication to the Township. The Township shall not be obligated to accept dedication of the common open space.


l

204:105	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-27	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-28

(2)	With permission of the Township and with appropriate deed restrictions in favor of the Township and in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, the developer may transfer ownership of the common open space or a portion thereof to a private nonprofit organization among whose purposes is the preservation of common open space land, natural resources , or both. The organization shall be a bona fide conservation organization with a perpetual existence, the conveyance must contain appropriate provision for reverter or retransfer if the organization is unable to maintain the land, and the organization must enter into a maintenance agreement with the Township.

(3)	The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space which shall be generally consistent with the requirements for unit owners'  associations found in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. If such an organization is created, the agreements of sale and deeds for all lots shall contain the following requirements in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors:

(a)	Such organization shall not dispose of the common open space by sale or otherwise, except to the Township, unless the Township has  given  prior written approval. Such transfer shall be made only  to another  organization which shall maintain the common open space in accordance with this chapter.

(b)	The organization and all lot owners shall enter into a maintenance agreement with  the Township  and shall agree to be bound  by the provisions  of Article VII   of   the   Pennsylvania   Municipalities   Planning   Code   relating   to   the maintenance  of deteriorating common open space by municipalities.

(c)	The Township may require the establishment  of a reserve fund to provide for
maintenance of or capital improvements to the common open space.


§ 204-28. Corner lots.

A.	Corner  lots,  including  multiple  frontage  lots,  shall have  two  front  yards  (abutting  the
street), one side yard and one rear yard.

(1)	For purposes of this chapter, the front lot line of the street in which the lot is addressed shall be the primary front lot line, and the other front lot line shall be the secondary front lot line.  The rear  lot line shall be the lot  line directly opposite of the primary front lot line. The side lot line shall be the lot line directly opposite the secondary lot line.

B.	On any corner lot, including multiple frontage lots, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no hedge, tree or other growth shall be planted or maintained which may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view. On corner lots, including multiple frontage lots, no such structure or growth shall be permitted  within  an area  which  is formed  by the clear-sight  triangle as set forth in
§ 204-32.




204:106	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-29	ZONING	§ 204-30

§ 204-29. Height limit exceptions.

A.	The height regulations do not  apply to the following structures or projections, provided such structures or projections are set back a horizontal distance from any lot line at least equal to their height from the average level of the ground abutting the structure:

(1)	Water    towers,	antennas,    utility	poles,	smokestacks,	chimneys,	farm   silos,
windmills,  flagpoles or other similar structures.

(2)	Rooftop  structures  for  the  housing  of  elevators,  stairways,  water  storage  tanks,
ventilating fans and other mechanical appurtenances.

(3)	Parapet  walls or cornices used  solely for ornamental purposes  if not  in excess of
five feet above the roof line.

B.	In no case shall any freestanding or rooftop structure  above  the  maximum  permitted height be used for the purpose of providing additional floor space for residential, commercial or industria l purposes.


§ 204-30. Landscaping and vegetation preservation.

Landscaping and vegetation in all zones shall be subject to the following criteria:

A.		Any part of a nonresidential, multifamily dwelling/apartment, single-family attached, or mixed use lot which is not used for structures, access drives, driveways, loading areas, parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with an all-season, well-maintained vegetative groundcover, and shall be landscaped with trees and  shrubs.

B.	In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential for crime, planting shall also be sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first or ground floor windows from the street and from within the development to the greatest extent possible. Planting patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or create isolated areas, especially near pedestrian walking paths. A clear-sight triangle shall be maintained at all  street intersections and at all points where access drives and driveways intersect public streets.

C.	Vegetation preservation.  Vegetation  preservation  is  governed  by  the  standards  in  this section and the  provisions  of the  PA MPC.  The removal  of  trees,  shrubbery,  foliage, grass  or other natural growth shall be permitted when in conformance with the provisions of this   chapter,  or  Chapter  180,  Subdivision  and  Land  Development.  The  grubbing activity shall be permissible,  upon Zoning  Officer review and approval of the application as  required  by  the Township.  A  permit  shall  be prepared  and  issued  for  an approved application.  Violations  and penalties  associated  with  cutting  and  clearing  of vegetation include:

(I)	Forestry activities of timber harvesting and/or logging shall comply with Article IV of this chapter.

(2) The cutting of living, damaged, or deceased trees and/or clearing of vegetation as part of required screening within a buffer yard is prohibitive, unless replaced  by other suitable screening material as required by the this chapter.


204:107	01 - 0 I - 2014
 
§ 204-31                                    NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 204-32

§ 204-31. Minimum habitable floor area.

Unless  otherwise provided  herein Article IV of this chapter, the minimum residential dwelling
and room sizes shall be in accordance with North Middleton Township Building Code.22


§ 204-32. Lot access.

Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an approved private street. The erection of buildings without  approved  access shall not be permitted. Approved access shall be provided in accordance with  this  section  and Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.

A.	Driveway  requirements.  Driveways, as defined  in Article  I, shall meet  the following
standards:

(1)	Number   per   lot.   No   more   than   two   driveway   connections   per   lot   shall  be
permitted.

(2)	Setbacks. Except as noted below  in Subsection A(l2) and (13), driveways shall be not less than 40 feet  from  the  edge of the cartway of any street  intersection,  nor less than five  feet from a fire hydrant, nor less than  two feet  from adjoining  lot lines.

(3)	Slope. A driveway  shall not  exceed a slope of 8% within 25  feet of the street
right-of-way  lines.

(4)	Road  classification.  Driveway  access  shall  be provided  to the  street  of  lesser
classification when  there  is more than one street classification involved.

(5)	Driveway width. No driveway shall provide a curb cut exceeding 24 feet in width.

(6)	Permits required. All driveways shall require the obtainment of a driveway permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or a road occupancy permit from the Township.

(7)	Traffic movement /drainage. Driveways shall not interfere with normal traffic movement nor be constructed in a manner to be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street.

(8)	Plan delineation.  Driveway  location shall be delineated  on all plan s/permits  as
applicable.

(9)	Joint use driveways.

(a)	Joint use driveways may be  used  to  provide  required  vehicular  access between dwellings and a street. The use of a joint use driveway shall only be approved when cross-access easements ensure common use, access and maintenance of the joint  use driveway for each property owner relying upon said  joint  use driveway.  Such cross-access easements shall be required  in



22.	Editor's Note: See Ch.95, Construction Codes, U niform.


204:108	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-32	ZONING	§ 204-32

language acceptab le to the Township  Solicitor and the Board of Supervisors.
Joint use driveways shall not exceed  1,000 feet in length.

(b)	Joint use driveways will be owned, maintained, and repaired by users of the joint use driveway in accordance with an ownership and maintenance agreement recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County. Whenever a subdivider or developer proposes to provide access to a subdivision by a joint use driveway, the Township shall require that two copies of a proposed agreement be submitted with the plan as well as two copies of an appropriate deed restriction. The agreement and deed restriction shall establish responsibility for maintenance and repair of the joint use driveway, including mowing, snow and ice removal, maintenance of clear sight distance within the clear-sight triangle, and upkeep of the road bed and drainage facilities. References to said agreement shall be provided on the plans and recorded with the final subdivision or land development plan.

(10)	Clear-sight triangle. Driveways shall be located and  constructed  so  that  a clear-sight triangle, as depicted below, is provided.  Two  apexes  of  the  triangle shall be located in both directions along the street center line, 75 feet from a point where the center line of a driveway and street intersect. The vertex of the triangle shall be located along the center line of the driveway,  on the site, and  five feet from the property/street right-of-way line. No bui lding or obstructions and/or plant materials with a mature height over 18 inches high shall be placed within the clear-sight  triangle.


 







204:109	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-32	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-32

(11)	Adequate site distance. Driveways shall be located so as to provide adequate sight distances at intersections with  streets. Such sight distances shall be in compliance with Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development, or PennDOT.

(12)	Single-family attached dwellings on individual lots: driveway and garage requirements. Single-family attached dwellings on individual lots are permitted to utilize driveways and garages in compliance with the following requirement:

(a)	A detached garage located within the rear yard must be located no less than 20 feet from the rear lot line. Garages may be constructed with party walls on common lot lines.

(13)	Single-family attached dwellings on common property: driveway and garage requirements. Single-family attached dwellings on common property are permitted to utilize driveways and garages in compliance with the following requirements:

(a)	A driveway located within the front yard may be arranged as a side-by-side joint driveway with an adjoining townhouse.  Such driveway shall be set back at least 10 feet from any lot line of an adjoining townhouse  that  does not share the joint driveway and 10 feet from the closest point of any building except where attached to a garage.

(b)	A driveway located between a townhouse with an attached garage and a local road,  private drive or alley must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the closest  point of any townhouse or other building not served by the driveway, other than a garage.

(c)	A driveway located between a townhouse without an attached garage and a local road, private drive or alley must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any townhouse or other building not served by the driveway.

(d)	A garage located between a townhouse and a road, or private drive must be located no less than 25 feet from the street right-of-way or private drive cartway (whichever provides for the greater setback), 20 feet from the alley right-of-way or cartway (whichever provides for the greater setback), and in no case shall a garage be located in the front yard.

B.	Access  drive  requirements.  Access  drives,  as  defined  in  Article  I,  shall  meet  the
following standards:

(1)	Number   per   lot.  Except   as  specified  elsewhere,  the  number  of  access  drives
intersecting with a street shall not exceed two per lot.

(2)	Setbacks. The edge(s) of all access drives shall be set back at least:

(a)	One hundred feet from the intersections of any street right-of-way  lines;

(b)	One hundred feet from any other  access  drive  located  upon  the  same  lot (measured  from cartway edges); and






204:110	OJ - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-32	ZONING	§ 204-32

(c)	Fifteen feet from any side and/or rear lot lines; however, this setback would not apply along one lot  line when a joint parking lot is shared by adjoining uses or a joint  use access drive is proposed.

(3)	Clear-sight triangle. Access drives shall be located and constructed so that a clear-sight triangle as depicted below is provided as a minimum. The apexes of the triangle shall be located along all center lines, in all directions from the intersection of street and access drive. No building or obstructions and/or plant material s over 18 inches high shall be placed within the clear-sight triangle.


 



(4)	Slope. Access drives shall not exceed a slope with an algebraic difference of 4% within 75 feet of the intersecting street center line.

(5)	Surfacing. All access drives shall be paved with concrete or bituminou s paving
material or another dust-free material suitable to the Township.

(6)	Access drive width. Access drives shall  provide a  twelve-foot-wide  cartway  for each lane of travel. However, in no  case  shall  any access  drive cartway  be  less than 15 feet wide if it provides  for  truck  movement  between  the  public right-of-way and any required off-street loading spaces as regulated by § 204-36 of tills chapter. Regulations of this section are subject to modification as required by PennDOT.

(7)	Permits required. Any access drive intersecting with a state-owned or Township-owned road shall require the obtainment of a Pennsylvania Department of Transportation driveway permit or a road occupancy permit from the Township, respectively.




204:111	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-32	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-33

(8)	Plan delineation.  Access  drive  location shall be delineated  on all plans/permits  as applicable.

(9)	Joint use access drives.

(a)	Joint use access drives may be used to provide required vehicular access between nonresidential  development  and  a  street. The  use of a joint  use access drive shall only be approved when cross-access  easements ensu re common use, access and maintena nce of the joint use access drive for each property owner or occupant  relying upon said joint use access drive. Such cross-access easements shall be required in language acceptable  to  the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors.

(b)	Joint use access drives will be owned , maintained, and repaired by users of the j oint use access drives in accordance with an ownership and maintena nce agreement recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cumberland County. Whenever a developer  proposes to provide access to a development by a joint use access drive, the Township  shall require that  two copies of a proposed agreement be submitted with the plan as well as two copies of an appropriate deed restriction . The agreement and  deed  restriction  sha ll establish responsibi lity for maintenance and repair of the joint  use  access drive, including mowing, snow and ice removal, maintenance of clear sight distance within the clear-sight triangle, and upkeep of the road bed and drainage facilities. References to  said agreement shall be provided on  the plans and recorded with the final subdivision or land development plan.


§ 204-33. Materials and waste handling requirements.

A.	All  nonresidential,  multifamily  dwellings/apartment  uses  shall  be  required  to  provide
detailed  information regarding materials and wa ste handling, including:

(1)	Listing of all materials to be either used or produced on the site.

(2)	Listing of all  wastes  (including but not limited to food and greases; animal; solid; medica l; and haza rdous, etc.) generated on the site.

B.	Evidence shall be provided indicating that the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with local, state and federal regulations. Such evidence shall, at a minimum , include copies of contracts with wa ste haulers licensed to operate within Cumberland County which have been contracted to dispose of  the materials and wastes used or  generated  on site or  some other  legal  means  of disposal. The zoning permit for this  use shall remain  valid only so long as such contracts  remain in effect and all materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regu lar basis. Should the nature of the use change in the future, such that the material s used  or  wastes generated changes significantly either in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning	Officer and shall provide  additional  evidence  demonstrating  continued compliance with the requ irements of this section.






204:112	OJ - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-34	ZONING	§ 204-35

§ 204-34. Number of principal use/structure per lot.

The number of principal uses and/or principal structures permitted per lot in all zones shall be subject to the following criteria:

A.	A lot  in the VMU, NC, C/LI, and IND Zones may include more than one permitted principal use and/or structure, provided all other requirements of this chapter are met. If differing dimensional requirements  apply for different uses on the lot, then the most restrictive requirement shall apply.

(1)	For  example,  if  use  A requires  twenty-foot  setbacks  and  use B  on the  same lot requires ten-foot  setbacks, then the lot shall have minimum setbacks of 20 feet.

(2)	The lot may include a condominium form of ownership of individual buildings, with  a legally binding property owner or other similar-type association , if the applicant  proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Township  Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, that there will be appropriate legal mechani sms in  place and compliance with applicable state law.

B.	A lot within the AG, RR , R-1 and R-2 Zones shall not include more than one principal
use or one principal structure unless specifically permitted by this chapter.

(I)	A mobile home  park,  condominium  residential  development,  single-family attached, or mu ltifamily dwelling/apartment  development  may  include more  than one principal building per lot, provided all other requirements of this chapter are met.

(2) A condominium form of ownership of individual dwelling units, with a legally binding homeowner s' or other association, may be established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors, that there will be appropriate legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable state law.


§ 204-35. Off-street parking requirements .

A.	Off-street parkin g shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section prior to the occupancy of any building or use, so as to alleviate traffic congestion on streets. Off-street parking shall be provided whenever:

(1)	A bui lding is constructed or a new use is established;

(2)	The use of an existing building is changed to a use regumng more parking facilities; or

(3)	An existing building or use is altered or enlarged so as to increase the amount of
parking  space required.

B.	Parking for single-family dwellings . Every single-family dwelling shall be required to provide at least two off-street parking spaces. Such spaces must be provided behind the street right-of-way line and may take the form of garages, carports or driveways. Driveways shall be in accordance with the provi sions of § 204-32A of this chapter.



204:113	01-01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

C.	Parking for all other uses.

(1)	General requiremen ts.

(a)	Site plan. Each application for a zoning permit (or a use for which parking spaces are required) shall include a drawing (site plan) showing the proposed layout of the lot. The drawing shall clearly indicate all of the design elements required below. No zoning permit shall be issued for any u se for which parking spaces are required unless the site plan has been approved or necessary var iances have been obtained.

(b)	Surface. All parking lots shall be constructed and maintained with a paved surface of concrete or bituminous materials or another approved durable and dustless  surface.

(c)	Drainage. Parking lots shall be graded to a minimum slope of 1% to provide for  drainage.  Adequately  sized  inlets  and  storm  sewers  shall  be  provided  to discharge stormwater in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 180, Subdivision	and  Land  Development,  and  Chapter  175,  Stormwater Management.

(d)	Lighting.  Adequate  lighting  shall be provided  and arranged  so in accordance
with the provisions of§ 204-37B(9) of this chapter.

(e)	Access drives. Every parking lot shall be connected to a street by means of an  access  drive.  Access  drives shall  be in accordance with  the provisions of
§ 204-32B of this chapter.

(f)	Location. Except as provided elsewhere, off-street parking may be located in any  yard, subject to any specific requirements of this code or any code regulating parking in this chapter.

(2)	Parking  requirements.

(a)	Size. The following lists required minimum space sizes in feet: [l]   Standard car spaces:
[a]  Parallel: 19 feet by eight feet.

[b]  Nonpara llel: 19 feet by nine feet.

(b)	Access. Parking areas for more than one dwelling shall be designed so that each vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space without requiring the moving of any other vehicle.

(c)	Marking. All parking lots shall be adequately marked and maintained for t he purpose of defining parking  spaces  and  interior  drives.  Where  paving  is required,  the  lines  of  all  parking  spaces  and  interior  drives   (including directional arrows, etc.) shall be solid white and four inches in widt h. Painted lines,   arrows   and   dividers   shall   be  provided   and  maintained   to  control parking  and direct vehicular  circulation.



204: 114	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-35	


(d)	ZONING	§ 204-35

Separation.  Parking  spaces  shall be guarded by curbs or other protective
		devices ,  which  are arranged  so  that  parked  cars  cannot  project  into access
and interior drives, street s, yards or walkways.
	(e)	Handicapped parking. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall  be governed by the latest gu idelin es described under the North Middleton Township Building Code.zJ
	(f)	
Joint parking lots.

[l] For nonresidential uses, joint parking lots may be permitted. These joint facilities can redu ce the  total number  of parking spaces required by a maximum of 20%. Therefore, the resulting joint parking lot will be required to provid e at least 80% of the total number of spaces required by the sum of all the uses. Such reduced parking spaces  must  be appropr iately distributed on the lot to provide convenient walking distance between  every vehicle and each of the uses.

[2]  Required parking spaces may be provided  in parkin g lots designated to jo intly serve two or more establishments or uses, provided that the number of required  spaces  in such joint  facility shall not be less than the total required separately for all  such  establishments  or  uses. However, where it can be conclusively demonstrated that one or more uses will be generating a demand  for parking spaces, primarily dur ing periods when the other use(s) is not in operation, the tota l number of required  parking spaces may be redu ced to:

[a]   That  required number of spaces that would be needed to serve the u se generating the most demand for pa rking; plus

[b]   Twenty  percent of that  number of required  parking spaces needed to serve the use(s) generating the demand for lesser spaces.

(g) Schedule of required spaces. The following lists required numbers of pa rking space s by u se type. Any use involving a combination of severa l uses shall provide t he total number of spaces required for each individual use:


Table 204-35A - Agricultural/Forestry Parking Space Requirem ents
Agricultural and Forestry Uses
Type of Use	Minimum  Required  Spaces
Agribusiness	1 spa ce per nonresident fa nn employee on the peak
shift, plus 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Agriculture (excluding agribu siness)	1 space per nonresident farm employee on the peak
shift , plus 2 spa ces per dwelling unit
Forestry	l space per employee on the peak shift




23.	Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Construction Codes, U niform.


204:115	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

Table 204-35A - Agricultural/Forestry Parking Space Requirements Agricultural and Forestry Uses
 
Type of Use
Nature preserve and wildlife sanctuary
Riding school and horse boarding
stable
 
Minimum Required Spaces
1 space per each acre or portion thereof devoted to
the use
1 space per 2 stalls, plus 1 space per every 4 seats of
spectator seating, plus 2 spaces per dwelling unit
 



 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35B - Residential Parking Space Requirements Residential Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Bed-and-breakfast







Boarding/rooming house



Continuing care retirement facility, long-term care nursing home, and/or personal care facility (individual or in combination with the following:









Flag lot residence
Group home


Mobile home park
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1 space for each guest/sleeping room; and
Other uses beyond the dwelling unit and guest/sleeping rooms, and open to the public: number of spaces normally required for similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
2 spaces per dwelling unit of owner/resident manager and other permanent residents, plus 1 space for each sleeping/rooming unit for let
Personal care or nursing care centers: 1 space for each 4 beds, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift.
Apartment  units:  1.25 spaces per dwelling unit. Cottage units  (single-family units):  1 space per
dwelling unit, plus  1 space per 5 units for guest
parking.
Other uses not specified herein above: number of spaces normally required for similar uses listed elsewhere  within this schedule
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus  1 space for each 4
residents
2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1/2 additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized, arranged, and located so that the spaces are within 300 feet walking distance to any unit served.








204:116	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	ZONING	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35B - Residential  Parking  Space Requirements Residential Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Multifamily   dwellings/apartments

















Multiunit residential conversions
 
3 spaces per dwelling unit; such parking spaces can take the form of private access drives, driveways, or garages and/or common parking lots, provided all spaces required are within 150 feet of the unit served In addition, for developments containing more than 6 multifamily dwellings and/or conversions, there shall be provided off-street parking/storage space for boats, travel trailers, tent campers, and trailers u sed to transport recreation vehicles; such space shall be provided at a minimum rate of I 00 square feet per dwelling unit and shall be placed at only 1 location that is no less than 50 feet from any dwelling unit; such storage space shall be screened from all dwellings
Two dwelling units: 2 spaces per dwelling unit Three or more dwelling units: 3 spaces per dwelling
unit; such parking  spaces can take the form of private
access drives, driveways or garages and/or common
parking lots; of these spaces, at least 2 must be provided on the same individual lot as the principal dwelling unit , and the remaining I space may be provided within common parking lots provided all spaces required are within 150 feet of the unit served In addition, for developments containing more than 6 single-family attached, there shall be provided
off-street parking/storage space for boats, travel trailers, tent campers, and trailers used to transport recreation vehicles; such space shall be provided at a minimum rate of 100 square feet per dwelling unit and shall be placed at only 1 location that is no less than 50 feet from any dwelling unit; such storage space shall be screened from all dwellings.


















204:117	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35B - Residential Parking Space Requirement s
Residential Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Single-family attached dwelling





















Single-family  detached dwelling
 
3 spaces per dwelling unit; such parking spaces can take the form of private access drives, driveways or garages and/or common parking lots; of these spaces, at least 2 must be provided on the same individua l lot as the principal dwelling unit, and the remaining 1 space may be provided within common parking lots provided all spaces required are within 150 feet of the unit served
In addition, for developments containing more than 6
single-family  attached, there shall be provided
off-street  parking/storage space for boats,  travel trailers, tent campers, and trailers used to transport recreation vehicles; such space shall be provided at a minimum rate of  l 00 square feet per dwelling unit and shall be placed at only 1 location that is no less
than 50 feet from any dwell ing unit; such storage
space shall  be screened from all dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit
 
Single-family semidetached dwelling   2 spaces per dwelling unit
 
Two-family  dwellings
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit
 



 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35C - N onresidential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Adult-related uses


Airports/air pads/heliports/he lipads


All other uses


Anima l hospital


Automobile wrecking, j unk and
scrap storage and sales
 
1 space per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus l
space per employee on the peak shift
1	space for each 4 air vehicles stored, plus 1 space
for each employee on the peak shift
Nu mber of spaces normally required for similar uses
listed elsewhere within this schedule
2	spaces per exam table, plu s 1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per 112 acre or portion thereof, plus 1 space
per employee on the peak shift












204:11 8	01   -01-2014
 
§ 204-35	ZONING	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35C - Nonres idential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential  Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Automobile, boat, heavy equipment mobile home, recreational vehicle and similar motor vehicle rental/sales, repair/service, washing and/or fuel/gas sales









Billboard Campground




Cemetery Clinic, medical

Club, clubh ouse or lodge, private Commercia l recreation, indoor Commercial recreation,  outdoor




Communicat ion, television, and radio transmitting and receiving tower antennas, towers, and equipment
Contractors' office and storage yard Convenience store

Copy shop/business service
 
1 space per employee on the peak shift plus: Rental/sales: 1 spa ce per 15 vehicles or units of
motor vehicle equipment
Repair/service: 2 spaces per service bay
Washing: 1 space per 200 square feet of office floor
area, plus 3 stacking spaces per wash bay Fuel/gasoline sales/distribution: 1 space per fuel
pump which may be provided at fuel pumps at a ratio
of not more than 2 spaces per each pump (1 on each side), plus  1 space for each employee on the peak shift
1 space per billboard
1 space per campsite, plus  1 space per employee on the peak shift, plus 1/2 of the spaces normally required  for accessory uses  listed elsewhere within this schedule
5 spaces, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
4 spaces per patient examination room, plus 1 space
per  employee on the peak shift
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
space per  employee on the peak shift
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
space per  employee on the peak shift
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plu s 1
space per employee on the peak shift; or if
completely outside of a structure 1 space per each 3 u sers at maximum utilization, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per lot




1 space per 750 square feet of office gross floor area,
plus  1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per 100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 space per fuel pump, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift





204:1 19	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35C - Nonresidential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential  Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Day care, commercia l Financial  services Food  service






Funeral home


Golf course




Home improvement  center,  lumber, and building materials  sales


Hospital Hotels



Industrial use, heavy
 
1 space per employee on -the peak shift, plus  1 space
per 6 client (adult or child) enrolled
l  space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per employee on the peak shift plus:
Delivery: l space per vehicle stored on site
Direct patron  food sales/consumption: 1 space per 6 seats if restaurant  is provided or 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area open to and accessible to the public,  whichever is greater
25 spaces for 1st parlor, plu s 10 spaces for each
additional parlor
4 spaces per hole, plus  l  space per employee on the peak shift, plu s 1/2 of the spaces normally required for accessory u ses listed elsewhere within this schedule
1	space per 500 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor) open to and accessible to the public, plu s l space per employee on the peak shift
2	spaces per 3 beds, plus 1 space per employee on
the peak shift
l  space per guest/sleeping room, plus  1 space per employee on the peak shift, plu s  l/2 of the spaces normally  required  for accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of
the building up to 20,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet gross floor area of the building up between  20,000 square feet and 40,000  square
feet, plu s l  space for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of the building in excess of 40,000 square feet
In addition to the off-street parking requirements and when  there are 10 or more loading berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be prov ided at 1 tra iler parking space for each 4 loading berths










204:120	01 - 01-2014
 
§ 204-35




Type of Use
 
ZONING	§ 204-35

Table 204-35C - Nonresidential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential  Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Industrial  use, light













Kennel, commercial



Large solar energy production facility
Large wind  energy production facility
Laundry and dry cleaning
establishment  (industrial)












Laundry and dry cleaning establishment (personal) Library

Massage therapy


Mineral  extraction and recovery
operation
Mini-storage  warehouses


Motor  vehicle auction
 
1 space per  1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to 20,000 square feet, plus  1 space for each 2,000 square feet gross floor area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000 square
feet, plus 1 space for each 3,000 square feet gross
floor area of the building in excess of 40,000 square
feet
In addition to the off-street parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading berths provided , trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer parking space for each 4 loading berths
1 space per each 15 animals based on maximum animal capacity, plus  1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per employee on the peak shift, plus l space
per vehicle stored on site
1 space per employee on the peak shift, plus l space
per vehicle stored on site
1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to 20,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet gross floor area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000 square
feet, plus  1 space for each 3,000 square feet gross
floor area of the building in excess of 40,000 square feet
In addition to the off-street parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading berths provided , trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer parking  space for each 4 loading berths
1 space per 300 square feet of net floor area, plus  1
space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per table, plu s 1 per employee on the peak shift
1 space per each employee on the peak shift


1	space per 25 storage units, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
2	spaces per  1,000 square feet of gross floor area of building, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift, plus  1 space per 20 vehicle display spaces



204:121	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

Table 204-35C - Nonresidential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential  Uses
Type of Use	Minimum Required Spaces
Motels		1 space per guest/sleeping room, plu s 1 space per employee on the peak shift, p lus 1/2 of the spa ces normally  req uired for accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Municipal-owned u ses	Number of spaces normally required for similar uses
listed elsewhere within this schedule
Nightclub s	1 space per  100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1
space per employee on the pea k shift
Offices, bu siness professional	1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plu s 1 per
employee on the peak shift
Offices, medical	2 per patient exa mination room, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Outdoor farmer's market and/or flea	1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
market	(indoor and outdoor) open to and accessible to the
public, plu s 1 space per employee on the peak shift
Outdoor shooting range	2 spaces per target , plus  1 space per employee on the
peak shift
Parking lot and parking structure	1 space per employee on the peak shift
Parks, playground s and other	3 spaces per acre or portion thereof noncomm ercial recreational  uses
Personal services	1 space per 300 square feet of net floor area, plu s 1
space per employee on the peak shift
Place of worship		1 space per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or I  space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
 
Post office


Principal wa ste handling facility



Public/private utility building s and structures
Research  laboratory Restaurant  (fast food)

Restaurant  (sit down) Retail  business Sawmill
 
1 space per 200 square feet of net floor area, plu s 1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per employee on the largest shift, or  1 space for each  1,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever  is greater
1 space per employee on the peak shift, plu s 1 space
per vehicle stored on site
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area l space per 2 seats, plus l space for each 2
employees on the peak shift
1 space per 4 seats, plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the peak shift
1 space per 200 square feet of net floor area, plu s 1
space per employee on the peak shift
1 per employee on the peak shift



204:122	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	ZONING	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35C - Nonresidential Parking Space Requirements
Nonresidential  Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
School,  commercial


Schools, public or private (primary)



Schools, public or private
(secondary) Schools,  vocational Shopping  center











Taverns/bars


Theater, indoor  (excluding adult
uses)


Travel plaza





Treatment center Truck drop lot Veterinary office
 
1 space per 4 students, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
1 space per each 30 students enrolled , plus  1 space per employee, plus  1 space per each 30 seats for auditorium , gymnasium,  or multipurpose room
1 space per each 5 students enrolled, plus 1 space per
employee, plus 1 space per each 30 seats for auditor ium, gymnasium,  or mu ltipurpose room
1 space per 4 students, plus 1 space per employee on the peak shift
Up to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area: 1 space per 25,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross leasable floor area
Between 50,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross floor area: l space per 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross leasable floor area
Greater  than  100,000 square feet of gross floor area: 5 spaces, plus  1 per 50,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross leasable floor area over 100,000 square feet
1 space per 4 seats, plus 1 space for each 2
employees on the peak shift
1 space per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
1 space per employee on the peak shift , plus number of spaces normally required for similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule (i.e., restaurant, convenience store, etc.), in addition to truck and trailer parking
1 space for each 3 patient/client and  1 space for each employee on the peak shift
1	space per employee on the peak shift, in addition to
truck and trailer parking
2	spaces per exam table, plus  1 space per employee on the peak shift










204:123	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-35C - Nonresidential Parking Space Requirements Nonresidential Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Warehousing, distribution, and
wholesaling
 
l  space per  1,000 square feet of gross floor area of
the building up to 20,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet gross floor area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000 square
feet, plu s l space for each 3,000 square feet gross
floor area of the building in excess of 40,000 square feet
In addition to the off-street parking requirements and when there are l 0 or more loading berth s provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer parking space for each 4 loading berths
 



 



Type of Use
 
Table204-35D - Accessory Use Parking Space Requirements
Accessory  Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Accessory  apartment



Automated  banking facility



Day care, accessory
Day care, family



Drive-through facilities
Farm occupation






Home occupation


No-impact  home occupation
 
l space per accessory apartment dwelling unit , in addition to parking spaces required with the permitted business
2 spaces when not associated with on-site principal bank or other financial service, otherwise no minimum required
2 spaces per dwelling unit as part of principal use
2 spaces per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plu s 1 per nonresident employee, plus 1 for patron use
No minimum required
1	space per nonresident farm employee on the peak shift as patt of the principal use, plu s 2 spaces per dwelling unit , plu s 1 space per nonresident employee of the farm occupation, plus 1 parking space per potential patron on site at one time
2	spaces per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus 1 space per nonresident employee
2 spaces per dwelling unit as part of principa l use
 
Noncommercial keeping of livestock  2 spaces per dwelling unit as part of principal use
Outdoor cafe/dining	No minimum required
Roadside stand	In addition to the spaces required as part of the principal use, l space per 50 feet of gross floor area or 2 spaces, whichever is greater




204:124	01-01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	ZONING	§ 204-35

 



Type of Use
 
Table204-35D  - Accessory  Use Parking Space Requirements
Accessory Uses
Minimum Required Spaces
 
Rural occupation	2 spaces per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus  1 space per nonresident employee


(3)	Interior drives.

(a)	Widths .

[l]  Interior drives between rows of parking spaces shall have the minimum
widths indicated in the following table:


Table 204-35E - Interior Drive Standards
 



Angle of Parking
90°
60°
45°
30°
Parallel
 
Owwne-Way Traffic Width of Driveway (feet)
25
20
18
11
11
 
Two-Way  Traffic Width of Driveway (feet)
25
22
22
22
22
 


[2]  Interior drives in areas where there is no parking permitted shall be at
least 11 feet wide for each lane of traffic.

(b)	Horizontal  curves.  Not   less  than  a  four-foot  radius  of  curvature  shall  be
permitted  for horizontal curves in parking areas.

(c)	Backup area. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup area for all end spaces.

(d)	Speed bumps.

[1]   Speed bumps, constructed as part of access or interior drives or parking
lots, shall be marked with permanent , yellow diagonal stripes.

[2]   The  speed  bump s shall be in the form of mounds or depressions in the
pavement  and shall be designed to restrain motor vehicle speed.

[3]    There shall be a warning  sign posted  at each entrance to a parking area having  speed bumps.

[4]   In no case shall the overall height (or depth) of speed bumps exceed three inches.





204:125	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-35	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-35

(4)	Prohibited uses of a parking lot. Automobi le parking lots are for the sole purposes of accommodating the passenger vehicles of persons associated with the use which requires  them. Parking lots shall not be used for the following:

(a)	The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise.

(b)	Parking/storage of nonpassenger vehicles accessory to the use.

(c)	Performing  services (including services to vehicles).

(d)	Loading  and  unloading   purposes,   except  during  hours  when  business
operations are suspended.

(5)	Landscap ing and screening. The following landscaping and screening requirements shall apply to all parking lots:

(a)	Landscaped strip. When a parking lot is located in a yard which abuts a street right-of-way, a landscaped  strip screened with a minimum 2 1/2 foot high hedge, berm, fence, wall or other measure  to  prevent  distraction  and confusion from parking cars' headlights, shall be provided on the property along  the entire street line. If there is no building or other structure on the property ,  the parking lot shall still be separated from the street right-of-way by the   landscaped strip. This strip shall  be  measured  from  the  street right-of-way  line. The strip may be located within any other landscaped strip required to be  located along a street. The following lists required width of landscape strips:


Table 204-35F - Parking Lot Landscape Strip Requirements
Landscape Strip Width Measured
 
Number of Spaces in Parking Lot,
Including Joint Facilities Fewer than 100
100 to 250
 
From Street Right-of-Way Line
(feet) 15
20
 
Over 250	25


(b)	Interior landscaping.

[1] In any parking lot contammg 20 or more parking spaces (except a parking garage), 5% of the total area of the parking lot shall be devoted to interior landscaping. Such interior landscaping may be used, for example, at the end of parking space rows to break up rows of parking spaces at least every 10 parking spaces and to help visually defme travel lanes through or next to  the parking lot. Landscaped areas situated outside the parking lot, such as peripheral areas and areas surrounding buildings , shall not constitute interior landscaping. For the purpo se of computing the total area of any parking lot, all areas within the perimeter of the parking lot shall be counted, including all parking spaces and access drives, aisles, islands and curbed areas. Ground cover



204:126	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-35		ZONING	§ 204-36

alone is not  sufficient  to meet  this requirement.  Trees, shrubs or  other .
		approved material  shall be provided as set forth in § 204-30 of this
chapter. At least one shade tree shall be provided for each 300 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required interior landscaping area. Such trees shall have a clear trunk at least five feet above finished grade.
	[2]	Parked  vehicles  may not  overhang  interior  landscaped areas more than 2 1/2 feet. Where necessary, wheel stops or curbing shall be provided to ensure no greater overhang.
	[3]	If a parking lot of fewer than 20 spaces is built without interior landscaping and later additional spaces are added so that the total is 20 or more, the interior landscaping shall be provided for the entire parking lot.

(c)	Screening. Parking  lots shall be screened in accordance with § 204-26 of this
chapter.

(6)	Paved area setbacks (including off-street parking setbacks).

(a)	The paved area setbacks in this section are applicable to all districts where paved area  setbacks are not specified. The setback areas required  by this section shall be maintained in grass or other appropriate natural ground cover and   shall not be covered with paving, except for approved access and driveway   entrances and  concrete  sidewalks  of  the  required  widths.  The setbacks  required by this section shall not apply to driveways serving one or two dwellings  on a lot, but shall apply to all other parking areas.

(b)	All paved areas required by this section shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet  from any right-of-way or lot  line unless a larger setback is required within a particular district.


§ 204-36. Off-street loading facilities.

A.	Off-street loading shall be required in accordance with this section prior to the occupancy of  any building or use, so as to alleviate traffic congest ion on streets. These facilities shall be provided whenever:

(1)	A new use is established.

(2)	The use of  a property  or  building  is changed  and  thereby  requiring more loading
space.

(3)	An existing use is enlarged, thereby requiring an increase in loading space.

B.	General requirements.

(1)	Site plan. Each application for a zoning permit (or use for which off-street loading spaces are required) shall include a drawing (site plan)  showing the proposed layout of the loading area. The drawing shall clearly indicate the design elements requ ired below. No zoning permit shall be issued for any use for which a loading


204:127	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-36	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-36

area is required unless the site plan has been approved or necessary variances have
been approved.

(2)	Location. Except  as  provided  elsewhere,  all ground  level loading area  should  be located in side or rear yards.

(3)	Sizes. The following lists required  minimum  loading space sizes (excluding access
drives, entrances and exits):


Table 204-36A - Loading Design Standards
Height (if covered or
	Length	Width	obstructed)
Facility	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)
Industrial, wholesale and
storage uses	63	12	15
All other uses	33	12	15

(4)	Separation. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed  so that  there  will  be  no need for service vehicles to ba ck over streets or sidewalks. Furthermore, off-street loading spaces shall not interfere with off-street parking lots.

(5)	Connect ion to street. Every loading space shall be connected to a street by means of an access drive. The access drive shall be at least 24 feet wide for two-way travel or 18 feet wide  for one-way travel, exclusive of any parts of the curb and gutters.

(6)	Surface. All off-st reet loading facilities, including access drives, shall be constructed and maintained with a paved surface of concrete or bituminou s materials .

(7)	Drainage. Off-street loading facilities (including access drives) shall be drained to prevent damage to other propertie s or public streets in accordance with Article X, Stormwater Management Plan and Design Criteria, set forth in Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development. Furthermore, all off-street loading facilities shall  be designed to prevent the collection of standing water on any portion of the loading facility surface, particularly next to access drives.

(8)	Lighting . Adequate lighting shall be provided and an-anged so in accordance with the lighting provi sions § 204-378(9) of this chapter.

(9)	Screening. Loading facilities shall be screened in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter.

(10)	Schedule of requ ired loading spa ces.








204:128	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-36	ZONING	§ 204-36

 



Type of Use
 
Table 204-36B - Loading Space Requirements
Number  of
Spaces Per	Gross Floor Area/Dwelling Unit
 
Hospital or other institution
 
None	First 10,000 square feet


10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional 100,000 square feet
(or fraction)
 
Hotel, motel and similar
lodging  facilities





Industry or
manufacturing
 
None






None
 
First 10,000 square feet


10,000 to 100,000 square feet
Each additional  100,000 square feet
(or fraction)
First 2,000 square feet
 
1	2,000 to 25,000 square feet
l	Each additional 40,000 square feet
(or fraction)
 
Mult ifamily dwelling	None
 
Less than 100 dwelling units
100 to 300 dwelling units
Each additional 200 dwelling units
(or fraction)
 
Office building , including financial institutions
 
None
 
First 10,000 square feet



10,000 to  100,000 square feet
Each additional  100,000 square feet
(or fraction)
 
Retail bu sinesses	None


2
1


Shopping centers (integrated shoppin g centers, malls and plazas): up to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area;








204: 129
 
First 2,000 square feet 2,000 to 10,000 square feet
10,000 to 40,000 square feet
Each additional  100,000 square feet (or fraction)
Per 25,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, of gross leasable floor area













01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-36	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-37

Table 204-36B - Loading Space Requirements Number of
 
Type of Use
Shopping centers (integrated shopping centers, malls and plazas): between 50,000 and 100,000 square feet of gross floor area:
Shopping centers (integrated shopping centers, malls and plazas): greater than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area:
Theater,  auditorium, bowling  alley or other recreational establishment
 
Spaces Per
1







5







None
 
Gross Floor Area/Dwelling Unit Per 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross leasable floor area





Plus 1 per 50,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross leasable floor area over 100,000 square feet




First 10,000 square feet




10,000 to 100,000 square feet
 
1	Each additional 100,000 square feet
(or fraction)
 
Funeral home	None
1

1
 

First 3,000 square feet
3,000 to 5,000 square feet
Each additional 10,000 square feet (or fraction)
 
Wholesale or warehousing (except mini-warehousing)
 
None
 
First 1,500 square feet



1,500 to 10,000 square feet
 
1	Each additional 40,000 square feet (or fraction)



§ 204-37. Performance standards for all uses.

All uses in all zones shall be subject to the following performance standards:

A	All projects that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, streetlighting and similar services, shall obtain such approval as required by the agency providing  such service prior to project approval. No availability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for denying permits for additional development until such services are available. The jurisdiction is not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the extension of services shall be by and at the cost of



204: 130	01 - OJ - 2014
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

the developer, unless the jurisdiction agrees otherwise. All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full conformance with the jurisdiction's standards for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as required by other policies or ordinances of the juri sdiction.

B.	All uses  shall be subject  to and comply with  the following regulations,  or as amended,
where applicable.

(1)	Vibration. Ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated on the lot and detectable without instruments on any adjacent lot in any zone shall be prohibited, except that temporary vibration as a result of construction or vehicles which leave the lot (such as trucks, trains, airplanes and helicopters) shall be permitted. Otherwise all of the applicable rules and regulations  of  the  Pennsylvania Department  of Environmen tal Protection shall be complied with.

(2)	Noise . Noise from nonresidential and mixed uses which are determined to  be objectionable because of volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled.  Otherwise  all  of  the  applicable  rules  and   regulations   of   the Pennsylvania  Department  of Environmental Protection  shall be complied with.

(3)	Air pollution. Airborne emissions and odor: No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause spoiling of property. Otherwise all of the applicable rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be complied with.

(4)	Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible at any and all lot lines of the subject property on which the odor source is located.

(5)	Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards established by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission , Department of Environmental Protection, and The Clean Streams Law, June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, 35 P.S. § 691, or as amended.

(6)	Mine  reclamation   and   open   pit   setback:  Pennsylvania   Act   147,  the  "Surface
Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act" of 1971, or as amended.

(7)	Heat. Any operation producing intense heat shall be conducted within an enclosed building or with other effective screen.ll1g in such a manner as to make such heat completely imperceptible from any point along the lot line. No heat from any use shall be sensed at any lot line to the extent of raising the ambient temperature of air or materials more than 5° F.

(8)	No use or operation shall be permitted which creates a public nuisance or hazard to adjoining property by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or other sinUlar cause. Additiona lly, all uses and operations shall comply with the following:

(a)	Electromagnetic interference. In all zones, no use, activity or process shall be conducted  which produces  electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect  public  health,  safety  and  welfare,  including  but  not  linUted  to




204:131	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-37	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-37

interference   with   normal   radio,   telephone  or  television   reception   and/or
transmission off the premises where the activity is conducted.

(b)	Fire and explosive haza rds. Fire protection and firefighting equipment, procedures and safety protocol s acceptable to the North Middleton Township fire standard s, and Township fire and building  codes, and other applicable ordinance shall regulate hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or u se of substances, materials or devices and  from conditions ha zardou s to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of a structure or premises.

(c)	Toxic and hazardous substance storage. Storage  of  toxic  and  hazardou s substance shall meet the requirement s of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental  Protection,   Pennsylvania   Labor   and   Industry,   and/or   the Unit ed States Environmental Protection Agency.

(9)	Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting is permitted subject to the following criteria :

(a)	Purpose. The purpose of th is section is to require and set minimum  standards
for outdoor lighting to:

[1]  Provide for and control lighting in outdoor public places where public
health , safety and welfare are potential concern s.

[2] Protect driver s and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light sources.

[3] Protect persons, the environment and the night sky from nu isance glare and light trespa ss from improperly selected, placed, aimed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources.

[4]    Promote energy efficient  lighting design and operation.

[5]   Protect and retain the intended visual character of va rious scenic venues
throughout Nort h Middleton Township.

(b)	Applicability.

[l] The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all lighting associated with, required or proposed with any  action that constitutes land development or subdivision within North Middleton Township where there is interior or exterior lighting viewable from outside, including but not limited to residential, commercial, industria l, public and private recreational/sports and institutional uses, and sign, billboard, architectural and landscape lighting applications.

[2]   The  glare-control   requirements  herein  contained  apply  to  outdoor
lighting in all u ses, applications and locations.

[3] Emergency lighting, as may be required by any public agency while engaged in the performance of their duties, or for illuminat ion of the




204:132	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

pat h of egress during an emergency as described in NFPA 75 and NFPA I0 I, is exempt from the requ irements of this section.

[4] Tempora ry seasonal decorative lighting is exempt from all but the glare-control requirements  of this subsection.

(c)	Criteria.

[l] Illumina tion levels. Lighting, where required by this chapter,  or otherw ise required or permitted by the Zoning Officer, shall have intensities, uniformities and glare control in accordance with the current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (!ESNA), u nless otherwise directed by the Board of Supervisors.

[2] Lighting shall conform to  the  North  Middleton  Township  Building Code,	i nc luding the currently adopted International Energy Conservation Code published by the  International  Code  Council,  and the standards referenced therein for required Exterior Lighting Power Densities and Exter ior Lighting Power Allowance s, as pu blished by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. and the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America  (ASHRAE/IESNA 90. 1 Standard).

[3]   Lighting fixtu re design.

[a] Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting application.

[b] For the lighting of predominantly  horizontal  surfaces, such as but not limited to parking areas; roadways and streets; vehicu lar and pedestrian passage areas; sales, display, merchand ising and stora ge areas; automobile filling/servicing facilities; automobile, heavy equipment and similar  motor  vehicle  rental/sales, loading/unloading  areas;  culs-de-sac;  active  and  pa ssive recreationa l areas, bu ilding entrances; sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian paths; and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and shall meet !ESNA full-cutoff criteria.  Fixtures, except those contain ing direct ional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard nondirectional 40 watt incandescent or l 0 watt compact fluorescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of  this subsection . In the case of decorative streetlighting, the Zoning Officer may approve the use of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA cutoff criteria.

[c] For the lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal surfaces, such as but not limited to bui lding facades, landscaping, signs, billboards, fountains, sales/displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be installed and aimed so as to not project their



204:133	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-37	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-37

output into the windows of residences , adjacent  uses,  past  the object being illuminated, skyward or onto a public street. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps, with an aggregate  rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard nondirectional 40 watt incandescent or 10 watt compact fluorescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of  this subsection.

[4]	Control of glare.

[a] All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed ,  fitted  and maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse roadways and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting objectionable light, including excessive illumination, glare, light pollution and light trespass, onto another use or property.

[b] Directional fixtures, such as floodlight s and spotlights, shall be so shielded , installed and aimed so that they do not project their output into the windows of residences, adjacent uses, past the object being illuminated , skyward or onto a public street or pedestrianway. Floodlights , when installed on a building, pole or otherwise installed above grade on properties in residential use, except when motion-sensor actuated, shall not be aimed out more than 45° from straight down. When a floodlight creates glare as viewed from the property in residential use, the floodlight shall be required to be re-aimed and/or fitted with a shielding device to block the view of the glare source from that property.

[c] Exterior lighting fixture types , commonly called "barn lights," "dusk-to-dawn lights," or "yard lights," when a source of glare as viewed from an adjacent property, shall not be permitted unless effectively shielded as viewed  from that adjacent property.

[d] Parking  facility  and  vehicular  and  pedestrianway  lighting  (except for safety and security applications  and  all-night  business operations) for nonresidential uses shall be automatically extinguished no later  than 112 hour after the close of busines s or facility operation . When safety or security lighting is proposed for after-hours illumination , it shall not be in excess of 25% of the number of fixtures or illumination level required or permitted for illumination during regular business hours . When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that an elevated security risk exists, e.g., a history of relevant crime, an appropriate increase above the 25% limit may be permitted.

[e] Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved primarily  through  the use of such means as full cutoff fixtures,



204:134	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting
height, wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.

[f] The illumination projected from any use onto a residential  use shall at no time exceed 0.1 footcandle, measured line-of-sight from any point on the receiving residential property.

[g] The illumination projected from any property onto a nonresidential use shall at no time exceed one footcandle, measured line-of-sight from any point on the receiving property.

[h] Only the United States and the state flag shall be illuminated from dusk till dawn. All other flags shall not be  illuminated  between 11:00 p.m . and dawn. Flag-lighting sources shall not exceed 7,000 lamp lumens per flagpole. The light source shall have a  beam spread no greater than necessary to illuminate the flag and shall  be adequately shielded so that it is not visible at normal  viewing angles.

[i]	Lighting for use underneath canopies for such applications as automobile filling/service stations , hotel/theater marquees, and automobile drive th.roughs shall be accomplished using flat-lens full-cutoff fixtures aimed straight  down and  shielded in such a manner that the lowest opaque edge of the fixture shall be below the light source at all lateral angles. The average illumination in the area directly below the canopy shall not exceed 20 footcandles and the maximum shall not exceed 30 footcandles .

[j]	The use of white strobe lighting for tall structures such as smokestacks,	chimneys and radio/communications /television towers	is prohibited during hours of darkness, except as specifically required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

[k] Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting and permitted elsewhere in this subsection, fixtures shall not be mounted  in excess of 20 feet above finished grade of the surface being illuminated. Mounting height shall be defined as the distance from the finished grade of the surface being illuminated to the optical center of the luminaire. For uses in all  commercial and industrial zones having contiguous paved parking and maneuvering areas in excess of 30,000 square feet, at the sole discretion of the Zoning Officer , North Middleton Township may permit the use of a mounting height not to exceed 25 feet for fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria  when it can be demonstrated to the  Zoning Officer that light trespass and glare control requirements in this section have been met. For  recreational  lighting  maximum mounting height requirements, refer to § 204-37B(9)(f) relating to recreational  uses.


l
204:135	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-37

[l]	Illumination of all building facades and/or  surrounding  landscapes for decorative, advertising or aesthetic purposes serving businesses, shall be extinguished automatica lly no later than 11:00 p.m. until dawn, except that such illumination  for businesses  that  remain open past 11:00 p.m. is permitted while the  establishment  is actually open for bu siness, and until 112 hour after closing.

[m] Illumination of signs and billboards. The lighting of new or relighting of existing billboards and signs shall require a building permit , which shall be granted when the Zoning Officer is satisfied that excessive illumination , glare, light pollution and light trespa ss have been adequately mitigated , and shall be subject to the standards in § 204-41, relating to signs, § 204-49, relating to billboard s, as well as the following requiremen ts:

[i]	The illumination of billboards shall be limited to IND Zone and the illumination of billboards within l ,000 feet  from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

[ii]	Illumination   by  light-emitting   diode  (LED)  type  lighting.
Illumination of a ll signs (excluding billboard s) by LED type lighting shall only be permitted in the VMU, NC, C/LI, and IND zones and shall be static. Illumination of all billboard s by LED type lighting  shall be static. The LED output shall be automatically reduced to a brightness level that does not create glare during  hours of darkness.

[iii] Illumination of all signs and  billboards  serving  bu sinesses shall be extinguished automatically no later than 11:00 p.m. and remain extinguished until dawn, except that illumination of all signs (excluding billboards) for businesses that remain open past 11:00 p .m. is permitted while the establishment is actually open for business , and until  1/2 hour after closing.

[iv] Externa lly illuminated signs and billboards shall  have fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The fixtures shall be designed, fitted and a imed to shield the source from off-site view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard. Lighting shall be by linear fluorescent unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that such a mounting arrangement is not possible. At no point on the face of the sign or billboard  and at  no time shall the
.illumination exceed 30 footcandles during hours of darkness.

[v]	Internally  illuminated  signs and billboard s shall have a dark
field  and  light  message.  The aggregate  output  of  the  light





204:136	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

sources shall not exceed  500 lumens per square foot of sign
face per side.

[vi]   The u se of highly  reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard shall not be permitted.

[vii] Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating  light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting  shall not be permitted.

[5]  Installation.

[a] Electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run underground , not overhead, and shall be in accordance with the North Middleton Township Building Code.24

[b] Poles supporting lighting fixtures for  the  illumination  of  parking areas and located directly behind parking spaces, or  where  they could be hit by snow plows or wide-swinging vehicles, shall  be placed a minimum of five feet outside paved area or tire stops, or placed on concrete pedestals at least 30 inches high above the pavement , or suitably protected by other methods approved by the Zoning Officer.

[c] Pole-mounted fixtures for lighting horizontal tasks shall be aimed straight down and poles shall be plumb/vertical.

[d] Poles and bracket s for supporting lighting fixtures shall be those specifically manufactured for that purpose and shall be designed and rated for the weights and wind loads involved.

[e]   Pole foundations  shall be  designed  consistent with the wind  loads
and local soil conditions involved.

[6] Maintenance. Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be maintained so as to always meet the requirements of this section.

(d)	Plan submission. Where site lighting is required by this chapter, is otherwise required by the Zoning Officer, or is proposed by applicant, lighting plans shall  be submitted to the Township for review and approval for all zoning permit ,  building permit , subdivision and land development , conditional use, special  exception and variance application s. The submitted information shall contain the following:

[1] A plan or plans of the site, complete with all existing and propo sed structures, parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian) , existing and proposed trees and adjacent uses that might be adversely impacted by the lighting. The lighting plan shall contain a layout of all existing and proposed exterior lighting fixtures,


24.	Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Construction Codes, U niform.


204:137	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-37	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-37

including but not limited to area, architectural , building entrance, canopy, soffit, landscape, flag, sign, etc., by location, orientation, aiming direction, mounting height, lamp, photometry and type.

[2] A ten-foot-by-ten-foot illuminance grid (point-by-point) plot of maintained horizontal footcandles overlaid on the site plan, plotted out to 0.0 footcandles, which demonstrates compliance with the light trespass, illuminance and uniformity requirements as set forth in this chapter or as otherwise required by the Zoning Officer. When the scale of	the plan, as judged by the Zoning Officer, makes a ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid plot illegible, a larger grid spacing may be permitted.

[3] The maintenance (light-loss) factors, IES candela  test-filename, lamp-lumen ratings and specific lamp manufacturer's lamp ordering nomenclature , used  in calculating the presented  illuminance levels.

[4] Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture catalog cuts, photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/off control devices, mounting heights, pole foundation details, pole protection means and mounting methods.

[5] When landscaping plans are involved, they shall contain  the  lighting fixture locations and shall demonstrate that the site lighting and landscaping have been coordinated to minimize conflict between vegetation	and intended light distribution, both initially and at vegetation maturity.

[6]  When  requested  by  the  Township,  applicant   shall   also   submit   a visua l-impact plan that demonstrates  appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate the potential consequences of on-site and off-site glare. This plan may require the inclusion of footcandle values at specific off-site venues , e.g., bedroom  windows of adjacent residential uses.

[7]  Plan notes. The following notes shall appear on the lighting plan:

[a] Postapproval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to North Middleton Township for review  and approval. Requests for substitutions shall be accompanied by catalog cuts of the proposed equipment and lighting plans, including a point-by-point plot, as required above, that demonstrate full compliance with the plan previously approved by North Middleton Township.

[b] The Township reserves the right to conduct  postinstallation inspections to verify compliance with the chapter requirements and approved lighting plan commitments, and if deemed appropriate by the Zoning Officer , to require remedial action at no expense to the Township .




204:138	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

[c]   All  exterior  lighting  shall  meet  IESNA  full-cutoff  criteria  unless
otherwise specifica lly approved by the Board of Supervisors.

[d] Installer shall notify North Middleton Township to arrange for inspection	and  approval   of   all   exterior   lighting,   including bui lding-mounted  lighting, prior to its installation.

(e)	Residential  development  fixture placement.

[1] For residential developments where lot sizes are or  average less than 20,000 square feet, streetlighting shall be provided at the following locations:

[a] Intersections of public road s with entrance roads to the proposed development.

[b] Intersections involving proposed public or nonpublic major thoroughfares , including collector and arterial roads within or immediately adjacent to the proposed development.

[c] The apex of the curve of any major-thoroughfare road, public or nonpublic , within the proposed development, having a radius of 300 feet or less.

[d]   Cul-de-sac bulbs.

[e] Terminal ends of center median islands having concrete structure curbing, trees and/or other fixed objects not having breakaway design for speeds of 25 m.p.h. or greater.

[t]  Defined pedestrian crossings located within the development.

[g] At other locations along the street as deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer but , in no case, shall lighting fixtures be spaced more than 500 feet apart.

[2] Where lot size limits the parkjng of less than two vehicles on the residential lot, thereby necessitating on-street parking, streetlighting may be required a long the length of the street.

[3]	In multifamily developments, common parking areas of five spaces or
greater shall be illuminated.

[4] In residentia l developments w ith lots of less than 20,000 square  feet, where five or more conunon contiguous parking spaces are proposed, such spaces shall be illuminated.

(f)	Recreational   u ses.   The   nighttime   illumination	of   outdoor   recreational facilities  for  such  aerial  sports as  baseball,  basketba ll,  soccer, tennis,  track and   field,  and  football  typically  necessitate  higher  than  normally  allowed fixture  mounting  height s and  aiming angles, utilize very high-wattage lamps and potentia lly produce  unacceptable levels of light trespass  and glare when



204:139	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-37	NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE	§ 204-37

located near residential properties. Permission to illuminate  such  facilities shall be granted only when the Zoning Officer is satisfied  that  the health, safety and welfare rights of nearby property owners and the Township as a whole have been properly protected. When recreational uses are specifically permitted by the Zoning Officer for operation during hours of darkness, the following requirement s shall apply:

[1] Race tracks and such recreat iona l venues as golf driving ranges and trap-shooting facilities shall not be permitted to be artificially illuminated unless it can be demon strated to the Zoning Officer that such lighting will not create a nuisance, shine on or into any residential properties or be visible to traffic on any nearby streets, roads or institutiona l or commercial parking lots. In any case, illumination shall not be accomplished by using any horizontally aimed fixture or floodlight s nor shall these fixtures be aimed at an angle greater than 45° from the vertical.

[2] Recreational facilities for  basketball ,  baseball,  football,  soccer, miniature golf, tennis or track shall not be illuminated if located within a residentia l district or sited on a nonresidential property located within 1,000 feet of a resident ial district.

[3] Sporting events at all recreational facilities shall be timed to end at such time that all lighting in the sports facility, other than lighting for safe exit of spectators and participants shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m., regardless of such occurrences as extra innings or overtimes.

[4] Maximum mounting heights for recreational lighting shall be  in accordance with the following:

[a]   Basketball : 20 feet. [b]  Football: 70 feet. [c]   Soccer: 70 feet.
[d]  Little league baseball.

[i]	Two-hundred-foot  radiu s: 60 feet. [ii]		Three-hundred-foot radiu s: 70 feet.
[e]  Miniature golf: 20 feet.

[f]	Swinuning pool aprons: 20 feet. [g] Tennis: 30 feet.
[h]  Track: 20 feet.

[5] To assist the Zoning Officer in determining whether lighting will be permitted,  applications  for  illuminating  recreational  facilities  shall  be



204:140	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-37	ZONING	§ 204-37

accompanied not only with the information required under  this subsection below but also by a visual impact plan that contains the foUowing:

[a] Plan views contammg a layout of the recreational facility and showing pole locations and the location of residences on adjoining properties.

[b] Elevations containing pole and fixture mounting heights , horizontal and vertical aiming angles and fixture arrays for each pole location.

[c]  Elevations containing illuminance plots at the boundary of the site,
taken at a height of five feet line-of-sight.

[d] Elevations containing illuminance plots on the windowed facades of all residences facing and adjacent to the recreational facility. Such plots shall demonstrate compliance with the light trespass and glare control requirements of this chapter.

[e] Proposed frequency of use of the facility during hours of darkness on a month-by-month basis and proposed time when the sports lighting will be extinguished.

[f]   A narrative describing the measures proposed to achieve minimum
off-site disturbance.

(g)	Streetlighting dedication.

[1] When streetlighting is proposed to be dedicated to the Township, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs involved in the lighting of streets and street intersections until such time as the streets and streetlighting are accepted by the Township for dedication.

[2] Prior to dedication and acceptance of any streetlighting by the Township, in the event of the formation of a homeowners' association or other ownership association, the Board of Supervisors shall require the declarant and/or association to enter into an agreement for the payment of and guaranty of the payment of all costs associated with streetlighting to be dedicated. Such costs shall include, but not be limited	to, the Township 's administrative costs, collection costs, insurance costs, electrical utility charges, maintenance, repair and replacement	costs for fixtures, standards , poles and associated equipment. The agreement shall include a provision allowing the Township to assess the declarant, the association and/or each individual property, as the case may be necessary and appropriate, to collect all of the above-referenced costs and expenses. All costs associated with the establishment of the agreement and the establishment of any lighting district necessary to implement the provisions of this paragraph shall be paid by the applicant, declarant or association, as the case may be.



204:141	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-37                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 204-40

(10)	In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the requirement s of this section, Nort h Middleton Township may obtain a qualified consultant's report, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.


§ 204-38. Required licenses , certificates, and permits.

All uses mu st comp ly with all applicable Township building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificate s, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Township as part of any application or shall be a condition of approval.


§ 204-39. Roadway classifications.

For the purposes of this chapter , the Township's roads shall be classified in the following
categories:

 





Arterial Roads
Pennsylvania  Turnpike
Harrisburg Pike Spring Road
West Trindle Road
Newvi lle Road Collector Roads Cavalry Road Claremont Road Cranes Gap Road Enola Road Longs Gap Road
McClures Gap Road North Middleton Road Waggoner s Gap Road Local Roads
 
Table 204-39A - Roadway Classifications Roadway  Classifications
Route No.


Interstate 76
Interstate United States 11, State Route 890
State Route 0034
State Route 0641
State Route 0641


State Route 1001
State Route 2002 Township Route T-531 State Route 0944 Township Route T-494
State Route 4027; Legislative Route 21033
Township Route T-495
State Route 0074; Legislative Route 21032
 
All roads not  listed as arterials or collectors


§  204-40. Setback	modifications	and	obstructions	prohibited	in   easements	and
rights-of-way.

A.	Front setback of buildings on built-up streets. Where at  least  two  adjacent  buildings within I00 feet of a property are set back a lesser distance than required, the average of the  lesser  distances  becomes  the  required   minimum  front  setback  for  the  property.


204:142	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-40	ZONING	§ 204-41

However, in no case shall the setback line be less than 15 feet from any abutting street right-of-way line.

B.	Accessory or appurtenant structures. Except for decks, porches and patios,  whether covered or not, setback regulations do not  apply  to  the  following  accessory  or appurtenant  structures:

(1)	Bu s shelter s; telephone  booths;  and cornices, eaves, chimneys, steps, canopies and
similar extensions.

(2)	Open fire escapes.

(3)	Minor public utility structures, articles of ornamentation or decoration.

(4)	Fences, hed ges and retaining walls.

(5)	Compost piles.

(6)	Air-conditioning unit s.

(7)	Propane tank.

C.	Easement/right-of-way   obstructions.

(1)	The erection, construction, placement , locating or planting of any improvement, fixture, fence, landscaping, vegetation, trees, shrubbery, or other object, whether perman ent or temporary, w ithin any public or private easement or Township right-of-way, with the exception of mailboxes on a single post , shall be prohibited.

(2)	Any violation of this chapter shall entitle the Township, at its discretion, to remove such improvement, fixture, fence, landscaping , vegetation, and the Township shall not be responsible for replacement thereof.25


§ 204-41. Signs.

A.	General intent. The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this section are made in accordance with an overall plan and program for the provision of public safety, land development, preservation of property values and  the general  welfare  of  the Tow nship of North Middleton and are intended to:

(1)	Aid in traffic control and traffic safety.

(2)	Preserve and protect property values.

(3)	Lessen congestion of land and air space.

(4)	Provide aga inst undue concentrations of signs which distract and endanger  traffic
safety and traffic flow.





25.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. ll).


204:143	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-41	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-41

(5)	Establish  reasonable  standards  for  commercial  and  other  advertising  through  the use of signs in order to maintain and encourage business activity and development.

(6)	Recognize the rights  of  the  public  in  roads,  streets,  highways  and  the  areas adjacent to those roads, streets and highways.

B.	General regulations for all signs.

(1)	Signs must be constructed of durable material and maintained in good condition.

(2)	No sign shall be maintained within the Township in such a state of disrepair as to have  the appearance of complete neglect, which is rotting or falling down, which is illegible or has loose parts separated from original fastenings .

(3)	Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety  of  the building or premises or endangers the public safety, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is located that such sign must be made safe or removed within five days.

(4)	Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other building or structure shall be regarded as a flat wall sign and the regulation s pertaining thereto shall apply.

(5)	Each  sign  shall  be  removed  when  the circumstances  leading  to  its erection  no
longer apply.

(6)	Light ed signs shall comply with § 204-378(9) relating to outdoor lighting, illumination of signs and billboards , other applicable standards herein this section, as well as the provisions below:

(a)	Signs may be interior lighted with nonglaring lights or may be illuminated by floodlights or spotlights that are shielded so there is  no  direct  light transmitted to other properties or public rights-of-way.

(b)	Directly illuminated  signs,  designed  to give forth artificial  light  directly or through transparent or translucent material from a source of light within such sign,  including but not limited to neon , will be permitted, provided that the light being emitted  from the sign shall not cause a glare or emit light onto the surroundin g area.

(7)	No sign shall be located so as to interfere with visibility for motorists at street or driveway  intersections.

(8)	No sign located within 300 feet of any traffic light shall be illuminated with red, green or yellow lights or red, green or yellow neon tubing in accordance with Pennsylvania  Department of Transportation  (PennDOT).

(9)	All signs shall be constructed to the stand ards of the current North Middleton Township Building Code.

(10)	Signs must be positioned so that they do not interfere with any clear-sight triangle.




204:144	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-41	ZONING	§ 204-41

(11)	No loud, vu lgar, indecent  or obscene advertising  matter shall be displayed  in  any
manner, including but not limited to:

(a)	Any graphic illustration pertaining to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or both.

(b)	Scenes wherein artificial devices are employed to depict or drawings are employed to portray any of the prohibited signs, photographs or graphic representations  described above.

(12)	No sign shall be erected or located as to prevent free ingress or egress from any window, door or fire escape.

(13)	No sign shall be placed  in such a position that it will obscure light or air from  a
building or which would create a traffic danger.

(14)	No sign shall be permitted  to be attached to public utility poles or trees which are within the right-of-way of any street.

(15)	No sign sha ll be located within§ 204-21, Floodplain Overlay Zone (FPO).

(16)	In the event that a symbol, trademark or other such figure is used as a sign post or standard which could be construed to indicate or identify a particular use or business, that symbol, trademark or figure is to be computed as part  of the total allowable sign area.

(17)	Except for flat wall signs affixed to bus shelters, no point of any sign, including trim, border and supports, shall be located within 10 feet of any property or street right-of-way line.

(18)	Any sign attached to a building  shall  not be placed on the roof or be higher  than
the wall to which it is attached.

(19)	No point of a wall projecting sign shall be located Jess than 8 112 feet above the grade directly below the sign.

(20)	Nothing  in  these regulations shall  be construed as prohibiting  signs intended  for viewing principally from within a building or  signs temporarily  attached  to  the inside face of a display window, announcing a sale or similar feature, provided that the latter shall not occupy more than 33 1/3% of the total display window area.

(21)	Determination of size of sign area.

(a)	The area of a sign shall be construed to includ e all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbol s, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, including any border framing or decorat ive attachments, but not including any supporting framework or bracing  incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or  symbols attached to a building, wall or window, the area of the sign shall be  considered to be that  of the smallest  rectangle  or other regular geometric  shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.




204:145	Ol   -Ol-2014
 
§ 204-41	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-41

 


(b)	Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of the larger face shall be used in determining the area of the sign.

(22)	No sign shall be placed on nor affixed to vehicles and/or trailers:

(a)	In such a manner  that the carrying of such sign is no longer incidental to the
vehicle's primary purpose of transporting persons and goods; and

(b)	That are parked on a public right-of-way, public or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way are prohibited where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a bu siness, organization, or other activity.

C.	Specific sign regulations.

(1)	See Tables 204-41A, 204-41B, 204-41C, and 204-410.26

(2)	Nameplates or identification sign. Only the following types of nonilluminated , nonadvertising signs are permitted in all district s without the necessity of securing a  building or zoning permit for such sign:

(a)	Signs indicating the name and address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation , provided that they shall not be larger than  four square  feet  in area. Only one su ch sign per dwelling unit shall be permitted, except in the case of corner lots where two such signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted  for each dwelling unit.

(b)	For buildings  other than dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding four square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building and the name of the management may be displayed, provided  that on a corner lot, two such signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted.




26.	Editor's Note: These tables are included as attachments to this ch apter.


204:146	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-41	ZONING	§ 204-42

D.	Sign permits. For signs requiring pennits, the following requirements shall apply prior to the erection of said signs:

(1)	Permit applications.

(a)	Application  for a  building  or zoning permit  shall be made at the Township
Municipal Office.

(b)	App lication  shall be made  on a form  to be provided  by the Township and
shall contain the following information and documentation:

[1]  The name(s) and address(es) of the sign owner and the landowner.

[2]   A drawing  to  scale showing  the location of the sign with reference to the adjoining lot lines and streets.

[3] A drawing to scale showing all dimensions of the sign. For a directional sign or an on-premises  sign  advertising  activities  being  conducted  on the property, the drawing shall also contain an accurate representation of the advertising or informative contents of the sign.

[4]   A descripti on of the construction materials of the sign and its manner of
installation.

(c)	Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, as established
by the Board of Supervisors.

(2)	All applications shall be reviewed and pennits issued by the Zoning Officer. No sign permit shall be issued, except in confonnity with the regulations of  this chapter, except upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board, granted pursuant to the procedures established for the issuance of a variance.

(3)	Permit   issuance.  Following  pennit  application  approval,  a  sign  permit  will  be issued by the Zoning Officer upon receipt of all required fees.

(4)	If there is any change in  location or dimensions of any sign or in advertising  or
informative contents of a sign, a new pennit shall be required.

(5)	Revocation  of permits.

(a)	All permits shall be subject to revocation upon 15 days' written notice for violation of any provision or upon change of information provided in the application.

(b)	Revocation of a permit shall not be cause for refund of the pennit fee.


§ 204-42. Temporary construction trailers or sheds.

Temporary construction trailers or sheds are permitted in all zones subject to the following criteria:





204:147	01 - Ol - 2014
 
§ 204-42                                      NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 204-44

A.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds  shall be permitted  only during the period  that the construction work is in progress. A permit for the temporary structure shall  be obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to the commencement  of construction and shall be renewed every 180 days.

B.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be located on the lot  on  which  the construction is progressing and shall not be located within l 0 feet of any lot line abutting an existing residentia l use.

C.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be used only as temporary field offices and for  storage of incidental equipment  and supplies and shall not be used for any dwelling use.

D.	A temporary construction trailer may be permitted for use as a sales center for residential lots. The maximum gross floor area of such a temporary sales center shall be 500 square feet.


§ 204-43. Temporary personal storage.

The use of temporary, nontraditional storage units, including those commercially known as "PODS®," enclosed "container" of a box trailer, and  commercial truck and trailers with or without wheels , but also vehicles such as limited to cars, trucks, buses, campers and mobile homes for storage of household items, shall not be permitted in the R-1, R-2, VMU, and NC Zones, nor upon any property with an existing residential use except in accordance with following:

A.	In the event of emergency storage needs arising from displacement of the occupants of the dwelling due to fire, flood, wind, other natural occurrence, or relocation of occupant. This exception will only be granted after the issuances of a temporary zoning permit by the Zoning Officer. The zoning permit shall expire 180 days  from the date the permit was originally issued. Upon written request by the permit holder the zoning permit may be granted a time extension in sixty day intervals.

B.	Temporary , nontraditional storage units, including those commercially known as "PODS®," enclosed "container" of a box trailer, and commercial truck and trailers with or  without wheels, but also vehicles such as limited to cars, trucks , buses, campers and mobile  homes shall not be located within 10 feet of any lot line.


§ 204-44. Unenclosed storage.

A.	Recreational vehicles , boats, campers, trucks, and utility trailers. Within the R-1 and R-2 Zones or upon any property used principally for residential purposes,  the  storage of recreationa l vehicles , travel trailers, trucks, boats [including trailers used solely for the transport of the residents' recreational vehicle(s)], and utility trailers, is permitted only according to the following requirements:

(1)	For purposes of this section, recreational  vehicl es, travel trailers, boats  [including trailers used solely for the transport of the residents' recreational vehicle(s)], and utility  trailers are divided into two separate categories, as follows:



204:148	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-44	


(a)	ZONING	§ 204-44

Class  I vehicles:  those recreationa l  vehicles, travel trailers, boats  [including
		trailers used solely for the transport of the resident's recreational  vehicle(s)],
and utility trailers that possess no more than 200 square feet, as measured to the vehicle's outermost edges, nor exceed a height of 10 feet, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the main body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall not be measured on vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches, masts, antennas, outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest point of any flybridge or other boat console.
	(b)	Class II vehicl es: those recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats [including trailers used solely for the transport of the residents' recreational vehicle(s)], and utility trailers that possess more than 200 square feet, as measured to the vehicle's outermost edges, exceed a height of 10 feet, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the main body of the vehicle, or both. Vehicle height shall not be mea sured on vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches, antenna s, masts, outrigging fishing  poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest point of any flybridge or other boat console.
(2)	The temporary parking of one Class I or Class II vehicle for periods not to exceed 72 hours during any seven-d ay period is permitted on a paved or gravel surface in any yard, so long as the vehicle is set back no less than 10 feet from any street right-of-way and five feet from adj oining lot lines.

(3)	The storage of two Class I vehicles shall be permitted per lot behind the building setback line, so long as the unit is set back no less than 10 feet from any adjoining lot line. All areas used for the storage of Class I vehicles shall be maintained so as to keep vegetat ion properly trimmed and debris or litter disposed of regularly. AJI vehicles shall maintain required registration and prevent the leakage of fuels, lubricants, or both,  into the ground.

(4)	The storage of one Class II vehicle on a residentia lly zoned pa rcel or a parcel used
for a principal residence is permitted, subject to the following requirements:

(a)	In no case shall the vehicle contain more than 320 square feet, as measured to the vehicle's outermost edges, nor exceed a height of 13 feet, as measured from the ground to the highest  point of the vehicle's main body. Vehicle height shall not be measured on vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches , antennas, masts, outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest point of any flybridge or other boat console.

(b)	All  vehicles  shall  be  set  back  a  horizontal  distance  equal  to  the  zone's
principal use setbacks, or 10 feet, whichever is greater.

(c)	No  vehicle  shall be  stored  in  front  of the building setback  line. On  vacant lots, t he vehicle must be stored behind the required front yard setback line, as specified for principal u ses.

(d)	All areas used for the storage of Class II vehicles shall be maintained so as to keep  vegetat ion properly  trinuned and debris or litter disposed of regularly.




204:149	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-44	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-44

All  vehicles  shall  maintain  required registration  and prevent  the  leakage of fuels, lubricants, or both , into the ground.

(5)	The storage or parking of one truck upon  any  property  used  principally  for residential purposes  is  permitt ed  for  commercial  vehicles  weighing  less  than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.

(6)	In addition to the above, one utility trailer not exceeding 8,000  pounds  rated hauling capacity  shall be allowed in conjunction with the parking or storage of a Class I or Class II vehicle as described in this section, and must comply with all setback requirements described in this section.

(7)	Grandfathering. Existing recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trucks, and utility trailers are permitted to continue to remain in a nonconforming condition; however , registration of an existing recreational vehicle, boat, camper , truck, or utility trailer to a new owner of record after the adoption date of this chapter shall forfeit its grandfathered status and shall comply with the aforementioned requirements.

B.	Outdoor stockpiling. In all zones, the unenclosed stockpiling of any material, except fire
wood, cut, split and stacked shall be prohibited.

C.	Trash, garbage, refuse or junk. Except  as  provided  in   this  chapter,  the  outdoor accumulation of trash, garbage, refuse or  junk  for  a  period  exceeding  10  days  is prohibited.

D.	Dumpster s/recycling.  All  trash  dumpsters  and  recycling  containers  exceeding  25  cubic yards (excluding those  curbside  containers  used  for  municipal  trash disposal)  shall  be located within a side or rear yard. Trash  dumpsters and recycling  containers  shall not encroach into required setbacks or buffer yards. Trash dumpsters and recycling containers shall  be screened  in  accordance  with  § 204-26  of  this  chapter,  and  equipped  with  a self-latching door or gate.

E.	Domestic composts. The placement of framed  enclosure  composts  as  an  accessory residential use is permitted . Only waste  materials  from  the  residential  site  shall  be deposited within the compost and in  no  case  shall  meat  or  meat  by-products  be composted. All composts shall be properly maintained so as not to become a nuisance to nearby properties.

F.	Parking or storage of unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicles. No more than one unlicen sed motor vehicle in good running condition, per occupied dwelling, may be stored on a graveled or paved driveway that is provided for customary residential use. Motor vehicles without current, valid license plates or inspection stickers which are more than 60 days beyond their expiration date shall not be parked or stored in any zone other than in a completely enclosed building that complies with accessory structure setbacks. The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to farm implements and other farm vehicles not normally used as a means of conveyance on public highways. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the parking or storage of any motor vehicle in any zone, unless such motor vehicle is an accessory use to the present use of the  lot.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  this  section,  in  and  of  itself,  shall  not  be



204:150	01 -01 -2014
 
§ 204-44	ZONING	§ 204-47

interpreted to prevent the unenclosed storage of motor vehicles without current, valid license plates  or current, valid inspection stickers if such storage is  performed in conjun ction with the legal operation of a aut omobile wrecking, junk and scrap storage and sales establishment, impoundrnent yards, and motor vehicle auctions.


§ 204-45. Use of on-lot sewage disposal systems.

A.	Regardless of any  lot  area  requirements  listed elsewhere in this  chapter, the minimum required lot size may be increased to ensure an acceptable level of nitrate-nitrogen in the adjoining  groundwater.  Such  determinations  will  be  made  by  the PADEP  through  its sewer module review process. In those cases where applicable  maximum  lot  area requirements are exceeded to  prot ect  groundwater  quality,  the  applicant  shall  furnish evidence that the amount of land needed to protect local groundwater  is the minimum necessary for such protection.

B.	Every use relying upon on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be required to properly maintain and repair such systems.


ARTICLE IV
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses

§ 204-46. Applicability.

A.	In addition to  the  general  prov1Slon s  for  principa l,  accessory  and/or  temporary  uses, bu ildings, and structures within a particular zone established  in Article II of this chapter; the additional genera l provi sions for u ses, buildings, and structures established in the Article III and elsewhere in the chapter, this article sets forth the specific standards  and supplemental regulat ions that shall be appl ied to each  principal,  accessory  and/or tempora ry use identified herein. These specific use standards  and  supplemental regulations mu st be satisfied  prior to approva l of any application for a zoning permit, building	permit , occupancy permit, tempora ry permit, special exception and/or conditiona l use. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate compliance with these standards and regulations and must furnish whatever evidence is  necessary  to demonstrate such compliance.

B.	All principal , accessory, and/or temporary uses identified subsequently herein this article, must comply with the general provisions for u ses within a particular zone in which the use is to be located, unless different standards are established herein the subsequent sections of Article II of this chapter; in any case, the more restrictive of the general and specific provisions  shall apply.

C.	For uses permitt ed within a specific zone as conditional uses and/or special exceptions,
see also the procedures and standards in Articles VI or VII of this chapter, as applicable.


§ 204-47. Principal agricultural/forestry uses.

A.	Agribusiness . Agribusiness is permitted  subject to the following criteria:



204:151	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-47	NORTH MIDDLETO N CODE	§ 204-47

(1)	The following setbacks are required:

(a)	Except for dwellings and residential accessory use and structures which shall comply with the residential area and design requirements of underlying zone district s, all structures shall be set back a minimum  of 50 feet from any lot line.

(b)	For new agribusiness operations or expansions of ex1stmg agribusiness operations, any manur e storage facility shall  be located  in accordance with the setback requirement s established by Act 38 of 2005 known as "ACRE."27

(2)	The applicant shall demonstrate that the methods of disposing of dead animals are in   strict compliance with applicable standard s established by  PADEP.  Dead turkeys,   chickens, or  piglet s  shall  be  kept  in  airtight  containers.  Larger  dead animals  shall  be  kept  in  a  manner  so as  to  minimi ze  the spread  of  odors  and disease.

(3)	The applicant  shall demonstrate that the farming operation allows for the safe and
efficient movement of all vehicles associated with the operation.

(4)	All areas utilized for grazing or pa sture areas shall be fenced.

(5)	All proposed entrances and exits to the operation shall be designed and improved in a manner which does not allow mud or gravel to be deposited or accumulate on or along abutt ing public streets.

(6)	Areas designed for outdoor storage of pallet s, machinery, or other materials shall be provided with buffering and screening in accordance with Article III of this chapter.

(7)	A land development plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Township in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(8)	All uses must comply with Township building , health, safety, property and other applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses , certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Township , or shall be a condition of approval. Specifically, new agribusiness operations, or expansions of existing agribusiness operations, which require a nutrient management plan in accordance with Act 38 of 2005 known as "ACRE" and all current regulations, the applicant shall demonstrate that such plan has been prepared and submitted to the Cum berland County Conservation District for review prior to the hearing for approval. Further, the applicant shall demonstrate that such plan has been approved by the Cumberland County Conservation District prior to the issuance of the zoning permit.

B.	Agriculture. Agriculture is permitted subject to the following criteria:




27.	Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. §311 ct seq.


204:152	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-47	ZONING	§ 204-47

(1)	The following setbacks are required:

(a)	Except for dwellings and residential accessory use and structures which shall comply with the residential area and design requiremen ts of underlying zone districts, all structures shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line.

(b)	Any manure storage facility shall be located in accordance with the setback requirements established  by  Act  38  of  200528  known  as  "ACRE,"  and  all current regulati ons.

(2)	The applicant shall demonstrate that the methods of disposing of dead animals are in   strict compliance with applicable standards established by PADEP. Dead turkeys ,  chickens, or piglet s shall  be kept  in  airtight  containers.  Larger  dead animals shall  be kept  in a manner so as to minimize the spread of odors and disease.

(3)	The applicant shall demonstrate that the farming operation allows for the safe and efficient movement of all vehicles associated with the operati on.

(4)	All areas utilized for grazing or pasture areas shall be fenced.

(5)	All proposed entrances and exits to the operat ion shall be designed and improved in a manner which does not allow mud or gravel to be deposited or accumulate on or along abutting public streets.

(6)	Areas designed for outdoor storage of pallets, machinery, or other materia ls shall be provided with bu ffering and screening in accordance with Article III of this chapter.

(7)	Surface water runoff from areas where animals are enclosed shall be diverted away from adjacent properties and shall not contaminate downstream watercourses.

(8)	Any new operation or expansion of an existing agriculture operation shall not be approved by the Township unti l a soil erosion and sedimentat ion control plan has been prepared , and found satisfactory by the County Conservation District.

(9)	All uses must comply with Township building, health, housing, renta l, safety, property and other applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirement s. All such licenses, certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Township, or shall be a condition of approval. A list of all chemicals utilized in the propagation and care of farm products shall be filed annually with the Zoning Officer.

C.	Forestry. Forestry or commercial timber har vesting, exclud ing the cutting of trees for the personal  use  of  the  landowner  or  for  precommercial  timber  stand  improvement,  is permitt ed subject to the following criteria:




28.	Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. §311 et seq.


204:153	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-47	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-47

(1)	All timber harvesting practices  must protect nearby structures and utility lines. No
uncontrolled felling shall be allowed.

(2)	Preparation of a logging plan.

(a)	Every landowner  on whose land timber harvesting is to occur shall prepare a
written logging plan in the form specified in this subsection and by state law.

(3)	Compliance with applicable regulations.

(a)	The Jogging plan shall address and comply  with  the  requirements  of  all applicable state laws and regulations and Township ordinances, including but not  limited to the following:

[l]  Soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations and standards of the County Conservation District and/or PADEP requirements.

[2]   Stream crossing and  wetlands  protection  regulations  of PADEP and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.

(b)	Relationship of state laws, regulations , and permits to the logging plan. Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be attached to and become part of the logging plan . A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that satisfies the requirements of 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, shall  also  satisfy  the  minimum  requirements  for  the  logging  plan  and a ssociated map specified previou sly, provided that all information required by these subsections is included or attached.

(4)	Responsibility  for compliance. The landowner and the operator shall be jointly  and
severa lly responsible for complying with the terms of the logging plan.

(5)	Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding . The landowner and the  operator  shall  be  responsible  for  repairing  any  damage  to  Township  streets caused  by traffic associated with  the  timber  harvest  operation  pursuant  to  the provisions  of  67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, hauling in excess of posted weight limit. The Township may require the landowner and/or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of any such damage, pursuant to the said provi sions of the Pennsylvania Code.

D.	Riding  schools  and  stables.  Riding  schools  and  stables  are  permitted  subject  to  the following criteria:

(1)	All  structures  used  for  the  boarding  of horses  and all outdoor  training  or show
facilities or areas shall be set back at a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line.

(2)	All outdoor training, boarding, or pasture  areas shall  be enclosed  by a  fence,  a minimum of four feet high, or a natural or man-made barrier a minimum of 10 feet from any public road right-of-way.

(3)	All stables shaJl be maintained and all animal wastes shall be properly stored and disposed of so to minimize odors perceptible at the lot line.




204:154	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-47	ZONING	§ 204-48

(4)	The  applicant   sha ll  furnish  evidence  of  an  effective  means  of  animal  waste disposa l which shall be implemented.


§ 204-48.  Principal  residential uses.

A.	Bed-and-breakfasts.  Bed-and-breakfasts are perm itted subject to the following criteria :

(1)	The building must be an existing single-family detached dwelling.

(2)	All princ ipal buildings  permitted  to be  bed-and-breakfa st uses shall maintain  an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the  neighborhood . No modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire  and  safety  requirements)  which  would  alter  its  residential character shall be permitted.

(3)	Fire escapes , where requ ired, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall
not be located on any wa ll facing a public street right-of-way.

(4)	Accommodations  shall be limited to no more than  10 guest bedrooms available or
used in any one structure.

(5)	The owner of the facility or resident manager must reside therein, and must be on
the premi ses when guests are present.

(6)	Overnight guests shall not occupy the facility for more than  14 consecutive nights
in a thirty-day period.

(7)	No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in individual guest bedrooms.

(8)	Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the use of a bed-and-breakfast , shall be permitted so long as they complement the bed-a nd-breakfast use and do not encumber activities of surrounding lots.

(9)	All parking areas shall be screened  from abutting propert y in the residentia l zones
(R-1 and R-2) or existing residentia l use.

(10)	The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(11)	The applicant shall obtain all required building permits under the North Middleton Township Building Code and a proper zoning permit.

B.	Boa rdinghouses. Boardinghou ses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The total number  of tenant/guest rooms for rent shall be three accommodating  not more than six tenants/guests total.

(2)	All tenant/guest  rooms shall be limited to two tenants/guests each.

(3)	The   owner   of   the   facility   or   res ident   manager   must   reside   therein   the boardinghouse.




204:155	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-48

(4)	All tenant/guest rooms available for boarding shall be located within the principal building.

(5)	Entry access to all boarding rooms shall be through the interior of the building. No exit  doors from individual boarding rooms shall lead directly to the exterior of the building.

(6)	Resident s  mu st  have  access  on  site  to  shared  common  areas  for  cooking  and eating. A common kitchen facility equ ipped for cooking meals located on site must be  available to the  residents, or  daily  meals  must  be provided  on  site  for  the residents of the boardinghouse.

(7)	Meals for compen sation shall be provided only to registered tenants/guests of the boardinghou se. No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in the individual tenant/guest rooms.

(8)	Each floor must contain at least one fully equipped bathroom for each  five tenants/guests that is accessible from a common hallway.

(9)	All tenants/guests must execute a lease before occupancy.

(10)	Tenant/guest rooms mu st be leased to the same tenant/guest  for at least seven consecutive days.

(11)	All parking areas shall be screened from abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(12)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.

(13)	The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals in accordance with the requirements of Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(14)	The app licant shall obtain all required buildin g permit s under the North Middleton
Township Building Code and a proper zoning permit.

C.	Continuing care retirement community facility. Continuing care retirement facilities are
permitt ed subject to the followin g criteria:

(1)	Whenever a party or parties seeks to establish a cont inuing care retirement facility, the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Township describing the propo sed use and development of the lot. Such statement shall detail the propo sed number and nature of the anticipated occupants and uses. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner withou t detriment to surrounding properties and neighborhood .

(2)	The continuing care retirement  community is designed primarily for persons aged
55 and over.

(3)	The subject  property  shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an
arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.




204:156	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-48	ZONING	§ 204-48

(4)	The following uses shall  be permitted  as principal uses within a continuing  care
retirement community.

(a)	Residential uses.

[1]   Long-term care nursing centers.

[2]  Personal care centers.

[3]   Single-family attached dwellings. [4]    Single-family detached dwellings.
[5]    Single-family semidetached dwellings.

[6]  Two-family detached dwellings.

[7] Multifamily dwellings/apartments.

(b)	Public-semipublic  uses.

[1]   Parks, other outdoor recreat ional uses.

[2]   Libraries and community activity buildin gs.

[3]   Indoor recreation  uses and structures operated for the benefit or use of
the community.

[4]   Post office.

(c)	Institutional uses.

[1]  Places of worship .

(5)	The  following  uses  shall  be  permitted  as  accessory uses  in the  continuing  care retirement commu nity for the u se of residents and guests:

(a)	Accessory service uses. [1]   Day-care facilities.
[2]    Medical  offices and clinics. [3]    Comm on dining facilities. [4]    Indoor recreation facilities.
[5]    Outdoor recreational facilities.

(b)	Accessory commercial uses.

[1]   Financial institutions.

[2]   Food services.

[3]   Retail businesses.


204:157	OJ - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-48		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-48

[4]  Personal services.
		[5]  Restaurant s (no drive in or drive through).
	(c)	Each accessory u se shall be located in a buildin g occupied by residential uses
or in a community activities building.
	(d)	Each  accessory  commercial  use  shall  not  exceed 2,500  square  feet  of  net
floor area.
	(e)	The total area reserved of commercia l accessory uses shall not exceed 4% of the total gross land area of the original  tract/lot, and no more than 25,000 square feet, whichever  is less.
(6)	Continuing  care  retirement  communities  shall  meet  the  following  area,  density,
coverage and setback requirements:

(a)	Minimum lot area shall be I 0 acres.

(b)	Maximum density shall be  12 unit s per acre.

(c)	Maximum imperviou s lot coverage shall be 60%.

(d)	Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 30%.

(e)	No building shall be within  25 feet of the lot line of the continuing care retirement community, nor within 35 feet of an outside or public street right-of-way.

(f)	In  instances  where  there  is  more  than  one building  on  a  single  lot,  the following minimum  building setback requirement s shall be met:

(l]  Front to front: 70 feet.

[2]   Front to side: 50 feet.

[3]   Front to rear: 40 feet.

[4]   Side to rear: 20 feet.

[5]   Side to side: 15 feet.

(6] Rear  to rear : 30 feet.

[7]   Corner to corner: 20 feet.

(g)	Staging of development.  When the continuing care retirement  community  is
to be developed in stages, the following criteria must be met:

[l]  The land development plan presented to the Township must show the
approxim ate location and type of use for each stage of the development.

[2]  If nonre sidential uses will be a part of the development , the sequencing
shall  be  shown  so that  not  all residential  development  is constructed



204:158	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	ZONING	§ 204-48

prior to the construction of the nonresidential development , unless the development involves an existing continuing care retirement community that already includes existing nonresidential components, in which case the staging requirement would not apply.

(7)	Safe vehicular  access  and  areas  for  discharging  and  picking  up  guests  shall  be
provided.

(8)	The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Township in order to minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood , and traffic flow and ingress-egre ss shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(9)	Deed restrictions or covenants shou ld be included to provide for the creation of a property owners' association or board of trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the  development improvements in the future; at a minimum, all development improvement s relating to internal streets, sidewalks, curbs, parks, parking areas, etc., shall remain private and the responsibility of  the landowner and/or the operator. Should the property owners' association or board of trustees, or landowner and/or the operator neglect to maintain the designated improvements , as depicted on the plan, the Township may then maintain said areas and assess the responsible party for any costs incurred.

(10)	The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management agency coo dinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardou s  materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with Township,  state, and federal regulations.

(11)	The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals in accordance with  the requirement s of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

D.	Flag lot residences. Flag lot residences are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	For  the purposes  of this  section,  a  flag  lot  shall be  described  as containing  two parts:

(a)	The "flag" shall include that port ion of the lot that is the location of the
principal and accessory buildings.

(b)	The  "pole"  sha ll  be  considered  that  portion  of the  site that  is used  for
vehicular access between the site and its adjoining road.

(2)	Requirements  for the flag.

(a)	The minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the underlying zone area and design requirements  shall be measured exclusively upon the flag.

(b)	For purposes of determining required yards and setbacks, the follow ing shall
apply:



204:159	01-01 -2014
 
§ 204-48	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-48

[1] Front yard: the area between the principal structure and that  lot line of the flag which is most parallel to the street providing vehicular access to the site. Additionally, all areas of the pole shall be considered to  be within the front yard.

[2] Rear yard: the area  between the principal structure and that lot line of the flag that is directly opposite the front yard , as described above.

[3] Side yards: the area between the principal structure and that one outermost lot line which forms the flag and pole, plus the area on the opposite side of the principal  structure.

(3)	The flag lot shall contain adequate driveway dimension for vehicu lar backup  so that  ingress to and egress from the lot is in the forward direction.

(4)	Requirements for the pole.

(a)	The pole shall maintain a minimum width of 50 feet.

(b)	The pole shall  not exceed 600 feet in length, unless additional  length is needed to avoid the disturbance of productive farmlands, prime agricultural soils, or some other significant natural or cultural feature.

(c)	No part of the pole shall be used for any portion of an on-lot sewage disposal system, nor any other improvement except a driveway and other permitt ed improvements , such as landscaping, fencing, utility connections  to  off-site facilities, mailboxes and signs.

(d)	The cartway contained on the pole shall be located at least six feet from any adjoining lot line and 20 feet from any existing structures on the site or any adjoining lot.

(e)	No pole shall  be located  within 200 feet of another on the same side of the street, unless an  adjoining  pole utilizes  a joint  use driveway, regulated  as follows:

(5)	Joint use driveways.

(a)	When one or mor e flag lots are proposed , such lots may rely upon a joint use
driveway for vehicular access.

(b)	A joint  use driveway may serve up to a maximum of three total lots.

(c)	All joint use driveways shall have a minimum cartway width of 14 feet.

(d)	Joint u se driveways shall be provided with cross-access easements m accordance with § 204-32A(9) of this chapter.

E.	Group homes. Group homes are permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Whenever a party or parties seeks to occupy a dwelling or other building as a group home facility, the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Township describing the proposed use of the dwelling or building. Such


204:160	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	ZONING	§ 204-48

statement shall detail the proposed number and nature of the anticipated occupants. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to surrounding properties and neighborhood.

(2)	No portion of a group home shall be located within 500 feet of another group home facility.

(3)	All principal structures permitted to be group home uses shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirement s) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.

(4)	Fire escapes , where required, sha ll be located in the rear of the building and  shall
not be located on any wall facing a street right-of-way.

(5)	Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling under the definition of a  "half-way house" or "treatment center" be considered a group home facility.

(6)	Occupants of the group home facility shall live as a family unit.

F.	Long-term care nursing home or personal care facility. Long-term care nursing homes and/or personal care facilities are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Whenever a party or parties seeks to establish a long-term nursing home or personal care facility on a lot or occupy a dwelling or other building as a long-term nursing home or personal care facility, the  party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Township describing the proposed use  and development of the lot or dwelling or building. Such statement shall detail the proposed number and nature of the anticipated occupants. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsib le manner without detriment to surrounding properties and neighborhood.

(2)	In addition to residential unit s (living and sleeping quarters with or without kitchen facilities), the following accessory uses may be provided for the exclusive use of residents and their guests:

(a)	Dispensaries.

(b)	Medica l  offices  and clinics.

(c)	Common dining facilities.

(d)	Parks and other noncommercia l recreation uses.

(e)	Indoor recreation uses.

(t)   Day cares.

(g)	Financial  institutions.

(h)	Retail business.


204:161	01 - OJ - 2014
 
§ 204-48	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-48

(i)	Persona l  service.

(3)	Buildings on the same lot shall meet the following minimum setback requirements between buildings:

(a)	Front to front: 70 feet.

(b)	Front to side: 50 feet.

(c)	Front to rear: 20 feet.

(d)	Side to rear: 20 feet.

(e)	Side to side: 15 feet.

(f)	Rear to rear: 30 feet.

(g)	Comer to corner: 20 feet.

(4)	Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 40%.

(5)	All principal structures permitted to be long-term nursing homes and personal care facilities shall maintain an exterior appearance  that  resembles and  is  compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire  and  safety  requirements)  which  would alter its residential character shall be permitted .

(6)	Fire escapes, where required , shall be located in the rear of the building and shall
not be located on any wall facing a street right-of-way.

(7)	The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Township in order to minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood , and traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(8)	A long-term nursing home or personal care facility shall be directly affiliated with a parent institution or organization, which shall provide full-time supervision and administration to the resident s of the long-term nursing home or personal care facility.

(9)	The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county emergency management agency coordinator . The EOP shall also inclu,de detailed information regarding solid, medica l and hazardous mater ials and waste handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies· with Township, state, and federal regulations.

(10)	A land development plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Township in accordance with the requirement s of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.






204:162	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	ZONING	§ 204-48

G.	Mobile  home  parks.  Mobile  home  parks  are  permitted  subject  to   Chapter   180, Subdivision and Land Development, and the applicable regulation s set forth elsewhere in this chapter.

(1)	All uses must comply with Township building, health, safety, property and other applicable local, county, state, and federal  code  and  licensing requirements.  All such licenses, certificates, and permits  shall have been  obtained  and presented  to the Township, or shall be a condition of approval.

H.	Multifamily	dwellings/apartments.	Multifamily	dwellings/apartments	are  permitted
subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Minimum required  lot area shall be one acre.

(2)	Maximum density shall be 12 units per acre.

(3)	Minimum required  lot width shall be:

(a)	One hundred fifty feet at building setback line.

(b)	One hundred fifty feet at the lot frontage.

(4)	Maximum imper vious lot coverage shall be 55%.

(5)	Minimum required setbacks shall be:

(a)	Front: 35 feet.

(b)	Side: 30 feet one side, and 60 feet both sides.

(c)	Rear : 35 feet.

(6)	Maximum permitted  building height: 35 feet.

(7)	All principal buildings permitted to be multifamily dwelling/apartment facilities shall  maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing    dwellings  in  the   neighborhood.   No   modification   to   the   external appearances  of  the building (except fire and safety requirements) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.

(8)	Fire escapes, where required , shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on any wall facing a street right-of-way.

(9)	In those instances where more than one multifamil y dwelling/apartment building is located on the same lot, the following separation distances will be provided between each building:

(a)	Front  to  front,  rear  to  rear,  parallel  buildings  shall  have  at  least  45  feet between  faces of the building.

[1] If the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end if increased by similar or greater distance to the other end.



204: 163	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE	§ 204-48

(b)	A minimum distance of 25 is required between end walls of building s.

[1] If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the distance between the corners of the end walls of the building may be reduced to a minimum of 15 feet.

(c)	A  minimum  distance of 25  feet  is required  between  end walls and front or
rear faces of buildings.

(d)	All multifamily dwelling/apartment buildings shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any interior access drives or parking facilities contained on commonly  held lands.

(e)	In no case shall there be more than  12 dwelling units per building.

(10)	A minimum of 30% of the tota l tract area shall be designated and maintained as common open space. Responsibility for maintenance of the open space area shall be with the landowner.

(11)	The location, or ientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Township in order to minimi ze the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cau se traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(12)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.

I.	Multiunit  residential conversions. Mu ltiunit  residential  conversions are permitted  subject
to the following criteria:

(1)	The building must be a  single-family  detached  dwelling  that  existed  on  the effective date of this chapter , and contained (at that time) at least 2,400 square feet of habitab le floor area.

(2)	All multiunit residential conversions shall comply with the applicable area and design requirements for applicable use in the underlying zone shall apply [i.e., a multiunit residential conversion resulting in not more than two total dwelling unit s (including the original dwelling unit) , then two-family dwelling area and design requirements apply; a multiunit residential conversion resulting in not more than three or more tota l dwelling unit s (including the original dwelling unit), then multifamily dwelling area and design requirements apply].

(3)	The total number of dwelling unit s permitted per lot shall be:

(a)	Three in the R-2 Zone.

(b)	Fou r in VMU and NC Zones.

(4)	All principa l building s permitted as part of a multiunit residential conversion use shall  maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing   dwellings in the  neighborhood.  No  modifications  to  the  external appearance of  the buildin g (except fire escapes) which wou ld alter its residential character shall be permitted.




204:164	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-48	ZONING	§ 204-48

(5)	Fire escapes, where required , shall be located in the rear of the building and  shall
not be located on any wall facing a street right-of-way.

(6)	All units contained on floors above or below grade shall have a direct means of escape to ground level.

(7)	No dwelling unit shall be less than 600 square feet.

(8)	All dwelling units shall be located within the principal building.

(9)	All  dwelling  units  mu st  have separate kitchen  and bathroom  facilities as well  as
living/sleeping spaces.

(10)	The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Township in order  to minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood , and traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(11)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.

J.	Single-family  attached dwellings.  Single-family attached dwellings are permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Minimum required lot area shall be:

(a)	One acre of contiguous undeveloped property in single ownership.

(b)	Two thousand square feet for individual lots.

(2)	Maximum density shall be eight units per acre.

(3)	Minimum required lot width shall be:

(a)	Twenty feet at the building setback line.

(b)	Twenty feet at the lot frontage.

(4)	Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be:

(a)	Fifty-five percent  for the entire development.

(b)	Fifty-five percent for individual lots.

(5)	Minimum required setbacks shall be:

(a)	Front: 35 feet.

(b)	Side: zero feet for common  and interior lots (attached units) and 30 feet for
end units.

(c)	Rear: 35 feet.

(6)	Maximum permitted building height: 35 feet.

(7)	The maximum number of dwelling unit s in a row shall be six, but where four or more dwelling units are in a row, then no more than 60% shall have the same front


204:165	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-48	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

setba ck and roofline that  generally parallel  the ground  along the same horizontal plane.

(8)	Each group of single-family  attached dwellings shall be set back a minimum of 30
feet from any other group of such dwellings.

(9)	No more than two abutting units shall have  the same front  setback and roofline that  genera lly parallel the ground along the same horizontal plane.

(10)	The minimum front setback variation shall be four feet.

(11)	The location , orientation, and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Township in order to minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood , a nd traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(12)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.

(13)	The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.

K.	Single-family   semidetached	dwellings.	Single-family	semidetached  dwellings	are
permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.

L.	Two-family detached dwelling s. Two-family detached dwellings are permitted subject to the following criteria :

(1)	Public water and public sewer shall be required.


§ 204-49. Principal nonresidential uses.

A.	Adu lt-related u ses. Adult-related u ses are permitted , subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject property  shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjac ent streets.

(3)	No portion of an adult-related use shall be located within  500  feet  of  another adult-related  use.

(4)	No portion of a building occupied  by an adult-related use shall be located within 500 feet from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(5)	No portion of a building occupied by an adu lt-related use shall be located within 500 feet of any property which contains any one or more of the following specified land uses where minors may congregate:






204:166	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(a)	Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor.

(b)	Day-care facility primari ly for children.

(c)	Library.

(d)	Park, playground, pla yfield.

(e)	Place of worship.

(f)	School, private/public.

(g)	Swimming pool, public.

(h)	Other lands, building s, and uses where minors are permitted to congregate.

(6)	No  materia ls, merchandi se,  or  film offered for sale, rent,  lease,  loan, or for  view
upon the premi ses shall be exhibited or displayed outside of a building or structure.

(7)	Any building or structure used and occupied as an adult-related establishment shall be window less, or have an opaque covering over all windows or doors of any area in which materials, merchandise , or film are exhibited or displayed , and no sale materials , merchandise , or film shall be visible from outside of the building or structure.

(8)	All signs shall comply with§ 204-41 of this chapter. No sign shall be erected upon the premises pictorially depicting or giving a visual representation of the type of materials , merchandi se or film offered therein.

(9)	Each entrance to the premi ses shall be posted with a notice specifying that persons under the age of 18 years are not permitted to enter therein and warning all other persons that they may be offended upon entry.

(IO)   No   adult-related   use  may   change  to   another   adult-related   use,   except   upon
additional approval by the entity with jurisdiction  for initial approval.

(11)	The use shall not create an enticement for minors because of  its  proximity  to nearby uses where minor s may congregate.

(12)	No unlawfu l sexual activity or conduct shall be permitted.

(13)	No more than one adult-related use may be located within one building or on one
lot.

B.	Airports/heliports. Airports/heliport s are permitted , subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Mini.mum  lot area shall be:

(a)	Thirty acres for airports; and

(b)	Three acres for heliport s.

(2)	No part of the takeoff/landing strip and/or pad shall be located nearer than 300 feet from any lot line.


204:167	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(3)	All facilities shall be designed and operated in strict compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.

(4)	The applicant shall furnish evidence of the obtainment of a license from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, prior to  the approval of the application.

C.	Animal  hospitals/veterinary  offices.  Animal  hospitals/veterinary  offices  are  permitted,
subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Minimum lot area. Unless animals are kept inside at all times,  each  site shall contain at least five acres; otherwise, the minimum lot area requirement of the underlying zone shall apply.

(2)	Unless animals are kept inside at all times, all animal boarding and related buildings that are not completely enclosed, and any outdoor animal pens,  stalls or runways shall be located within the rear yard, shall be provided with bufferin g and screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter, and shall be a minimum of: 100 feet from a ll lot lines; and 200 feet from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use. Otherwise, the setback  requirement s of the underlying zone shall apply.

(3)	All structures where animal s are kept shall be soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound  and odor from traveling outside, such as solid core doors, sound  absorbent ceilings and  forced air ventilation .

(4)	All areas used for outd oor exercise shall be enclosed or securely fenced to prevent the escape of animals.

(5)	All  outdoor  pa sture  areas  shall be  enclosed  and  securely  fenced  by  a minimum
four-foot-high  fence.

(6)	Where permitted,  anim als  may  exercise outside daily  between  the hours of  8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

D.	Automobile  filling  and/or service  stations. Automobile  filling and/or service stations are permitted  subject to the following criteria :

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided  in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Vehicles  shall  not  occupy  any part  of  the  existing  or  future  street  right-of-way
(including sidewalks) or required off-street parking areas.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	On-lot  traffic  circu lation  channels,  storage,  and  parking  areas  shall  be  clearly
delineated. Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.

(5)	All areas u sed for the storage, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing of vehicles shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.



204:168	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(6)	All areas used for the storage, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing of vehicles shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.

(7)	All permitted activities, except for parking, storage, and those normally required to be performed at the gasoline/fuel and air pumps, and washing and vacuuming areas shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.

(8)	In  no  case  shall  any  vehicle  in  any state of  servicing/repair  be pennitted  to  be
stored in the front yard.

(9)	All ventilation equipment outlets, fume collection, and other similar equipment associated with the service/repair work area(s) and/or service/repair and wash bay doors/opening shall not be located or oriented directly toward any property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(10)	The  demolition  or junking   of  vehicles  is  prohibited.  The  storage  of  inoperable
vehicles and related parts shall be within a completely enclosed building.

(11)	The outdoor storage of vehicles on the property without current registration is prohibited.

(12)	No vehicle, except those with current registration , shall be stored upon the site for
more than 35 days.

E.	Automobile  wrecking,  junk  and  scrap  storage   and   sales  (junkyards).   Automobile wrecking, junk and scrap storage and  sales  (junkyards)  are pennitted  subject  to  the following criteria:

(1)	Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.

(2)	No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises.

(3)	All junk, scrap, machinery or equipment stored outside shall not be permitted in required front, side, or rear building setback or buffer yard areas.

(4)	All junk, scrap, machinery and equipment stored outside shall be at least 100 feet from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use and 40 feet from any street right-of-way.

(5)	The entire premi ses shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high fence consisting either  hea vy-duty steel and supported upon steel posts of a solid masonry or metal wa ll of a uniform design and texture.

(a)	The height of the fence  may  be  increased  above  the  maximum  height permitted in § 204-25 of this chapter to ensure no material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from abutting properties or adjoining street right s-of-way;  and

(b)	Level  3  screening  in  accordance  with  §  204-26  of  this  chapter  shall  be
provided around the entire premi ses, outside of the requir ed fencing.




204: 169	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(6)	All junk shall be stored or arranged so as to permit access by firefighting equipment and to prevent the accumulation of water, and with no junk, scrap, machinery or equipment piled to a height greater than 10 feet.

(a)	There shall be a minimum  of 20 feet of clear space between rows, with each row  to be no greater in width than 40 feet.

(7)	No material shall be placed in any establishment in such a manner that it is capable of being transferred off the premises by wind, water or other natural causes.

(a)	All paper , cloth and rags and other fibers, and activities involving the same,
other than loading and unloading, shall be within fully enclosed building.

(8)	No material shall be burned or incinerated at any time.

(9)	No  automotive  wrecking , junk ,  scrap  storage  and  sales  establishments  shall  be located on land with a slope in excess of 5%.

(10)	All vehicles within the automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and sales establishment s shall be completely drained of fuel, lubricant s, battery fluid, transmission  fluid, brake fluids, coolants, and air-conditioning fluids.

(11)	All additional federal and state laws shall be satisfied.

(12)	The estab lishment shall at all times be maintained in such a manner as to prevent:

(a)	Any menace to public health and safety.

(b)	Offensive or obnoxious odors.

(c)	The breeding, harboring or infestation of rats and other rodents and vermin.

(d)	Violation of any health , sanitary  Jaw, ordinance, or regulation  of North Middleton Township and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

(13)	Every structure erected upon the lot after the effective date of this chapter shall be of fireproof construction with the exception of fences.

(14)	The u se shall otherwise comply with all provision s of Chapter  120, Junkyards.

F.	Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle rental/sales. Automobile, heavy equipment and similar  motor  vehicle rental/sales are permitted  subject  to the following criteria:

(l) The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent street s.

(3)	Vehicles as part of inventory/display/sales shall not occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way (including sidewalks) or required off-street parking areas.




204:170	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(4)	Vehicles as part of inventory/display/sales shall be permitted within the front yard and/or front required setba ck area, but shall not be closer than 20 feet from the front lot line.                                                                                                ·

(5)	Vehicles  as part  of inventory/display/sales shall  not  be permitted  in any required
side or rear building setback areas.

(6)	On-lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage,   inventory/display/sales,  and  parking
areas shall be clearly delineated.

(7)	All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing of vehicles shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulat ion for fire safety can be maintained  at all times.

(8)	All areas u sed for the storage, inventory/display/sa les, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing of vehicles shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.

(9)	All permitted activities except for the storage, inventory/display/sales, parking, and those normally required to be perform ed at the gasoline/fuel and air pumps, and washing and vacuu ming areas shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.

(10)	Where outside vehicle storage, sales/rental inventory/display areas abut a street right-of-way, a perimeter landscape strip in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter shall be provided.

(1 1)   In  no  case shall  any  permitted  motor vehicle in any  state of  servicing/repair  be
permitted to be stored in the front yard.

(12)	All ventilation equipment outlet s, fume collection, and other similar equipment associated with the service/repair work area(s) and/or service/repair and wash bay doors/opening shall not be located or oriented directly toward any property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(13)	The demolition  or junkin g of  vehicles  is proh ibited. The storage of vehicles and related part s shall be within a completely enclosed building.

(14)	The  outdoor  storage  of  vehicles  on  the  property  without  current  registration  is
prohibited.

(15)	No vehicle, except those with current registration and offered for sales/rental,  shall
be stored upon the site for more than 35 days.

G.	Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle repair  centers. Automobi le, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle repair centers are permitted subject to the following criteria :

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.





204: 171	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(2)	These uses  include service and repair of excavation machinery , commercial trucks,
buses, farm equipment, mobile homes, trailers or other similar machinery.

(3)	All service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building .

(4)	All  uses  involving  drive-through  service shall provide  sufficient  on-site  stacking
lanes to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining roads.

(5)	All exterior storage areas shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned properties as provided in § 204-26 of this.chapter. All exterior storage areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from adjoining street lines and shall be covered in an all-weather, dust-free sur face.

(6)	The storage of junked vehicles, boat s, machinery, trucks, trailers,  mobile homes and  heavy equ ipment vehicles on the property is prohibited .

(7)	Any vent ilation equipment outlets associated with  the service/repair work area(s) shall not be directed toward any residentially zoned property or residential use.

(8)	All vehicles shall be repaired and removed promptly from the premises.

(9)	The applicant shall furnish  evidence  that  the  disposal  of  material s  will  be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal regulation s.

H.	Billboard s. Billboards are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject  property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arteria l or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	No billboard shall be located within 500 feet of another billboard, including billboards on either side of  a  street  and  any   existing  billboards  in  other municipa lities.

(a)	No lot or structure shall  include  more  than  one  billboard,  except  that  a billboard may have two  sign  faces  if  they  are  placed  approximately back-to-back.

(3)	All billboards shall be a minimum of 35 feet from all side and rear lot lines.

(4)	All billboard s shall be set back at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way lines.

(5)	No billboard  shall be located within 250 feet from property in the residential zones
(R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(6)	No billboard shall obstruct the view of motorists on adjoining roads, or the view of abutting business u ses which depend upon visibility for identification.

(7)	No billboard shall be attached in any way to a building. Additionally, no billboa rd shall  be attached in any way  to any other  billboard , except that  a billboard may have two sign faces if they are placed approximately back-to-back.

(8)	No billboard shall be placed on nor affixed to any vehicle or trailer :



204:172	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(a)	In such a manner that the carrying of such sign is no longer incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose of transporting persons and goods; and

(b)	That is parked on a public right-of-way, public or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way are prohibited where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a bu siness, organization, or other activity.

(9)	No billboard  shall exceed an overall size of 300 square feet.

(10)	Maximum height. Whichever is less of the following:

(a)	Twenty-five feet above the ground level upon which the billboard is located ;
or

(b)	Twenty-five feet above the elevation of the center line of pavement of the adjacent street at the point nearest the billboard.

(11)	Billboards  shall  comply  with  sign  lighting  standards  set  forth  in  § 204-41  and
§ 204-37B(9) of this chapter relating to outdoor lighting,  illumination of signs and
billboards.

(12)	Landscaping requirements .

(a)	A  decorative  landscaped   strip  shall  be  located  immediately  adjoining  the supporting structure of the billboard  in all directions.29

(b)	A  hedge  or  other  desirable  planting of  at  least  2  112  feet  in  height  shall extend the entire length and breadth of the required landscaped strip.

(c)	The rear side of a single-faced billboard shall be of one color and screened
by w ith Level 2 screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter.

I.	Campgrounds  and  recreationa l  vehicle  parks.  Campgrounds  and   recreational   vehicle parks  are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The minimum tract size for a campground or recreational veh icle park shall be 10
acres.

(2)	All campgrounds or recreational vehicle parks containing more than 100 campsites or recreati onal vehicle spaces shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	For  all campgrounds or  recreational  vehicle parks, traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	All camping  or  recreational vehicle spaces shall be located  at least  50 feet  from any side or rear lot line and at least  I00 feet from any public street right-of-way.

(5)	Each camping or recreational vehicle space shall be numbered.



29.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


204:173	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(6)	The minimum size, dimensions and separation from other sites of each camping or recreational vehicle space shall be as follows:

(a)	Primitive tent space: 400 square feet (20 feet by 20 feet).

(b)	Standard tent space:  1,600 square feet (40 feet by 40 feet).

(c)	Recreational vehicles: 3,600 square feet (60 feet by 60 feet).

(7)	Each recreational vehicle space may be provided with individual electrical, sewage, and water connections. These element provisions generally do not apply  to primiti ve and standard tent sites.

(8)	Every campground and recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a public comfort station , including shower s, rest room facilities and a sheltered drinking fountain in accordance with requirem ents of the Commonwealth of Penn sylvania, including 28 Pa. Code Chapter 19, relating to organized camps and campgrounds.

(9)	Every campground and recreational vehicle park shall be provid ed with a paved sanitary station for the disposal of wastes from vehicle holding tanks that shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line. All sanitary stations shall be designed in accordance with PADEP requirem ents and other applicable laws of the commonwealth.

(10)	Every campground and recreational vehicle park shall be provided with centralized garbage collect ion facilities that shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.

(11)	A minimum of 10% of the gross area of the campground or recreational vehicle park or 500 squ are feet per camping or recreational vehicle space, whichever is greater, shall be set aside for recreation and open space use exclusively by all registered occupants (and their guests) of the facility. Such facilities shall be set back at least 50 feet from any lot line, and 100 feet from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(12)	Camping spaces shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement of a camping unit. Where camping unit s are intended to include travel trailers, recreat ional vehicles or other similar portable unit s, such foundation shall consist of at least a durable, dust-free all-weather surface.

(I 3) Standard tent sites (nonprimitive) shall be provided with a leveling area (tent pad) for the placement  of tents.

(14)	Camping and recreational vehicle spa ces shall be appropriately segregated and buffered to promote safety and compatibility among users and to eliminate nuisances.

(15)	No permanent structures shall be permitted on any individual  campsite  or recreational vehicle site other than fire places, improved pads, and required utility facilities.




204:174	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(16)	An  internal  road  system  shall  be provided.  All  roads,  streets, and  access  drives
shall be designed, constructed and maintained dust free.

(17)	Existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved , to the extent possible, to keep the
area as close as possible to its original condition.

(18)	Campgrounds or recreational vehicle parks shall provid e screening and buffering along the exterior/boundary lot lines of the campground and recreational park in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter.

(19)	Any accessory retail or service commercial uses shall be  solely designed and constructed to serve only the campground's or recreational vehicle park's registered occupants and their visitors. Any parking spaces provided for these commercial uses shall only have vehicular access from the campground's or recreational vehicle park's internal road rather than the publ ic street right-of-way.

(20)	Campgrounds and recreation vehicle parks shall be designed for intermittent recreational use. No persons or occupants shall be permitted to permanently reside on any campsite or recreational vehicle site, except the campground or recreational vehicle park owner and/or resident manager.

(21)	It shall be the responsibility of the campground and/or recreational vehicle park owner to maintain all improvement s and facilities, including  but  not  limited  to areas and facilities designated for internal roads, sewage disposa l, water supply, stormwater  management,  open space, and solid waste collection.

J.	Car washes . Car washes, where permitted,  are subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Minimum  required  lot width shall be:

(a)	One hundred  fifty feet at building setback line.

(b)	One hundred fifty feet at the lot frontage.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cau se traffic hazards on adjacent street s.

(4)	Car washes  must be provided with separate entrance and exitways with paved access drives.

(5)	On-lot traffic circulation channels and par.king areas shall be clearly marked.

(6)	For automatic and self-service car washes:

(a)	Each  washing  bay  shall  provide  a  minimum  one-hundred-foot  long  on-site stacking lane which precedes the washing process;  and

(b)	A post-washing drying area shall be provided for no fewer than two vehicles per washing lane.

(7)	For full-service car washes:



204:175	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(a)	Each  washing  bay  shall  provide  a minimum of three-hundred-foot  per  lane
long on-site stacking lane which precedes the washing process; and

(b)	A post-washing  drying area shall be provided for no fewer than four vehicles
per washing lane.

(8)	The applicant shall provide evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or waterways. Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that will completely  contain any leaks or spills.

(9)	Gray water recycling is mandatory.

(10)	Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto sidewalks or streets .in such a  manner as could cause ice hazards.

(11)	Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided. Such receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

K.	Cemeter y. Cemeteries are permiUed subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The minimu m lot area shall be 2.5 acres.

(2)	The total impervious  lot coverage shall not exceed 10% of the lot area.

(3)	All burial plots and all structures shall be located at least 25 feet from any lot line or street right-of-way line.

(4)	No burial plot shall be permitted in any floodplain or flood fringe area.

(5)	The applicant shall file a site plan with  the Township  to demonstrate  the design and layout specifically illustrating the:

(a)	Proposed drainage plan .

(b)	Internal circulation plan .

(c)	Location of building(s) and structure(s).

(6)	The owner(s) and operator(s) of  a  cemetery  shall  incorporate  best  managements pra ctices as outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas to minimize negative impacts of  erosion,  siltation  and surface water and groundwater contamination.

(7)	At no time shall a corpse be exposed or visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property.

(8)	Any escrow  account  provided  for  by  state or federal law  shall be established  in favor of North Middleton Township.

(9)	The use shall comply with all applicable state laws.




204: 176	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

L.	Club, clubhou se or lodge, meeting grounds: private or any combination thereof. Private clubs, clubhouses or  lodges, meeting grounds are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(l)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access to an arterial or collector
road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	All outdoor recreation/activity  areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from any lot
line.

(4)	No sign advertising the sale of food and/or beverages shall be permitted.

(5)	The owner(s) and operator(s) shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the
members and their guests.

M.	Commercial  recreation,  indoor.  Indoor commercia l recreation  facilities are permitted
subject  to the following criteria:

(1)	All activities sha ll take place in a completely enclosed building.

(2)	All structures where indoor commercial recreation occurs shall be soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound from traveling outside, such as solid core doors, sound absorbent ceilings and forced air ventilation.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

N.	Commercial recreation , outdoor. Outdoor commercial recreation facilities are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Minimum lot area shall be five acres.

(2)	The subject prope1ty shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	Required setbacks.

(a)	All outdoor recreat ion/activity areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from the street  right -of-way and from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(b)	Any structures exceeding the maximum permitted height may be permitted so long as they are set back from all lot lines at least the horizontal  distance equal to their height, plus an additional 50 feet. Furthermore, such structures shall not be used for occupancy.

(c)	Any booth s  or  other struct ures used for the collection of admission and/or parking fees shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle backups on abutting roads and streets during peak arrival periods. Any other collection of




204:177	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE	§ 204-49

fees  (roaming  parking  lot  attendants)  shall  be  conducted  in  a  manner  to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining streets.

(d)	Otherwise all structures shall comply with the underlying zone setbacks.

(5)	Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be  oriented,  arranged  and/or screened to prevent  any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.

(6)	Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided . Such receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of  litter and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

1.	Communication antennas, tower s, and equipment building transmitting and receiving facilities or any combination thereof. Communication antennas, towers, and equipment buildings transmitting  and receiving facilities are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	App lications for the construction of communication antennas,  support  structures, and related facilities shall include a written report containing the following:

(a)	Information describing the tower height and design.

(b)	A cross section of the structure.

(c)	Engineering specifications detailing construction of tower, base, and guy wire anchorage.

(d)	Information describing the proposed painting and lighting schemes.

(e)	Information describing the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate.

(f)	All  tower  structure information  shall  be certified by a licensed professional
engineer.

(g)	Certification that there is not suitable space on existing sites or structures where the intended facility can be accommodated and :function as required without rea sonable modification.

(h)	Technological  evidence that  the facility must go where proposed in order to satisfy its :function in  the  grid  system  and  provide  the  quality  of  service required by law.

(i)	Written authorization from the property owner of the proposed site.

U) Inventory of existing towers and potentia l antenna support structures within a two-mile radius of the proposed site, discu ssing the unavailability of sites and reasons therefor.

(k)	Evidence of the applicant's  good faith efforts to locate the antenna on an
existing structure.





204:178	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(I)	Applicant shall demonstrate that he/she is licensed by the FCC to operate a communications tower and/or communications antenna.

(2)	Communication  towers  and  related  buildings  shall  not  be  permitted   m  the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) and mixed use zones (VMU and NC).

(3)	Communication  antermas located in the residential  zones (R-1 and R-2) and mixed
u se zones (VMU and NC) shall employ stealth siting and design solutions.

(4)	All other uses ancillary to the antenna, tower, and associated equipment are prohibited (except accessory equipment  buildings) , unless  otherwise permitted  in the underlying zone in which  the site is located. This includes, but is not limited to, business offices, maintenance depots and vehicle storage.

(5)	Any utilities extended to the tower site shall be placed underground.

(6)	Other standards of approval for antenna support structures and antenna-related facilities include the following:

(a)	Setbacks are subject to the following criteria:

(1]   Antenna support structures shall be set back from all lot lines a distance
equal to the height of the antenna.

[2] The structure shall be self-collapsing or have a clear fall area setback equal to the height of the structure and any attached antennas.

(b)	Antenna support structure height is subject to the following criteria:

[1]   The maximum  height  of any single antenna support structure located at a single site for one antenna shall be at the lowest height to function at the proposed location,  based upon  specific engineering data pertaining to the function of the antenna support structure to be supplied by the applicant.

[2] An antenna support  structure  may  exceed  the  maximum  allowable height to allow for the co-location of another antenna, provided that the applicant shows evidence that the antenna support structure will be a shared location site.

(c)	Landscaping and screening are subject to the following criteria:

(l] If the antenna support structure site is located in an area of existing trees and vegetation , the existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the fullest extent possible to keep the area as close as possible to its original	condition. The existing trees and vegetation shall be supplemented as needed to fully screen the antenna support base.

[2] If the site lacks adequate  trees  and vegetation,  the entire perimeter  of the fence surrounding the antenna support structure compou nd shall be provided with Level 2 screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter.



204:179	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-49		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49
	
(d)	
Equipment or accessory buildings for towers. Accessory buildings must conform to the applicable building requirement s for the underlying zone in which the tower is located.
	(e)	Security, maintenance,  and fencing are subject  to the following criteria:
[1] The site shall be completely enclosed  by  a  minimum  eight-foot-high fence with a self-locking gate, or the climbing apparatus shall be fully contained and locked within the tower structure.

[2]   All guy wires shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and
shall be located within the fence enclosure.

[3]  All equipment  and buildings  must comply with Township building ,
health, safety, property and other applicable local ordinances.

(f)	Lighting and signs are subject to the following criteria:

[1] No  signs shall be mounted on a communications  tower except as may be required by the Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC), Federal Aviation Admini stration (FAA), or other governmental agency which has juri sdiction.

[2] All communications towers shall have lights as may be required by the FCC, FAA, or other governmental agencies which have juri sdiction . If lighting is not required by other agencies, then lighting acceptable to the Township shall be required .

(g)	Antenna support structures shall be painted in the color that best allows it to blend	into  the  surroundin gs  unless  otherwise  required  by   the   FAA regu lations. The use of grays, blues, and greens may be appropriate.

(h)	Antenna support structure design and structural integrity. The owner of the antenna or antenna support structure shall provid e a registered professional engineer's report documenting that the structure meets the structural standards of the in North Middleton Township Building Code.

(i)	Other provisions.

[l] Prior to issuance of a zoning permit for the erection of an antenna or antenna support structure, the applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.

[2]   A formal land development  plan  is not required if the antenna  is to be
mounted on an existing structure.

[3] Evidence shall be submitted from a registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed installation  will  not exceed the structural capacity of the building or  structure, taking  into  consideration  winds and other loads associated with location.





204:180	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-49	


[4]	ZONING	§ 204-49

The applicant, owner, or operator of the antenna shall be licensed by the
		FCC.
	[5]	The tower  shall comply with all applicable FAA and PennDOT Bureau
of Aviation regulations.
	[6]	Certification of insurance evidencing general liability in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per incident and property damage coverage in the
		minimum  amount of $1,000,000 per incident is required to cover the tower, antenna and structures.
U)	Abandonment.

[1] If an antenna support structure is unused, as evidenced by notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations, for a continuous period of 12 months after said notice, it shall be deemed abandoned.

[2]   Any   antenna   support   structure   or   antenna   that   is   deemed   to   be
"abandoned" must be removed within 90 days.

[3] Removal of the antenna  support  structure shall be the responsibility  of the owner of the antenna support structure. At the time of land development plan approval, the owner and/or his successors and assigns of the antenna support structure must enter into an agreement with the Township regarding the remova l of an abandoned antenna support structure, as herein defined.

[4] In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single tower, this provi sion shall become effective when all users cease operation.

P.	Contractors'  offices  and  storage  yards.  Contractors'  offices  and  storage  yards  are
permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(1)	No machinery, equipment , or materials shall be stored in required front, side, or
rear building setback areas.

(2)	On-lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage/inventory,  and  parking  areas  shall  be clearly delineated.

(3)	All outdoor storage areas shall not  occupy any part of the existing or future street
right-of-way or required off-street parking areas.

(4)	All areas used for the storage and parking  areas shall be aligned and displayed in
an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

(5)	All areas used for the storage/inventory and parking areas shall  be  graded  for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a  durable  and  dustless surface.

(6)	Except  in the Indu stria l Zone,  all permitted  accessory activities which are clearly incidental to the principal use, including drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing , crushing,




204:18 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

or  some  other  preparation   of  building  materials,  plus  any  testing  or  repair  of
motorized equipment, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

(7)	There shall be no retail or wholesale sales of contractor's  equipment  or building materials.

(8)	Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties .

Q.	Convention centers. Convention centers are permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Convention centers may include any of the following uses, provided such u ses are primarily sized, located and designed as one integrated development to serve those per sons or groups of persons attending the convention  center and not the general public of the Township per se:

(a)	Banquet and social halls.

(b)	Commercial day-care facilities.

(c)	Indoor commercial recreation facilities.

(d)	Hotels and motels.

(e)	Indoor theaters.

(f)	Informati on centers and booths.

(g)	Meeting rooms.

(h)	Offices.

(i)	Personal service bu sinesses.

(j)	Restaurant s.

(k)	Retail bu sinesses and concessionaires.

(I)	Taverns and nightclub s.

(2)	The subject property  shall front on or have direct access via  a public  street to an
arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	For all facilities, traffic flow and  ingress-egress shall not  cause traffic  hazards on
adjac ent streets.

(4)	Any booth s or other structures used for the collection of admission and/or parking fees shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle backups on abutting roads and streets during peak arriva l periods. Any other collection of fees (roaming parking lot attendants) shall be conducted in a manner to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining streets.

(5)	All  u ses  within   the  convention  center  shall  be  linked  with  sidewalks  and/or
pathway s to facilitate safe and efficient pedestrian movement s.



204:1 82	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(6)	Any outside pedestrian waiting lines shall be provided with a means of shade.

(7)	Any   exterior   microphone/speaker   system   shall   be   oriented,   arranged   and/or
screened to prevent  any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.

(8)	Exterior trash and recycling  receptacles  shall  be provided.  Such trash receptacles shall  be routinely  emptied  so as to prevent  the scattering of litter and debris. All application s shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

(9)	Convention centers  are eligible to utilize signage applicable to planned centers,  as
listed in § 204-4 1 of this chapter.

(10)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance wit h Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

R.	Day  care,  commercial.  Commercial  day  cares  are  permitted  subject  to  the  following criteria:

(1)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(2)	An outdoor play areas for children shall be provided. Off-street parking lots and areas shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play  areas shall  not  be located in the front yard. All outdoor play areas mu st provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s) . Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor play areas shall  be of a nonharmful type  (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.).

(a)	Add itiona lly, in the mixed use zones (VMU and NC) outdoor play areas shall be located at least 20 feet from property of an existing residen tial use, and screened with Level 2 screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter, along with a fence at least four feet in height. Outdoor play areas shall be limited to use between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

(3)	Off-street  parking  areas  shall  be  provided  and  arranged  so that  persons  and/or
children do not have to cross streets on or adj acent to the site.

(4)	Primary pa ssenger  dropoff  and  pickup  areas  should   be  provided  on  site  and arranged so that the pa ssengers do not have to cross traffic Janes on or adjacent  to the  site, and pa ssenger dropoff and pickup  areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts  (both  pedestrian  and  vehicular)  on  the surrounding  neighborhood.

(5)	Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of persons and/or children under day-care supervi sion at any one time during a seven-day period.

S.	Funeral homes.  Funeral homes are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject property  shall  front on or  have direct  access via  a public  street  to an arteria l or collector road as provided  in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	No  vehicles  will be allowed  to form or stack on an arterial road  as provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter.



204:183	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(3)	All  rooms available for funerals and viewing shall be located within the principal building.

(4)	There  shall  be  no  receiving  vault , preparation  room,  or  display  of merchandise
visible from outside of the principal building.

T.	Golf courses. Golf courses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	In no case shall the golf course design permit or encourage a golf ball to be driven across any building , building lot, parking lot , street, access drive, or driveway.

(2)	Golf paths.

(a)	Golf  path s  shall  be  graded  so  as  to  discharge  stormwater  runoff.  Surface
conditions of paths shall be provided with a durable and dustless surface.

(b)	The golf course design shall minimize golf path crossings of streets, access drives and driveway s. Easily identifiable golf paths must be provided for crossings of streets, access drives or driveways . The golf course design shall both discourage random crossing and require use of the golf path crossings of streets, access drives and driveways. Golf path crossings shall conform with the following:

[l]  Each crossing shall be perpendicular to the traffic movement s.

[2]   Only  one  street,  access  drive  or  driveway  may  be  crossed  at  each
location.

[3]   No crossing is permitt ed between a point  15 feet and  150 feet from the
cartway edge of a street or access drive.

[4] The crossing mu st be prov ided with a clear-sight triangle of 75 feet, measured along the street, access drive or driveway center line and the golf path center line,  to a location on the center line of the golf path, five feet from the edge of the roadway. No permanent obstruction over three feet high shall be placed within this area.

[5] Sight distance. Golf path intersections shall be designed to provide adequate  sight  distance  with  rega rd  to  both  horizontal  and  vert ical a lignment. The required sight distance shall be provided as set  forth in the requirements of Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.

[6]   The golf cart  path shall  not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the
cartway crossing.

[7] Golf path crossings shall  be signed  warning motorists and pedestrians and golfers. The surfa ce of the golf path shall be brightly painted with angle stripes.

[8]   Golf  path  crossings  of  collector   or  arterial  streets  (as  provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter) shall consist of a tunnel that is located below
street   grade.   The  golf  course   design  shall  both   prohibit   on-grade



204:184	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

crossing of collector or arterial  streets  and  require  the use of the  tunnel. The construction of the collector or arterial roadway crossing  of  the tU1U1el shall comply with PennDOT standards.

(3)	All golf course building s  shall be set back 75 feet from any adjoining  roads and 100 feet from property in the residentia l zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(4)	Golf courses may  include the following accessory uses:

(a)	Clubhouse,  which may consist of:

[1] Restaurant , snack bar, lounge and banquet facilities.

[2]   Locker and rest rooms.

[3]   Pro shop.

[4]   Administrative offices.

[5]  Golf cart and maintenance equipment storage and service facilities.

[6]   Guest lodging for those using the golf course, provided:

[a]  No lodging units have separate exterior means of ingress/egress.

[b]   All lodging units shall be contained within the main clubhouse.

[c]   Such guest  lodging  shall have a total occupancy  of no more than 20 units.

[7]  Fitness  and  health  equipment,  including  workout  machines,   spas, whirlpools , saunas and steam rooms.

[8]   Game rooms ,  including  card  tables,  billiards , ping-pong, video games,
pinball machines and other similar table games.

[9]   Baby-sitting rooms and connected fence-enclosed play lots.

(b)	Accessory recreation amenities located outside of a building , including :

[1]   Driving  range,  provided  that  all lighting has  been  arranged  to prevent
glare on adjoining properties and streets.

[2]  Practice putting greens. [3]  Swimming pools.
[4] Tennis, platform tennis, handball, racquetball , squash, volleyball and
badminton  courts.

[5]   Bocce  ba ll,  croquet ,  shuffleboard,  quoits,  horseshoe  pits  and  washers courses.




204: 185	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-49		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49
	
[6]	
Picnic pavilions, picnic tables, park benches and barbecue pits.
	[7]	Hi.king, biking, horseback riding and cross-country ski trails.
	[8]	Playground   equ ipment   and   play   lot   games,   inclu ding   four-square,
dodgeball, tetherball and hopscotch.
(c)	Freestanding maintenance equipment and supply buildings and storage yards.

U.	Home improvement  center,  lumber ,  and  building  materials  sales. Home  improvement centers, lumber,  and  building  materials  sales  are  permitted  subject  to  the  following criteria :

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct  access via  a public  street  to an
arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	On-lot  traffic  circula tion  channels,  storage,  inventory/display/sales,  and  parking
areas shall be clearly delineated.

(4)	All   outdoor   storage,   sa les,   display,   and   inventory   areas   shall   comply   with
§ 204-SOK of this chapter relating to outside display and sales.

(5)	All permitted activities, including drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing, or some other preparation of building materials, plu s any testing or repair of motorized equ ipment , except for the inventory/display/sales, parking, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

(6)	Where  outdoor  storage,  sales,  display,  and  inventory  areas  abut  a   street right-of-way,  a  perimeter  landscape  strip  in  accordance  with  § 204-26  of  this chapter shall be provided.

(7)	Any   exterior   microphon e/speaker   system   shall   be  oriented,   arranged   and/or
screened to prevent any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.

V.	Hospitals. Hospital s are permitt ed subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	Emergency entrances shall not be located or oriented directly toward any from property in the residentia l zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use and must be separated by at least 200 feet from property in the residentia l zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(4)	Primary visitor or pa ssenger dropoff and pickup areas should be provided on site and  arranged  so that  the  passengers do not  have to cross  traffic  lanes  on  or adjacent to the site.





204:186	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(5)	Sufficient off-street stacking area for the  movement  of  the  emergency  vehicles shall be provided on the site. A minimum one-hundred-foot long on-site stacking area for the emergency vehicles shall be provided on the  site.  No  emergency vehicle will be allowed to stack or be stored on public streets.

(6)	The institution  shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the
local and county emergency management agency coordinator.

(7)	Maximum  permitted  height.  The maximum  permitted  height  is 90 feet, provided that  an additiona l two feet of required building setback shall be provided for each one   foot   of   height   for   that   portion   of  building   height   exceeding   35   feet. Furthermore,   any  building   with  floor  space  exceeding  35  feet  in  height  sha ll require   the   applicant   to  obtain  a   letter   to  the  local  and  county  emergency management  agency coordinator indicating that adequate provision has been made for firefighting and rescue activities.

(8)	Accessory uses shall be integrated into the site function and design consistent  with
the creation of a campus-like environment.

(9)	The applicant shall furnish a description of the effect of the proposed use on the delivery of ambulance service. This description shall  include a letter from the agency responsible for ambu lance service in the site's vicinity. Such letter shall describe	the adequacy/inadequacy of existing facilities and  services  to accommodate the proposed use and any suggestions that might enhance ambu lance service. Should it be determined that the proposed use wou ld overburden local ambulance service, the Township may attach conditions of approval that seek to assure adequate levels of service.

(10)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

W.	Hotels and motels. Hotels and motels are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Each rental unit/room shall have its own toilet and bathing or shower facilities .

(2)	No guest vehicles will be allowed to form or stack on an arterial road as provided
in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	For hotels.

(a)	Any accessory eat ing, drinking, retail, personal service, and/or meeting room use should be directly accessible by pa ssing through the principal hotel building:

[l]  But in no case shall drive-through facilities be permitted; and

[2] One additional sign (in addition to those permitted for the principal hotel use) shall be permitted , but shall not be larger than 12 square feet and shall comply with all other applicable provisions of§ 204-41 of this chapter.

(4)	For motels.


204:187	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(a)	Any accessory eating, drinking, retail, personal service and/or meeting  room u se shall  be physically attached to the principal motel building subject to the following:

[l]  But in no case shall drive-through facilities be permitted ; and

[2] One additional sign (in addition to those permitted for the principal hotel u se) shaJI be permitted, but shall not be larger than 12 square feet and shall comply with all other applicable provisions of§ 204-41 of this chapter.

X.	Industrial  use,  heavy .  General  indu strial  uses  are  permitted  subject  to  the  following criteria:

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via  a public  street  to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	The applicant  shall  provide  a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following topics:

(a)	The nature of  the  on-site  processing  operations,  the  materials  used  in  the process, the products  produced,  and the generation and methods for disposal of  any by-products. In addition  the applicant  shall furnish evidence that the disposal  of materials will  be accomplished  in a  manner  that complies with state and  federal regulations.

(b)	The general scale of the operation, specific floor space requirements,  the total
number of employees on each shift, and an overall needed site size.

(c)	Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use  fall  within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances, including but  not limited to those of§ 204-37 of this chapter.

(4)	No  machinery , equipment,  or  materials shall be stored in required  front, side, or
rear building setback areas.

(5)	All machinery,  equipment,  or materials  shall be stored or arranged  in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times .

Y.	Industrial use, light. Light industrial uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The applicant  shall  provide  a  detailed description  of the proposed use in each of the following topics:

(a)	The nature of the on-site  processing  operations, the materials  used  in  the process,  the products produced,  and the generation  and methods for disposal



204:188	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

of any by-produ cts. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that  complies with state and federal regulations.

(b)	The general scale of the operation, specific floor space requirem ents, the total
number of employees on each shift, and an overall needed site size.

(c)	Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, stormwater , solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the  proposed  use  fall  within acceptable levels as regu lated by applicable laws and  ordinances, including but  not  limited to those of§ 204-37 of this chapter.

(2)	No  machinery,  equipment,  or  materials  shall be stored in requ ired  front,  side, or
rear building setback areas.

(3)	All  unpaved  buildin g  setback  areas  shall  be  covered  with  grass  or  similar
vegetative material and shall at all times be clean, vaca nt and well maintained .

(4)	All  machinery,  equipment,  or  materials shall  be stored or  arra nged  in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

Z.	Kenn els, commercial. Commercia l kenne ls are permitt ed subject to the following criteria :

(1)	Minimum lot area. Unless anima ls are kept inside at all times, each  site  shall contain at least five acres; otherwise, the minimum lot area requirement of the under lying zone shall apply.

(2)	Unless animals are kept inside at all times, all animal boarding and related buildings that are not completely enclosed, and any outdoor animal pens, stalls or runways shall be located within the rear yard and shall be provided with bu ffering and screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter, and shall be a minimum of 250 feet from all lot lines in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residentia l  use. Otherwise, the setback requiremen ts of the underlying zone shall apply.

(3)	All structur es where animals are kept shall be soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound and odor from traveling outside, such as solid core doors, sound-absorbent ceilings and forced air ventilation.

(4)	All areas used for outdoor exercise shall be enclosed or securely fenced to prevent
the escape of animals.

(5)	Where permi tted, animals may exercise outside daily between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

AA. Large  solar  energy  production  facility. Large  solar  energy prod uction facilities  are
permitted subject to the following criteria :




204:189	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(1)	The layout, design, and installation of large solar energy production facilities shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the American  Society for  Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other  similar certifying  organizations,  and shall  comply with the North Middleton  Township  Building  Code,  and  with  all other  applicable fire and life safety requirements . The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as part of the application.

(2)	All  on-site utility  and  transmission  lines  shall,  to  the extent  feasible,  be placed
underground.

(3)	All large solar energy production facilities shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited buildings on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way.

(4)	Large solar energy production facilities mounted on the roof of any building shall be subject to the maximum height regulations specified within each the underlying zone.

(5)	The owner  shall  provide  evidence  in  the form  of  stamped  plans certified  by  a licensed  professional  engineer  registered  by the Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania that the roof is capable of holding the load.

(6)	A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at the base of all
pad-mounted transformers and substations or fence.

(7)	The large solar energy production facility owner is required to notify the Township immediately upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The large  solar energy production facility owner shall then have 12 months in which to dismantle and remove the large solar energy production facility  from  the property.  At  the time of issuance of the permit for the construction of the large solar energy production facility, the owner shall provide financial security in form and amount acceptable to the Township to secure  the expense of dismantling  and  removing said structures.

(8)	The owner of the large solar energy production facility shall be required to provide a  certificate of insurance to the Township providing evidence of liability insurance of not  less than $1,000,000 and naming the Township as an additional insured on the policy  or policies of the owner and/or lessee.

BB. Large  wind  energy  production   facility.  Large  wind  energy  production  facilities  are
permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The layout, design, and installation of large wind energy production facilities shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer  Lloyd  Wind  Energies,   the  American   Society  for  Testing  and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the  North  Middleton  Township  Building  Code, and with all other applicable fire





204:190	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

and life safety requirements.  The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as
part of the applicat ion.

(2)	All on-site utility and transmission lines shall be placed undergr ound.

(3)	All large wind energy production facilities shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including variable pitch , tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanica l brakes shall be operated  in  a  fail-safe  mode.  Staff  regulation  shall  not  be cons idered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.

(4)	Noise from small wind turbines shall not exceed 55 decibels, or 10 decibels above ambient noise in any one hour, whichever is higher. Noise is mea sured from the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling or nearest habitable dwelling setback on abutting property, whichever is closer.

(a)	The ambient sound mea surement, known as "A-weighted sound  level"  is taken where the noise from the small wind turbine cannot be heard, or with the small wind turbine shut down. The ambient sound level is rarely found to be constant over time, and is usua lly quite variable. The ambient sound level is considered to be the level that is exceeded 90% of the time when the noise mea surements are taken. The 55 decibel or 10 decibel level may be exceeded during short-term events, such as utility outages and severe wind storms.

(5)	Large  wind  energy  production  facilities shall not  be artificially  lighted, except  to
the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

(6)	Wind turbines and towers shall not display advertising, except for rea sonable identification of the large wind energy  production  facility's manufacturer.  Such sign shall have an area of less than four square feet.

(7)	Wind turbines and towers shall be a nonobtru sive color such as white, off-white or gray.

(8)	All large wind energy production facilities shall, to the extent feasible, be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any occupied building on adjacent  property.

(9)	A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at the base of all
pad- mounted transformers and substations or fence.

(10)	All  access  doors  to  wind  turbines  and  electrical  equipment  shall  be  locked  or fenced, as appropriat e, to prevent entry by nonauthorized  persons.

(11)	All large  wind  energy  production  facilities  shall  be  independ ent  of  any  other structure and shall be located a minimum distance of 1.1 times the turbine height from any inhabited structure, lot line, street right-of-way, or overhead utility line.

(12)	The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind turbine shall be 30 feet above the ground.

(13)	All  large  wind  energy  production   facilities  shall  be  completely  enclosed  by  a
minimum  eight-foot  high  fence  with  a  self-locking  gate,  or  the  wind  turbines'


204:19 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

climbing apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12 feet from the ground, or the wind turbines' climbing apparatus shall be fully contained and locked within the tower structure.

(a)	Any requ ired fencing shall be provided with Level 2 screening in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter .

(14)	The large wind energy production facility owner is required to notify the Township immediately upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The large  wind energy producti on facility owner shall then  have 12 months in which to dismantle and remove the large wind energy production facility  from  the property.  At  the time of issuance of the permit for the construction  of  the  large  wind  energy produ ction facility, the owner shall provide financial security in form and amount accept able to the Township to  secure  the  expense of  dismantling  and  removing said structures.

(15)   The owner of the large wind energy production facility shall be required to provide a certi ficate of insuran ce to the Township providing evidence of liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 and naming the Township as an additional insured on the policy or policies of the owner and/or lessee.

CC. Laundry   and   dry   cleaning   establishment   (industrial).   Laundry   and   dry   cleaning establishments (industrial) are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The applicant  sha ll prov ide a  detailed description of the proposed use in each of
the following topics:

(a)	The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in the process, and the generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In addition the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that  complies with state and federal regulations.

(b)	The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific floor space requirements for each step of the industrial process, the total number of employees on each shift, and an overall needed site size.

(c)	Any environment al impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater , stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impa cts generated by the proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited to those of § 204-37 of this chapter.

(2)	No equipment or materials shall be stored in required front, side, or rear building setback areas.

(3)	All equipment or materia ls shall be stored or arranged in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.




204:192	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

DD. Minera l extraction and recovery establishment s. Mineral extraction and processing
establishments are permitted subject to the following criteria :

(1)	Genera l - operations:

(a)	May  not  injure  or  detract  from  the  lawful  existing  or  permitted  use  of
neighboring properties.

(b)	Must demonstrate compliance with a water feasibility study in accordance
with the requirement s of Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(c)	May not adversely affect the local, efficient and economical extensions of
public services, faci lities and utilities throughout  the Township.

(d)	May not create any significant damage to the health, safety, or welfare of the Township and its residents and property owners.

(e)	May not result in the land area subject to mining operations being placed in a condition that will prevent the use of that land for  economically  and ecologicall y producti ve uses upon completion of the mining operation.

(f)  Must demonstrate compliance with all applicable state and federa l regulations at all times.

(2)	Site plan requirement s.

(a)	As a part of each application, the applicant  shall  furnish  an  accurately sur veyed site plan on a scale no less than 1:2,400 showing the location of the tract or tracts of land to be affected by the operation. The surveyed site plan shall be   certified by  a  registered  professional  engineer  or  a  registered professional  land surveyor with assistance from experts in related fields and sha ll include the following:

[I]   The   boundaries   of   the   proposed   land   affected,  together   with   the drainage area above and below the area.

[2]   The locat ion and names of all streams, road s, railroads, and utilit y lines on or immediately adjacent to the area.

[3] The location of a ll buildin gs within 1,000 feet of the outer perimeter of the area affected, and the names and addresses of the owners  and present occupants;

[4]  The purpose for which each building is used.

[5]   The name of the owner of the affected area and the names of adjacent
landowner s, the municipa lity, and the county.

(3)	Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area will be 100 acres.

(4)	Screening and buffering. A fence measuring at least eight feet in  height  must enclose the area of actual mining operations. All fencing shall be provided with buffering  and  screening  in accordance  with  §  204-26  of  this  chapter.  Earthen


204:193	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

berms   are  preferred   and  shall  be  provided   in  accordance  with  the  mmunum
standards:

(a)	Sha ll have a  slope of not  less than  one vertical  to two horizontal and must
extend at least eight feet above the ground level of the highest target.

(b)	The crest of the berm at the eight-foot minimum height limit shall be at least four  feet in width as measured between the wall of the berm facing the range and the opposite wall.

(5)	Setback. The following table identifies minimum setbacks imposed upon specific features of the mining and other extractive-related uses from abutting and/or adjacent uses:

	Exist ing
Residential	Existing Nonresidential	Residentially
Zoned	
Adjoining	Public/
No nprofit	Cemetery
or Stream	
Abutting
Quarry-Related	Use	Build ing	District	Street	Park	Bank	Property
Feature	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)	(feet)
Stock piles or spoil
pi les	300	300	1 ,000	100	300	100	100
Min eral processing equipment  (e.g.,	300	300	1,000	100	300	100	100
rushers, sorters,							
convey ors, dryers,							
etc.)							
Quarry pit	300	300	1,000	IOO	300	100	100
On-site access roads and ofT-strt'Ct	300	300	500	100	300	100	100
parking, loading and							
vehicle storage and							
weighi ng facilities							
Other operat ional
equipment,	300	300	500	100	300	100	100
structu res and/or							
improvements							

(6)	Access.

(a)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(b)	Traffic  flow  and  ingress-egress  shall  not  cause  traffic  hazards  on  adjacent
streets.

(c)	All access drives shall be designed and located in accordance with the requirements of § 204-32 and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(d)	All access drives serving the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five-foot wide cartway for a distance of at lea st 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. In addition, a fifty-foot-long gravel section of access drive should be placed ju st beyond  the preceding two-hundred-foot paved section to help collect any mud that may have attached to a vehicle's wheels.

(7)	Traffic  impact. The applicant shall provide a traffic study prepared  in accordance with the requirements of Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.



204:194	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(8)	Reclamation. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with Section 7(c) of the Pennsylvania Act No. 1984-219, as may be amended.J-O The applicant shall provide a  detailed description  of the proposed  use of the site, once reclamation has  been completed, including a description of any zoning and/or subdivision approvals or remedies that wou ld be necessary to accommodate  the proposed  use. Finally, the applicant  shall  provide  written   notification  to  the  Township   within   30  days whenever a change in the reclamation plan is proposed to the PADEP.

(9)	Operations progress report. Within 90 days after commencement of surface mining operations, and each year thereafter , the operator shall file an operations and progress report with the Zoning Officer setting forth all of the following:

(a)	The name or number of the operation.

(b)	The location of the operation with reference to the nearest public road.

(c)	A description of the tract or tracts, including a site plan showing the location
of all improvements, stockpile, mining pits, etc.

(d)	The name and address of the landowner or his duly authorized representative.

(e)	An annual report of the type and quantity of mineral produced.

(f)	The current status of the reclamation work performed in pursuance of the approved reclamation plan.

(g)	A maintenance report for the site that verifies that all required fencing, berming and screening has been specifica lly inspected for needed  repairs and/or maintenance and that such needed repairs  and/or  maintena nce  has been performed.

(h)	Verification that the proposed use continues to comply with all applicable state regu lations. The operation shall furnish copies of any approved permit s and/or any notices of, violation issued by the PADEP.

(10)	Responsibility for road maintenance and repair; road bonding. The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any damage to  Township  roads caused by traffic associated with the mineral extraction or recovery operations pursuant to the provisions of 67 Pa. Code Chapter 189, hauling in excess of posted weight limit. The Township may require the landowner and/or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of any such damage, pursuant to the said provisions of the Pennsylvania Code.

EE. Mini-storage warehouses. Mini-storage warehouses are permitted subject to the following criteria:







30.	Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. §3307(c).


204:195	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(1)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(2)	All areas u sed for storage and loading, interior traffic aisles, and required off-street parking areas, shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.

(3)	Parking  may  be  provided  along  interior  traffic  aisles  adjacent  to  the  building s.
These aisles shall be at least 26 feet wide when storage units open onto one side of the aisle only and at least 30 feet wide when storage unit s open onto both sides of the aisle.

(4)	Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required off-street parking areas, or
loading areas.

(5)	Outdoor storage shall be limited to vehicles, boats and trailers.

(6)	The storage of inoperable, unlicensed, or inspected motor vehicles outside of a completely enclosed building shall be prohibited.

(7)	All mini-storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.

(8)	Mini-storage unit s shall be used solely for the dead storage of property. The following lists examples of uses expressly prohibited upon the site:

(a)	Auction s,  except   for  disposition  of  storage  contents  by  storage  property owner or represent ative.

(b)	Commercial wholesale or retail sales, or garage sales.

(c)	Offices,  except  for  an  office that  is part  of  the  mini-storage operation,  or residential dwellings.

(d)	The servicing,  repair, or  fabrication  of  motor  vehicles,  boat s, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar equipment.

(e)	The operation  of  power  tools,  spray-p ainting equipment,  table saws,  lathes,
compressors, welding equipment , kilns, or other similar equipment.

(f)	The establishment  of a transfer and storage business.

(g)	The storage of trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse, explosives or flammable mat eria ls, ha zardous substances, animal carcasses or skins, or similar items that are dangerou s, noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or vibrations.

(h)	The applicant shall adequatel y demonstrate that all mini-storage/rental and/or use contracts shall  specifically prohibit these uses.

(9)	All garage doors of mini- storage unit s or outdoor storage areas shall not be located directly facing toward any property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2)  or existing  residential use.





204:196	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(10)	Minimum  separation between  buildings  shall be 20 feet which shall allow  passage
by emergency vehicles.

(11)	Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. Such receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

FF.  Motor freight terminal.  Motor freight terminals are permitted subject to the following
criteria:

(1)	The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	The subject property shall be located no closer than 500 feet from the residential zones  (R-1 and R-2) and/or property containing a school, day-care  facility, park, playground,  library , hospital, or nursing, rest or retirement home.

(4)	All  structures  (including  but  not  limited  to  air  compressors,  fuel pump  islands,
kiosks) shall be set back at least 50 feet from any street right-of-way line.

(5)	Access driveways shall be a minimum of 28 feet, and a maximum of 35 feet wide.
All access drives onto the same road shall be set back at least 150 feet from one another, as measured from closest points of cartway edges.

(6)	Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate equal to that required for each of the respective uses comprising the truck stop. The applicant shall also present credible evidence that the number of oversized off-street parking spaces provided for trucks will be adequate to accommodate the expected demand generated by truck patrons. Any gates or other barrier s used at the entrance to parking areas shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle backups onto adjoining roads during peak arrival periods.

(7)	Trash receptacles shall be provided amid off-street parking areas that shall be routinely emptied. Furthermore, a working plan for  the  regular  cleanup  of  litter shall be furnished and continuously implemented  by the applicant.

(8)	All uses involving drive-through restaurants and/or drive-through vehicle service and/or washing shall provide sufficient on-site stacking lanes to prevent vehicle backups  on adjoining  roads.

(9)	All vehicle service and/or repair activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. No outdoor storage of parts,  equipment,  lubricants,  fuels,  or other materials used or discarded in any service or repair operations shall be permitted.

(10)	The outdoor storage of unlicensed vehicles is prohibited.

(11)	All vehicles and machinery shall be repaired and removed from the premises promptly.




204:197	OJ - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(12)	The demolition or junking  of  vehicles  and machinery  is prohibited.  Demolished vehicles and/or parts thereof shall be removed within two weeks after arrival.

(13)	Any exterior public address system shall be designed and operated so that  the audible levels of any messages conveyed over the system will not exceed the ambient noise levels of the use as measured at each of the property lines.

(14)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter 180,
Subdivision and Land Development.

(15)	The applicant shall furnish evidence that the storage and disposal of materia ls and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with all applicable state and federal regulations.

GG. Motor  vehicle  auction.  Motor  vehicle  auctions  are  permitted  subject  to  the  following criteria:

(l) Any site used for the sa le, parking and/or storage of more than 150 vehicles shall front on or have direct access via a pub lic street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Vehicles as part of inventory/display/sales shall not occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way (including sidewalks) or required off-street  parking areas.

(3)	Vehicles as pa rt of inventory/display/sales sha ll not be permitted in required front,
side, or rear building setback areas.

(4)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adj acent streets.

(5)	On-lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage,  inventory/display/sales,  and  parking
areas shall be clearly delineated.

(6)	All a reas used  for  the  storage,  inventory/display/sales, parking, and  otherwise permitt ed servicing of vehicles shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

(7)	All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing of vehicles shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surfa ce.

(8)	All permitted activities except for the stora ge, inventory/display/sales, parking, and those norma lly required to be performed at the gasoline/fuel and air pumps, and washing and vacuuming areas shall be performed within a completely enclosed building .

(9)	All ventilation equipment outlets, fume collection,  and  other  similar  equipment associated with the service/repair work area(s) and/or service/repair and wash bay doors/opening shall not be located or oriented directly toward any from property in the residential zones (R- 1 and R-2) or existing residential use.





204:198	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(10)	The demolition  or junking  of  vehicles  is prohibited.  The storage of vehicles  and
related parts shall be within a completely enclosed building.

(11)	No vehicle, except those with current registration and offered as part of the inventory/display/sales, shall be stored upon the site for more than 35 days.

(12)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter  180,
Subdivision and Land Development.

HR. Nightclubs. Nightclub s are permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(1)	A nightclub serving and/or selling alcohol shall be located in accordance and otherwise comply with  the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.

(2)	All  buildings   shall  be  completely  enclosed  and  soundproofed  in  a  manner  to
prevent sound from traveling outside, such as solid core doors.

(3)	The owner(s) and operator(s) of a  nightclub  shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the patrons.

II.	Off-track  bett ing parlors.  Off-track  betting  par lors are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(!) The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arteria l or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	No portion of an off-track betting parlor shall be located within 500 feet of another
off-track betting parlor.

(4)	No  portion of a  building  occupied  by  an off-track  betting  parlor  shall be located within 500 feet from property in the residentia l zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(5)	No portion of a building occupied by  an off-track betting parlor shall be located within 500  feet of any property which contains any one or more of the following specified land u ses where minors may congregate:

(a)	Commercia l recreation  facility,  indoor/outdoor;

(b)	Day-care facility primarily  for children;

(c)	Library;

(d)	Park, playground , playfield;

(e)	Placeofworship;

(f)	School,  pr ivate/public;

(g)	Swimming pool, public; or

(h)	Other lands, buildings , and uses where minors are permitted to congregate.



204: 199	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(6)	No more  than  one off-track betting parlor  may be located within one building or
on one lot.

JJ.	Outdoor  farmer's  market  and/or   flea  market.   Outdoor  farmer's  markets  and/or   flea markets are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The retail display/sales area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle, or  other regular geometric shape which encompasses a ll display stands, booths, tables or  stalls, plus any adj oining aisles and/or walkways from which consumers can inspect  items for sale. The retail display/sales area shall include all indoor and/or outdoor areas as listed above.

(2)	All areas u sed for outdoor retail display/sales area shall not be permitted m required front, side, or rear building setback areas.

(3)	All outdoor display and sales of merchandise shall begin no earlier than one hour before officia l sunrise, and must be completed no later than one hour after official sunset.

(4)	Any exterior microphon e/speaker system shall be  oriented,  arranged  and/or screened to prevent any objectionab le noise impact on adjoining properties.

(5)	Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

KK. Outdoor shooting ranges. Shooting ranges are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(l) A development or site plan shall identify the safety fan for each firing range. The safety fan sha ll include the area  necessary to contain all projectiles, including direct fire and ricochet. The safety fan configuration shall be based upon qualified expert testimony regarding the trajectory of the bullet and the design effectiveness of berms, overhead baffles, or other safety barriers to contain projecti les to the safety fan.

(2)	The firing range, including the entire safety fan, shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high, nonclimbable fence to prevent unauthorized entry into  the  area. Range caution signs with eight-inch tall, red letters on a white background shall be posted at a maximum fifty-foot  intervals around the range perimeter. Signs shall read "SHOOTING RANGE AREA. KEEP OUT!".

(3)	The firing range shall also be provided  with  bufferin g, landscaping and screening
in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter.

(4)	All surfaces located within the safety fan, includ ing the backstop, overhead ba ffles, berm s and range floor, shall be free of hardened surfaces, such as rocks or other ricochet-producing  materials.







204:200	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(5)	The applicant shall present credible evidence that the sounds of shooting to the nearest property containing an existing residential use does not exceed the ambient noise level.

(6)	The range boundarie s must be set back at least 500 feet from any lot line or street right -of-way line, and also located at least 1,000  yards  from  property  in  the residential  zones (R-1 and R-2)  or existing residential  use. The range boundaries shall be determined as a one-hundred-fifty- yard radius from each of the stands.

(7)	The facility shall  be operated  no  earlier  than  one hour  after official  sunrise, and mu st be completed  no later than one hour before official sunset.

(8)	All operations shall be conducted in accordance with Na tional Rifle Association guidelines.

LL.  Parks,  playground s and  other  noncommercia l recreational  uses. Parks,  playgrounds  and
other noncommercial  recreational uses are permitted  subject to the following criteria :

(1)	Parks, playgrounds, and other noncommercial  recreational uses shall be developed in a manner that preserve s natural features, watercour ses, unique rock outcrops, slopes of greater than 15% and vegetation.

(2)	Hours  of  operation   and  activities  sha ll  comply  with  all  applicable  Township
policies and regulation s relating to parks and public outdoor facilities.

(3)	Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provid ed. Such receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

MM.Place of worship. Places of worsh ip are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Primary  pa ssenger  dropoff   and  pickup   areas  should   be  provided  on  site  and a rranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic Janes on or adjacent to the site, and passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicu lar) on the surrounding  neighborhood.

(2)	All places of worship with attendance or seating capacity of 250 or more students shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	Off-street parkin g areas shall be provided and arranged so that persons do not have
to cross streets on or adjacent to the site.

NN. Principal  waste  handling  facilities. Principal  waste  handling  facilities  are permitt ed subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Any processing of solid waste (including but not limited to incineration, composting, shredding, compaction, material separation, refuse derived fuel, pyroly sis, etc.) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.



204:201	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(2)	No refuse shall be deposited or stored, and no bu ilding or structure shall be located within  100 feet of any lot line, and 250 feet of any from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(3)	Any externa l area  used for the unloading, transfer, storage or depositing of waste sha ll be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet in height. Such fence shall be  completely  sight  obscuring  and  maintained  in good condition . Any  gate in a fence  shall  be  similarly  constructed  and  maintained  and  shall  be  kept  securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.

(4)	All  facilities shall  provide sufficiently  long stacking lanes  into the facility, so that
vehicles waiting will not have to back upon onto public road s.

(5)	All access drives serving the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five-foot-wide cartway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. In addition, a fifty-foot-long gravel section of access drive should be placed just beyond the preceding two-hundred-foot paved section to help collect any mud that may have attached to a vehicle's wheels. The owner and/or operator shall be responsible for removing any mud from public roads caused by persons traveling from the site.

(a)	Otherwise, a ll access drives shall- be designed and located in accordance with the  requirements  of  § 204-32  of  this  chapter  and  Chapter  180,  Subdivision and Land Development.

(6)	Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against the indiscriminat e and unauthori zed dumping, all areas of the site shall be protected by locked barricad es, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthori zed times or locations.

(7)	Hazardous waste, as defined in the Code of Federa l Regulations, Title 40, Chapter
1, Part 261, or as amended, shall not be disposed of within the proposed area.

(8)	Litter control shall be exercised to prevent  the scattering of wind-borne debris, and a working plan for the cleanup of litter shall be submitt ed to the Township.

(9)	The   unloading,   processing,   transfer ,  and   deposition   of   solid   waste   shall  be
continuously supervised by a qualified facility operator.

(10)	Any waste that cannot be used in any disposal process, or material that is to be recycled , shall be stored  in leak- and vector -proof containers. Such containers shall be designed to prevent their being carried by wind or water. These container s shall be stored within a comp letely enclosed building.

(11)	Al l storage of solid waste shall be indoors in  a  manner  that  is  leak-  and vector-proof. During normal operation, no more solid waste shall be stored on the property than i s needed to keep the facility in consta nt operation; but, in no event, for more than 72 hours.





204:202	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(12)	A contingency plan for the disposal of solid waste during a facility shutdown shall
be submitted to the Township.

(13)	Leachate from the solid waste shall be disposed of in a manner in compliance with any applicable state and federal laws or regulations. lf leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage facility, pretreatment shall be required and appropriate permits shall be obtained from the applicable agencies and authorities. In no event shall leachate be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other manner inconsistent with the PADEP regulations.

(14)	All structures shall be set back at least a distance equal to their height.

(15)	A water supply feasibility report shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, to demonstrate that sufficient water resources are available to serve the proposal.

(16)	Any sanitary landfill must be owned and operated by a county or municipality or their authorities.

(17)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter 180, Subdivision  and Land Development.

1.	Public/private utility building or structure. Public/private utility buildings or structures
are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The applicant  must  demonstrate  that  the  selected location  is necessary  for public
service and the u se cannot be supplied if located elsewhere.

(2)	In the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) and mixed use zone (VMU and NC), any permitted public building shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings in the neighborhood , and building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding development in the neighborhood. In all other zones all height, area, setback and coverage standards within the underlying zone shall apply.

(3)	In the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) and mixed use zones (VMU and NC), the outdoor storage of vehicles, materials, and equipment shall not be permitted .

(4)	Buildings and structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residentia l use.

PP. Sawmi lls. Sawmills are subject to the following criteria:

(I)	The subject property  shall front on or have direct access via  a public street to an arterial or collector  road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	All access drives serving the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five-foot-wide cartway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. In addition, a  fifty-foot-long  gravel  section  of access  drive should be placed




204:203	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

just beyond the preceding two-hundred-foot paved section to help collect any mud that may have attached to a vehicle's wheel s.

(a)	All access drives shall be designed and located in accordance with the requirement s of§ 204-32 of this chapter and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(4)	On-Lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage,  loading, and  pa rking  areas  shall  be
clearly delineated.

(5)	All areas u sed for storage, loading, and parking shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

(6)	Except in the IND Zone, all buildings, structures, storage and  loading areas shall be a minimum of 250 feet from all lot lines.

(7)	Storage and loading areas and other activities of similar nature shall not occupy
any part of the street right-of-way or required off-street parking areas.

(8)	Except in the IND Zone, all cu tting, sawing, grinding, or other processing shall be cond ucted within a completely enclosed building.

(9)	Except the IND Zone, sawmills shall only operate no earlier than one hour  after the official sunri se, and must be completed no later than one hour before official sunset on weekdays. No weekend or holiday operation shall be permitted.

QQ. Schools, commercial. Commercial  schools are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	All  schools  wit h  an  enrollment  of  250  or more students shall front  on or  have
direct  access  via  a  public street  to  an  a11erial  or collector  road  as provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students under  educational supervision at any one time during a seven-day period.

RR. Schools,  public  or  private.  Public  or  private  schools  are permitted  subject  to  the
follow ing criteria:

(1)	All  schools  with  an  enrollment  of  250  or  more  students shall  front  on  or have
direct  access  via  a  public  street  to  an  arterial  or  collector  road  as provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Primary pa ssenger dropoff and pickup areas should be provided on site and arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site, and pa ssenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian  and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cau se traffic hazards on adjacent streets.




204:204	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(4)	"Enrollment" shall be defined as the largest number of students under  educational
supervision at any one time during a seven-day period.

SS.   Schools, vocational. Vocational  schools are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	All schools with an enrollment of 250 or more students shall front on or have direct  access via a public street  to an arterial or collector road as provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Traffic flow and ingress-egre ss shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(3)	On-lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage,  loading,  and  parking  areas  shall  be clearly delineated.

(4)	All areas used  for storage,  loading, and parking  shall be aligned and displayed in
an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

(5)	All areas used for the storage, loading, and parking areas  shall  be  graded  for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable  and  dustless surface.

(6)	Enrollment  shall  be defined  as  the largest  number of students under  educational
supervision at any one time during a seven-day period.

(7)	The applicant  shall provide  a  detailed  description  of the proposed  use in each of
the following topics:

(a)	The  nature  of  the  on-site  achv1t 1es  and  operations,  the  types  of material s stored, the duration  period  of  storage  of  materia ls,  and  the  methods  for disposal of any surplus or damaged materials . In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence  that  the  disposal  of  materials  will  be  accomplished  in  a manner that complies with state and federal regulations.

(b)	Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrica l disturbance, wastewater, stormwater, solid wa ste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further furnish evidence that  the impacts generated by the proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as  regulated by applicable laws and ordinance, including but not limited to those listed in § 204-37 of this chapter.

TT. Shopping centers. Shopping centers are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject  property shall front on or have direct access via  a public street  to an arteria l or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	All access drives shall be set back  at  least 200 feet from the intersection  of any street right-of-way lines.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	On-lot traffic circu lation channel s and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.



204:205	01 - Ol - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

(5)	For off-street parking and loading, refer to §§ 204-35 and 204-36. For landscaping,
refer to § 204-30.J•

(6)	In addition to vehicular access to the property, the applicant shall be required to design and construct pedestrian linkages with any adjoining area within the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or mixed use zones (VMU and NC), even if they are not yet developed. Such pedestrian linkages shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient access to the shopping center from the nearby areas.

UU. Taverns/bars. Taverns/bars are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	A tavern/bar shall be located in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.

(2)	The owner(s)  and operator(s)  of a tavern/bar  shall be responsible  for the conduct
and safety of the patrons.

X.	Travel plaza s. Travel plazas are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Travel plazas may include a wide range of services and  goods  to  professional drivers and the general public are congregated , such as fuel sales, vehicle service, overnight accommodations and restaurant s subject to  the  specific  standards  for each use in accordance with the provision s in Articles Ill and IV of this chapter.

(2)	The subject property  shall front  on or have direct access via  a public  street to an arterial or collector road as provided  in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(3)	Travel  plazas  must  be  provided  with  separate entrance and  exitways with  paved access drives.

(4)	All access drives serving the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five-foot-wide cartway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-wa y line.

(a)	All access drives shall be designed and located in accordance with the requirements of § 204-32 and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(5)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent street s.

(6)	On-Jot traffic circulation channels, storage, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated. Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.

(7)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

WW.Treatment  center. Treatment centers are permitted  subject to the following criteria:






31.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


204:206	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	ZONING	§ 204-49

(1)	A treatment center shall be directly affiliated with  a  parent  institution  or organization which shall provide full-time supervision and administration to the residents  of the treatment center.

(2)	A common cooking and eating area must be provided; no cooking or  dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites.

(3)	The residents of the treatment center shall reside on the premises to benefit from the services provided .

(4)	No portion of a  treatment  center  shall  be  located  within  500  feet  of  another treatment center, group home facility,  group  care facility,  and/or  halfway  house, but in no case shall be located within the same block.

(5)	No portion of a building occupied by a treatment center use shall be located within 500 feet of any property which contains any one or more of the following specified land uses where minors may congregate:

(a)	Commercial recreation facility, indoor/outdoor ;

(b)	Day-care facility primarily  for children;

(c)	Library;

(d)	Park, playground,  playfield;

(e)	Place of worship;

(f)	School, private/publi c;

(g)	Swimming pool , public ; or

(h)	Other lands, building s, and uses where minors  congregate.

(6)	Each application shall be accompanied by a statement describing the following:

(a)	The composition of the treatment center;

(b)	The policies and goals of the treatment center and the means proposed to
accomplish  those goals;

(c)	The characteristic s of the residents and number of resident s to be served;

(d)	The operating method s and procedures to be used ; and

(e)	Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the treatment center.

(7)	No treatment center may change the type or maximum number of clients being housed , except upon additional approval by the entity with juri sdiction for initial approval.

(8)	The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local  and county emergency management agency coordinator.




204:207	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-49	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-49

XX.	Truck drop lot. Truck drop lots are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(l) The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street to an arterial or collector road as provid ed in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Truck drop Lots must be provided with separate entrance and exitways with paved access drives.

(3)	All access drives serving the site shall have a paved minimum thirty-five-foot-wide cartway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line.

(a)	Otherwise, all access drives shall be designed and located in accordance with the requirements of § 204-32 and Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(4)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(5)	On-lot traffic circu lation channels, storage, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated. Fuel delivery shall not impede traffic flow patterns.

(6)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter  180,
Subdivision and Land Development.

(7)	Trnck drop lots shall provide permanent bathroom facilities connected to the public sewerage system or, if public sewerage is not available, to an on-lot septic system(s). The facilities shall always be available to full- and part-time workers at the drop lot, and drivers and associated personnel visiting the lot.

YY. Warehousing, distribution, and wholesaling. Warehousing , distribution, and wholesaling establishments are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject propert y shall  front on or have direct access via  a public street to an arteria l or collector road as provided in § 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	Storage, loading, parking areas, and other activities of similar nature shall  not occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way (including sidewalks) or required off-street parking areas.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.

(4)	On- lot  traffic  circulation  channels,  storage,  loading,  and  parking  areas  shall  be
clear ly delineated .

(5)	All  areas  used  for  storage,  loading,  and  parking  shall  be  aligned  in  an  orderly
fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.

(6)	All areas used for the storage, loading, parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.

(7)	The applicant  shall provide  a  detailed description  of the proposed  use in each of
the following topics :




204:208	01   -01-2014
 

§ 204-49	


(a)	ZONING	§ 204-50

The  nature  of  the  on-site  activities  and  operations,  the  types  of materials
		stored,  the  frequency  of distribution  and  restocking,  the duration  period  of
		storage of materials, and the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged
		materials. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
		materials  will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and
federal regulations.
	(b)	The general  scale of the operation,  in terms of its market area, specific floor
		space requirements  for each activity, the total number  of employees on each
		shift and an overall needed site size.
	(c)	Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise,
	smoke,   dust,   Jitter,   glare,   vibration,   electrical   disturbance,   wastewater,
	stormwater, solid waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or
	eliminate any negative  impacts. The applicant shall  further furnish evidence
	that the impacts generated  by the proposed use fall within acceptable levels,
	as regulated  by  applicable  laws and ordinance, including but  not limited  to
	those listed in § 204-37 of this chapter.
(8)	The applicant shall submit a traffic study prepared in accordance with Chapter  180,
Subdivision and Land Development.


§ 204-50. Accessory uses.

A.	Accessory apartments. Accessory apartments are subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted as an accessory use to a principa l
owner-occupied, single-family detached  dwelling.

(2)	An  accessory  apartment   may  be  contained  within   a  portion   of  an  accessory
building or within a portion of the main structure.

(3)	No accessory apartment shall comprise more than 30% of the habitable floor space of the principal dwelling.

(4)	The applicant  shall demonstrate  that  an  approved  means  of  sewage disposal and
reliable water supply shall be used.

(5)	All  units  contained  on floors above or below  grade shall have a direct  means of
escape to ground level.

(6)	Any modifications to the external appearance of the building (except fire escapes) shall complement its residential character.

B.	Automated  banking  facilities.  Automated  banking  facilities are permitted  subject  to the
following criteria:

(1)	Within the VMU Zone, drive-through facilities shall be prohibited.

(2)	Otherwise , all drive-through automated banking facilities shall comply with the
provisions  for drive-through  facilities herein § 204-50E of this chapter.


204:209	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-50

(3)	Otherwise, automated banking facilities are permitted, subject to the following criteria :

(a)	Trash receptacl es shall be provided and routinely emptied to present the scattering of litter, and the applicant shall furnish and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and debris.

(b)	All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain convenient parking spaces, so that the movement of vehicles will not be hampered by those cars belonging to person s using the automated teller machines.

(c)	Where practicabl e, all  automated  teller  machines  shall  be  located  on  a building  wall  facing  away  from  an adjoining property  within  the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) and any existing, adjacent residential use.

C.	Day care, accessory . Accessory day cares are exempted from zoning permit requirements , except that the principal residentia l dwelling must comply with all other applicable requirement s of this chapter.

D.	Day care, family. Family day-care uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Family   day-care  facilities   shall  be  conducted   within  a  single-family  detached
dwelling.

(2)	A  family  day-care  facility  shall  offer  care and  supervision to  no  more than  six
different nonresident persons during any calendar day.

(3)	All prin cipal structures permitted to be family day-care  facilities shall maintain an exterior appearance  that  resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellin gs in the neighborhood. No modification to the external appearances of the buildin g (except fire and safety requirements) which would  alter  its residential  character shall be permitt ed.

(4)	Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear or side (in order of preference) of the building and shall not be located on any wall facing a street right-of-way.

(5)	An outdoor play area for children shall be provided. Off-street parking lots and areas shall not be used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall  not be located in the front yard . All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s). Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor pla y area s shall be of a nonharmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.)

(a)	Additionally , outdoor play areas shall be located at lea st 20 feet from property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2)  or existing residential  use, and screened in accordance with § 204-26 of this chapter, along with a fence at least four feet in height. Outdoor pla y areas shall be limited to use between 8 :00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.





204:210	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	ZONING	§ 204-50

(6)	Off-street parking area s shall be provided and arranged so that persons do not  have
to cross streets on or adjacent to the site.

(7)	Primary  passenger  dropoff  and  pickup  areas  should  be  provided   on  site  and arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the  site,  and passenger  dropoff and pickup  areas shall be located  in a manner that minimizes  detrimental  traffic   impacts   (both  pedestrian  and  vehicu lar)  on  the surround ing neighborhood.

(8)	All parking areas shall be screened from abutting property  in the residential  zones
(R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(9)	"Emollment"  shall be defined as the largest number of persons under  day-care
supervision at any one time during a seven-day period.

(10)	All  family  day  centers  must  comply with  the current Uniform Construction  Code
regulations .

E.	Drive-through  facilities for permitted uses. Drive-through  facilities for permitted uses are
permitted  subject to the following criteria:

(l)	The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road as provided  in
§ 204-39 of this chapter.

(2)	No drive-through facility shall be located within 25 feet from an abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 or R-2) Zones or existing residential use.

(3)	Traffic flow and ingress-egress  shall not  cause traffic hazards on adjacent  streets.
Ingress and egress standards shall meet  the requirements  set forth  in Chapter  180, Subdivision and Land Development.

(4)	All drive-through facility buildings and structures shall be designed and planned to take  advantage of and be compatib le with natural and built  features of the site and area.

(5)	Where practicable, all drive-through window and lanes shall be separated from the parking lot's interior driveways.

(6)	Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and lanes shall be located on a  building wall facing away from an abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(7)	Where practicable, all drive-through window facilities and lanes shall be located on
a building wall facing away from a public street right-of-way.

(8)	On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.

(9)	Sufficient stacking lanes  shall be provided associated  with drive-through windows to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining streets. A minimum one-hundred-foot-long on-s ite stacking area for the veh icles shall be provided on the site. No vehicle will be allowed to stack or form on public streets. Furthermore,  each drive-through lane




204:211	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-50	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-50

shall  have  on-site  directional  signs,  indicator  lights  or  pavement  markings identifying the direction of travel and lane status (i.e., open vs. closed).

(10)	Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall  be  oriented,  arranged  and/or screened to prevent any objectionable noise impact on abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residentia l use.

(11)	A traffic impact study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of traffic into and out of the facility in accordance with Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development.

F.	Fa1m occupations. Farm occupation uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	For the purposes of this section,  farm occupations may involve any one of a wide range  of uses, so long as there is no more than one farm occupation per lot, and it remains   secondary and clearly  incidental  to  and  compatible  with  the  active agricultural  operation and/or farm use of at least 10 acres.

(2)	For farm or agricultural parcels of  up  to  50  acres  in  size,  while  the  farm occupation is in operation, no non-farm subdivi sion of the site shall be permitted.

(3)	No more than four nonresidents shall be employed by the farm occupation, and at
least one owner of the farm occupation must be engaged in the farm occupation.

(4)	Activities associated with the farm occupation shall be conducted  in such a way that no traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution , odor, smoke, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, electromagnetic interference , or otherwise, shall  be noticeable at or beyond the lot line.

(5)	A descr iption of the operations proposed in sufficient  detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing  traffic congestion, noise,  glare,  air  pollution, water pollution, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation and  other  performance standards in accordance with this chapter.

(6)	The farm occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that its noise exceeds at
the lot line the ambient noise Level of the applicable time of day.

(7)	Except as otherwise provided herein this section, all activities associated with the farm occupation shall take place in one completely enclosed building. Where practicable, the farm occupation shall be conducted within an existing farm or agricultural operation building:

(a)	However, any new building constructed for use by the farm occupation shall be located to the rear (behind) the agricultural operation's or farm's principal buildings , and must be no less than I 00 feet from any adjoining roads or properties.

(b)	Any new building constructed for use by the fann occupation shall be of a design  so that  it  is compatible with  the  surrounding  buildings  and can  be




204:212	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	ZONING	§ 204-50

readily converted to agricultural operation or farm use, or removed, if the
farm occupation is discontinued.

(8)	The sales of goods or merchandise may occur on the premises, limited to those goods or merchandise that are produced on the premises , or are customarily incidental to the business use and directly related thereto.

(9)	No manufacturing,  repairing, or other  mechanical work shall be performed  in any outdoor  area.  Such  activity  shall  be  conducted  within  a  completely  enclosed building in such a way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic interference, or smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the lot line.

(10)	All parking , loading, and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining roads and properties:

(a)	Parking and loading areas must be located to the side or rear (behind) of the building  containing the farm occupation; and

(b)	Outdoor storage of goods and materials must be located to the rear (behind)
the building  containing the farm occupation.

(11)	No part of a farm occupation shall be located within 75 feet of any side or rear lot line,  nor 150 feet from an abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 or R-2 Zones) or existing residential use.

(12)	The farm occupation shall occupy no more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area, nor more than one acre of lot area. However , any driveway serving the farm occupation and the agricultural operation or farm use, shall not be calculated as land serving the farm occupation.

(13)	No more than  50% of the land devoted to a farm occupation  shall be covered by
buildings, structures, parking or loading areas, or any other impervious surfaces.

(14)	Vehicular access to the farm occupation shall be limited to the same driveway connection with the public street right-of-way that serves the agricultural operation or farm use and/or related dwelling. No additional roadway connection shall be permitted  for the farm occupation.

(15)	Drive-through s shall be prohibited .

(16)	Sign(s) advertising a farm occupation shall comply with§ 204-41 of this chapter or maximum l 0 square feet.

G.	Home occupations. Home occupation uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	For the purposes of this section, home occupations may involve any one of a wide range of uses, so long as there is no more than one home occupation per lot, and it remains secondary and clearly incidental to and compatible with the primary use of the premi ses as a single-family detached dwelling for living purposes.

(2)	No more than two nonresidents shall be employed by the home occupation , and at
least one resident of the dwelling must be engaged in the home occupation.



204:213	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-50

(3)	No modifications to the external appearance of the building which wou ld alter its residentia l character shall be permitted.

(4)	Activities associated with the home occupation shall be conducted in such a way that no traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution , odor, smoke, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, electromagnetic  interference,  or  otherwise,  shall  be noticea ble at or beyond the lot line.

(5)	A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in produ cing traffic congestion, noise, glare,  air pollution, water pollution, vibration , fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potenti ally harmful or obnoxious ma tter or radiation and other performa nce standards in accordance with this chapter.

(6)	The home occupat ion shall not  be conducted in a manner that its noise exceeds at
the lot line the ambient noise level of the appli.cable time of day.

(7)	All activities associated with the home occupation shall take place in a completely enclosed building.

(8)	No sa les of any goods or merchandise shall occur on the premises, other than those goods or merchandise that are produced on the premises, or are customarily incidental to the business use and directly related thereto, such as  hair  care products by a barber or beautician .

(9)	No manu facturing, repairing, or other mechanical work sha ll be performed  in any outdoor  area.  Such  activity  shall  be  condu cted  within  a  completely  enclosed building in such a way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic interference, or smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the lot line.

(10)	No goods or materials  shall be displayed or stored so as to be visible from the
exterior of the premises .

(11)	Home occupations sha ll be limited to not more than 25% of the habitable floor
area of the dwelling unit , or 500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less.

(12)	All parking areas shall be screened from abutting property in the residentia l zones
(R-1 and R-2) or existing residentia l use.

(13)	Vehicu lar access to the home occupation shall be limited to the same driveway connection with the public street  right-of-way  that  serves  the  single-family detached dwelling. No additiona l roadway connect ion sha ll be permitted for the home occupation.

(14)	The home occupation  shall not require delivery or pickup by tractor-trailer trucks.

(15)	Drive throughs shall be prohibited.

(16)	No accessory building or structure shall be utilized as a home occupation, except that an accessory building or structure may be used as storage area for the home occupation, provid ed that said area sha ll be included in the total area permitted for




204:214	Ol - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	ZONING	§ 204-50

a home occupation  use and,  further,  that  no such accessory building  or structure
shall be accessible to the public for bu siness purposes.

(17)	Sign(s) advertising a home occupation shall comply with§ 204-41 of this chapter.

H.	No-impact home occupation. No-impact home occupation uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.

(2)	The bu siness shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.

(3)	There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of substantial nature.

(4)	There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but not limited to parking, signs or lights.

(5)	The bu siness may not use any equipment or process  that creates noise,  vibrat ion, glare,  fumes, odors or electrical interference, including interference with radio or television  reception, which is detectable in the neighb orhood.

(6)	The  business  activity  may  not  generate  any  solid  waste or  sewage discharge  in volume or type which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.

(7)	The bu siness activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not
occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.

(8)	The business may not involve any illegal activities.

I.	Noncommercial  keeping   of   livestock.  Noncommercial   keeping  of  livestock  shall  be permitted  subj ect to the following specific criteria:

(1)	The following lists minimum lot  areas  for  housing  or  keeping  noncommercial livestock.

(a)	Minimum  lot area shall be one acre. Additionally, the following list specifies
additional lot area requirements by size of livestock kept:

[l] Group 1: livestock whose average adult weight is less than 10 pounds shall be permitted at a livestock density of 12 per acre, with a maximum number of 50 livestock.

[2] Group 2:  livestock whose average adult weight is between 10 and 65 pounds sha ll be permitted at an animal density of two per acre, with a maximum  number of 20 livestock.

[3] Group 3: livestock whose average adult weight is  greater  than  65 pounds shall be permitted at an animal density of one per acre, with a maximum number of 10 Livestock.


204:2 15	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-50

(2)	The keeping of a combination of animal types (Groups  I, 2 and 3) shall require an animal  density  equa l to the ratio  of the number  of livestock, by type.  In no case shall a lot contain more than 50 total livestock.

(3)	The following lists minimum  setbacks (from all lot lines) imposed upon the placement of any structure used to house noncommercial livestock. Should one structure be used to house a combination of animal types, the most  restrictive setback shall apply:

(a)	Livestock less than 10 pounds: a twenty-five-foot  setback.

(b)	Livestock greater than or equal to  10 but  less than or equal to 65 pound s: a forty-foot setback.

(c)	Livestock greater than 65 pound s: a fifty-foot setback.

(4)	Structures used to house noncomm ercial livestock shall not be permitted in the front yard.

(5)	All outdoor pa sture/recreation areas shall be enclosed with fencing to prevent the escape of the livestock. Such fencing must be set back at least 10 feet from all lot lines.

(6)	All livestock hou sing structures and all animal wastes shall be properly stored and
disposed of so to minimi ze odors perceptible at the lot line.

(7)	The applicant  sha ll  furnish  evidence  of  an  effective  means  of  livestock  waste disposal which shall be  implemented.  All  manure  management  pra ctices  and operations shall comply with the provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Mana gement Act , as amended.J2

J.	Outdoor cafe/dining. Outdoor cafes/dining are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	Outdoor furnishings shall be limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas, benches, trash/recyc ling type facilities , outdoor heaters , and reservation podium .

(2)	Outdoor  furnishings  shall be stored  in an enclosed  facility after normal operating hours.

(3)	The limits of the outdoor dining area shall be defined. In addition to decorative fencing and landscaping, decorative planters , posts with ropes, and other removable enclosures, as well as reservation podium , are encoura ged as a way of defining the area occupied by the outdoor dining area.

(4)	Any  exterior  microphone/speaker   system   shall   be   oriented,   arranged   and/or screened to prevent any objectionable  noise impact  on  abutting  property  in  the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

(5)	Exterior  trash and recycling receptacl es shall be provided amid any outdoor dining
area.  Such  trash  receptacles   shall  be  routinely  emptied  so  as  to  prevent  the


32.	Editor's Note: Sec 3 Pa.C.S.A. §501 et seq.


204:216	01 - 01-2014
 
§ 204-50	ZONING	§ 204-50

scattering  of  litter  and  debris.  All  applications  shall  include  a  description  of  a working plan for the cleanup of litter.

(6)	Advertising  or promotional  features, other than permitted signs in accordance with
§ 204-41 of this chapter, shall be limited to umbrellas and canopies.

(7)	Outdoor dining shall not impede public sidewalks. Where permission is granted by the entity having juri sdiction over the public right-of-way in which the outdoor dining is proposed, a minimum of six feet  uninterrupted  (obstacle free) pathway can be continuou sly maintained, public sidewalks may be utilized  for  outdoor dining areas.

(8)	All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize noise, odor, and vibration, light or electrica l interference on abutting property in  the  residential zones (R-1 and R-2) and existing residential use in accordance with § 204-37  of this chapter.

K.	Outside  display  and  sales.  Outdoor  display  and  sales  are  permitted  subject  to  the
following criteria:

(1)	To be considered outside display and sales, the goods, material, and merchandise which  are being displayed must be offered for sale to customers. Otherwise, it shall be   considered outdoor storage or  stockpiling  must  comply  with  outdoor storage and outdoor stockpile provisions set forth elsewhere in this chapter.

(2)	Except as provided herein in subsections below, outside display and sales of goods, material, and merchandise offered for sale shall not occupy any public right-of-way (including public sidewalk areas), required setbacks, buffer yards, nor required parking and loading areas. In no case shall the location of such outside display and sales areas occur  within  any  area  used  for  pedestrian  or  vehicular  circulation , pa rking or loading, or emergency vehicle access (e.g., fire lanes).

(3)	The location of the out side display and sales shall not interfere with or otherwise
obstruct pedestrian and vehicu lar traffic:

(a)	Traveling within a public right-of-way includ ing sidewalks and streets.

(b)	Entering  or  leaving  the  lot  or  adj acent  lots  (including  access  drives  and
driveways).

(c)	Shall be not located within a clear-sight triangle.

(4)	No outside displa y and sales shall occur on areas with a slope in excess of 15% or w ithin any area designated as the floodway as provided for in Chapter 112, relating to floodp lain management.

(5)	Outside display and  sales  areas  shall  be graded  for proper  drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface.

(6)	Outside display and sales areas shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion
so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.



204:217	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-50

(7)	No signage, except as authorized by§ 204-41, shall be permitted.

(8)	Intended outside sale and display areas shall be graphically depicted and other uses
indicated upon any permits and/or plans required by the Township.33

L.	Railroad   spurs  (branch  lines).  Railroad  spurs  (branch  lines)  for  permitted   uses  are
permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	The subject property shall abut and have direct access to main or trunk rail line.

(2)	There shall be no setback requirement where a property  abuts a main or trunk rail line.

(3)	The railroad spur, and all related rail outdoor loading/unloading shall  not  be located or oriented directly toward any property in the residential zones (R-1 and R-2) or existing residential use.

M.	Roadside stand. Roadside stands are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	There shall not be more than one roadside stand permitted per lot.

(2)	The sale of products shall be conducted from a portable roadside stand.

(a)	Roadside stands may be  located  in any  required  front  yard  area , provided they  are at least 30 feet from any street right-of-way and any lot line and at least 50 feet from any side or rear lot line:

[l] Portable roadside stands shall be dismantled at the end of the harvesting season;

[2] All portable structures and signage used as part of the roadside stand operation shall be moved to an area to the side or rear of the principal structure and appropriately screened from view; and

[3] Otherwise a permanent road side stand structure shall be permitted under the following condition s:

[a]   The permanent roadside stand structure shall be located at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line;

[4]  The maximum floor area of the structure used as a roadside stand shall
not exceed 300 square feet.

(3)	In addition to the required parking spaces, beyond those required for the permitted principal  use,  roadside  stand  parking  shall be  provided  on the  lot  in  accordance with  § 204-35 of this chapter .

(4)	Unless otherwise specified herein this subsection, signs shall comply with § 204-41 of this chapter:




33.	Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. I , General Provisions, Art. II).


204:218	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	ZONING	§ 204-50

(a)	The maximum  number signs permitted on the lot per roadside stand shall be
two and they shall be attached to the produce stand;

(b)	The maximum sign area for any one sign shall be five square feet.

N.	Rural occupations. Rural occupation uses are permitted subject to the following criteria:

(1)	For the purposes of this section, rural occupations may involve any one of a wide range  of uses, so long as there is no more than one rural occupation per lot, and it remains  secondary and clearly incidental to and compatible with the single-family detached  dwelling on a lot of least five acres.

(2)	No more than four nonresidents  shall be employed by the rural occupation, and at
least one owner of the rural occupation must be engaged in the rural occupation.

(3)	Activities associated with the rural occupation shall be conducted in such a way that no traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, odor, smoke, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, electromagnetic interference, or otherwise, shall be noticeable at or beyond the lot line.

(4)	A description of the operations proposed  in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare,  air  pollution, water pollution, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation and other performance standards in accordance with this chapter.

(5)	The rural occupation  shall not be conducted  in a manner that  its noise exceeds at
the lot line the ambient noise level of the applicable time of day.

(6)	Except as otherwise provided herein this subsection, all activities associated  with the rural occupation shall take place in one completely enclosed building. Where practicable, the rural occupation shall be conducted within an existing agricultural, farm, or other accessory building:

(a)	However , any new building constructed for use by the rural occupation shall be located to the rear (behind) of the single-family detached dwelling,  and must be no less than 100 feet from any adjoining roads or properties.

(b)	Any  new  building  constructed  for use by the rural occupation shall be of a design  so that  it  is compatib le with  the  surrounding  building s and  can  be readily  converted  to  another  permitted  use,  or  removed,  if   the   rural occupation is discontinued.

(7)	The sales of goods or merchandise may occur on the premises, limited to those goods or merchandise that are produced on the premises, or are customarily incidental to the bu siness use and directly related thereto .

(8)	No manufacturing , repairing, or other mecha nical work shall be performed in any outdoor area. Such activity shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building in such a way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic interference, or smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the lot line.



204:219	01 -01 - 2014
 
§ 204-50	· NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-51

(9)	All  parking,  loading,  and  outdoor  storage areas shall  be screened  from adjoining
roads and properties:

(a)	Parking and loading areas mu st be located to the side or rear (behind) of the building containing the rural occupation; and

(b)	Outdoor storage of goods and material s mu st be located the rear (behind) the building containing the rural occupation.

(10)	No part of a rural occupation shall be located within 75 feet of any side or rear lot line, nor 150 feet from an abutting property in the residential zones (R-1 or R-2 Zones) or existing residential use.

(11)	The rural occupation shall occupy no more than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area ,  nor more than the building footprint (coverage or area) of the single-family detached  dwelling, nor  more than  one acre of lot area. However , any driveway serving the  rural occupation and the single-family detached dwelling shall not be calcu lated as land serving the rural occupation.

(12)	No more than 50% of the land devoted to a rural occupation shall be covered by buildings, structures, parking or loading areas, or any other impervious surfaces.

(13)	Vehicular access to the rural occupation shall be limited to the same driveway connection with the public street right-of-way  that  serves  the  single-family detached dwelling. No additional roadway connect ion shall be permitted  for  the rural occupation.

(14)	Drive throughs shall be prohibited.

(15)	Sign(s) advertising a rural occupation shall comply with§ 204-41 of this chapter.

(16)	Proof  of  tax  identification  number  shall  be provided  and  placed  on  the zoning permit.


§ 204-51. Temporary uses.

A	Temporary farm employee hou sing. Temporary  farm employee housing is permitted
subject to the following criteria:

(l)    For the purposes  of this section, act ive agricultural operations and/or farm u ses of at least 10 acres shall be permitted one additional dwelling unit to house farm worker s (and their fami lies) who are employed by the owner of the agricultura l operation and/or farm, for such time as the employee works the land of the owner.

(2)	The dwelling unit shall be located within the  rear  yard  of  the  principal  farm dwell ing and shall further comply with all setback requirements imposed upon single-family detached dwellings.

(3)	The dwelling unit shall be occupied at least 120 days a year by at least one person who is employed on the farm where the dwelling unit is located . If this condition is not satisfied, the dwelling unit shall be removed within 120 days.



204:220	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-51                                                      ZONING                                                      § 204-55

(4)	Upon the proper installat ion of the dwelling unit , the Zoning Officer shall issue a temporary use and occupancy permit. Such permit shall be reviewed every  12 months until such time as it is required to be removed. A fee, in the amount to be set by the Board of Super visors, shall be paid by the landowner upon each renewal of the temporary use and occupancy permit. Such fee shall be based upon the cost of the annual review of the permit.


ARTICLE V
Nonconformities

§ 204-52. Continuation.

Any use,  building or stru cture lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter may
be continued, although it is not in conformit y with the regulation s specified by this chapter.


§ 204-53. Abandonment.

If a nonconforming use of land or of a building or structure ceases or is discontinued for a continuous period of one yea r or more, subsequent use shall be in conformity with the provi sions of this chapter. Vacating of buildings or structures, nonuse of land or nonoperative status of use constitutes evidence of a discontinued use.


§ 204-54.  Extension of a nonconforming use of land.

Any lawful nonconforming use of land, exclusive of buildings and structures and the use contained therein, may be extended upon the lot upon which it exists at  the  time  of  the effective date of this chapter, but such extension shall conform to area and lot regulations and the design standards of this chapter and to the percentage limitation as set forth in § 204-55 of this chapter. The extension of a nonconforming u se on a lot shall be limited to the lot which was  in existence on the effective date of this chapter.


§ 204-55. Expansion or alteration.

A.	Any nonconforming u se may be expanded or altered through the acquisition of a special exception and subject to the following criteria and those contained in § 204-64C of this chapter :

(1)	Expansion  of the nonconformit y  sha ll be confined to the lot on which  it was
located at the time the use became nonconforming.

(2)	The total of all such expansion s or alterations of use shall not exceed an additiona l 50% of the area of those buildings or structures or land devoted to  the nonconforming u se as they existed on the date on which the use of such buildings, structures or land  first  became  nonconformities.  The  applicant  shall  furnish conclu sive evidence as to the extent of the nonconformit y when it was created.





204:221	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-55                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 204-56

(3)	Provision for vehicular access, off-street parking and off-street loading shall be consistent with standards required by this chapter.

(4)	Provision for yards, building height and building area shall be consistent with the standards required for permitted  u ses  in the zone in which the nonconformity  in question is located.

(5)	Appearance should be harmonious with surrounding properties. This feature includes but is not limited to landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control, architectural control and maintenance of all improvements and open spaces.

(6)	Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary  to  adequately  protect neighboring properties. This includes but is not limited to fences, walls, plantings and open spaces.

(7)	The  expansion   shall   not   create   new   dimensional   nonconformities   or  further
increa se existing dimensional nonconformities.

(8)	No  expa nsion  of  a  nonconforming   structure  or  a  nonconfonning   use  located outside of a structure existing  on  the  effective  date  of  this  chapter  shall  be permitted in the Floodplain Zone.

(9)	Excluding expansion, any modification , alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming use or structure located in the Floodplain Overlay Zone shall comply with § 204-21 of this chapter.

(10)	Excluding expansion, any modification , alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a nonconforming use or structure located  in  the Airport Overlay Zone shall comply with § 204-22 of this chapter.

B.	Any dimen sional nonconformity may be reduced by permitted use.  The extension  or enlarg ement of  a dimensional nonconformity  may also be permitted  by right ; however, su ch extension or enlargement shall be limited to a total of a 10% increase of the dimensional nonconformity when it was originally created.


§ 204-56. Substitution or replacement.

Any nonconforming use may be replaced or substituted by another nonconforming  use by special exception, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that the proposed use is at least equally compatible with the surrounding area, as the original nonconforming use. In addition, the pr oposed nonconforming use shall not increase any dimensional nonconformiti es. The Zoning Hearin g Board may attach rea sonable conditions to the special exception to keep the use compatible within its surroundings.










204:222	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-57                                                      ZONING                                                      § 204-59

§ 204-57. Restoration.

Any lawful nonconformin g use or structur e which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm or other similar active cause may be recon structed in the same location, provided that:

A.	A nonconforming u se or structure which has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of whereby the cost of restoring the use or structure to its befor e-damaged condition wou ld equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the use or the structur e before the damage occurred shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and all other applicable standa rds of this chapter.

B.	A nonconforming use or structure which has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of whereby the cost of restoring the use or structure to its before-damaged condition would be less than 50% of the market value of the use or the structure before the damage occurred may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of the damage, provided that:

(1)	Such repairs or reconstruction are commenced within one year of the date of such
damage and shall be carried on without interruption ; and

(2)	The reconstructed use or structure does not exceed  in height, area, and volume, of
the use or buildin g destroyed.


§ 204-58.  Previously expanded nonconforming  uses and structures.

It is the express intent and purpose of this chapter that if a building , structure,  sign or  land wa s expanded or extended to the limits of expan sion for a nonconforming building, structure, sign or u se of land as author ized by a prior zoning regulation or ordinance, no  further expansion of said buildin g, structure, sign or land shall be authorized. In the event a nonconforming building, structure, sign or u se of land was expanded to a portion of the limits of expansion author ized by a prior zoning regulation or ordinance, additional expansion  if permitt ed by this chapter shall only be authorized to the amount of expansion not previously utilized pursuant to sa id prior zoning regulation or ordinance.


§ 204-59.  Nonconforming  lots.

A lot owned individu ally and separately and separated in ownership from any adjoining tracts of land on the effective date of th.is chapter, which has a total lot area or lot width less than prescribed in this chapter, provided that the lot was and still is in single ownership and no opportunity is present to consolidate two or more contiguou s lots into a lot conforming to the district requirement , may be used provided such lot shall be developed in conformity with all applicable district regulation s other than the minimum lot area, lot width and yards. Existing sma ll lots meeting the above stipulations shall comply with the following permitted reductions:

A.    Side yards may be proportionately reduced ba sed upon the percentage that the existing
sma ll lot is not in compliance, but in no event shall the side yard be less than five feet.




204:223	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-59                                       NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                       § 204-60

For example, if the existing small lot is 25% less than the minimum lot size requirement ,
the side yard may be reduced by 25%.

B.	Rear yards may be proportionately reduced in the same manner  as  in  Subsection  A above, but in no event shall the rear yard be less than 10 feet.

C.	Front yard relief shall comply with  the  average  setback  of  the two existing  principal buildings with the greatest setbacks located within  100 feet on each side of the proposed building .


ARTICLE  VI
Zoning Hearing Board

NOTE:  This  article predominantly  presents  regulations  contained  within  the MPC  (53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.). Should the MPC be revised subsequent to adoption of this chapter in a way that is inconsistent with the contents of this Article VI, the language of the revised MPC shall apply.

§ 204-60. Establishment and membership.

A.	There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board which shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of resident s of the Township. Their terms of office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term . Member s of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the Township. Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.

B.	The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board . The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of§ 204-61, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and  discussions of the Board  to the same and full extent as provided  by law for Board members , including specifica lly the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings ,  and  shall  have  all  the power s and  duties  set forth in  this  chapter  and  as otherwise  provided by  law.  Alternates  shall  hold  no  other  office  in  the municipality , including  member ship on the Planning Corrunission  and Zoning  Officer.  Any alternate may participate  in any proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Hearing Board bl,lt shall not be entitled  to  vote as a member of the Zoning Hearing Board nor be compensated unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to § 204-61 of this chapter.







204:224	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-61                                                         ZONING                                                         § 204-63

§ 204-61. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board.

The Zoning Hearing Boa rd shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all member s of the Zoning Hearing Board, but the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own member ship to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in § 204-63. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as many alternate member s of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to provide a quorum . Any alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on the Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board ha s made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pur suant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case ba sis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the commonwealth. The Zon ing Hearing Board shall keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Township and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors upon request.


§ 204-62. Expenditures for services.

Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, lega l counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. Member s of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensat ion, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, for the perfo1mance of their duties when designated as alternate members pursuant to § 204-61, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate of compen sation authori zed to be paid to the members by the Board  of Supervisors.


§ 204-63. Hearings.

A.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following  requirements:

(1)	Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant , the Zoning Officer , such other persons as the govern ing body shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made timely request  for  the same. Such mailed notices shall state the location of the site and the nature of the request. It shall also state the time, date and location of the proposed hearing. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing sha ll be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.





204:225	01 - Ol - 2014
 
§ 204-63	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-63

(2)	The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however , shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board , expenses for engineering , architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.

(3)	The first hearing before  the Board  or hearing officer shall be commenced  within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant bas agreed, in writing, to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to  by the applicant , in writing,  or on the record.  An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board  or  hearing  officer  shall assure that  the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's  case-in-chief.  And  applicant may, upon request, be granted additional bearings to complete his case-in-chief, provided the persons opposed to  the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings . Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and municipality , be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.

B.	The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the municipality may, prior to the decision of the hearing , waive decision or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.

C.	The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by the application who  has made timely appearance of record  before  the Zoning Hearing Board and any other  person, including civic or community organizations  permitted  to appear  by  the Zoning  Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have power to require that all persons who  wish to be considered parties enter appearances,  in  writing,  on  forms provided by the Zoning Hearing Board for that purpose.

D.	The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and  issue  subpoenas  to  compel  the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers , including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

E.	The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and  argument  and cross-examine  adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.






204:226	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-63	ZONING	§ 204-63

F.	Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

G.	The Zoning Hearing Board or the hea ring officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Zoning Hearing Board, if the transcript is ordered by the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the Zon ing Hearing Board if such appeal is made, and, in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.

H.	The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed , and shall not inspect the site or  its surroundings  after the commencement  of hearings with any party or bis representative unless all parties are given an opportunity  to be present.

I.	The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render  a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the Act or of this chapter, rule or regulation shall contain  a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclu sion is deemed appropr iate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendation s available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer.  Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to hold t e required hearing within  60 days from the date of the applicant's request for hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last  day  it  could have met  to render a decision in the same manner as provided in § 204-63A of this chapter. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.

J.	A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its



204:227	01-01 - 2014
 
§ 204-63	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-64

date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with  the Zoning Hearing Board not later than the last day of the hearing , the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or fmdings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.

K.	Effect of Zoning Hearing Board's decision:

(I)	If the variance or specia I exception is granted or the issuance of a permit is approved or other action by the appellant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be secured and the authorized action begun within two years after the date when the variance or special exception is finally granted or the issuance of a permit is finally approved or the other action by the appellant is authorized and the building or alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within three years of said date. For good cause, the Zoning Hearing Board may at any time, upon application in writing, extend either of these deadlines.

(2)	Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permit s within said two-year period or, having obtained the permit, should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year period , it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant has waived , withdrawn or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all provi sions, variances and  permit s granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Zoning Hearing Board.

(3)	Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration within said two-yea r period , but should he fail to complete such  construction  or  alteration within said thr ee-year period , the Zoning Hearin g Board may, upon 10 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the granted va riance or special exception or the issuance of the permit or permits or the other action authorized to the appellant or applicant, if the Zoning Hearing Board finds that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within such three-year period and if the Zoning Hearing Board further finds that condit ions have  so altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the variance, permit or action, that revocation  or  rescission  of  the action is ju stified.

(4)	As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as part of the original application befor e the Zoning Hearing Board , the granting of a timetab le associated with the request which would supersede the deadlines imposed in Subsection K(l) thorough (3) above. In so doing, the applicant mu st demonstrate that the times requested are logically related to norm al and expected progres s of the project. In approving a timetable under this section, the Zoning Hearing Board must establish and bind a definite timeframe for the issuance of a zoning permit and the completion of construction of the project.


§ 204-64. Zoning Hearing Board's functions.

The Zoning Hearing Board  shall  have the exclusive juri sdiction to hear and render decisions in the following matters:





204:228	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-64	ZONING	§ 204-64

A.	Substantive challenges to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance,  except  those  brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to § 204-72F of this chapter.

(1)	If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to have  merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:

(a)	The impact  of  the  proposal  upon  roads,  sewer  facilities,  water  supplies, schools and other public service facilities.

(b)	If the proposal is  for  a  residenti al  use,  the  impact  of  the  proposal  upon regional housing  needs  and  the  effectiveness of  the proposal  in  providing housing  units  of  a  type  actually  available  to  and  affordable  by  classes  of person s otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or Zoning Map.34

(c)	The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed  by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains , aquifers, natural resources  and other natural features.

(d)	The impact of  the  proposed  use  on  the  site's  soils,  slopes,  woodlands, wetlands,  floodplain s,  natural  resources  and  natural  features,  the degree  to which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources  to development and any adverse environmental impacts.

(e)	The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land u ses which are essential to public health and welfare.

(2)	Public notice of the hearing shall be provided  as specified in § 204-72B(2) of this
chapter.

(3)	The Zoning  Hearing  Board  shall commence its hearings within  60 days after the request is filed unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.

(4)	The Zoning Hearing Board shall  render its decision within 45 days after  the conclusion of the last hearing. If the Board fails to act on the landowner's request within  this time limit, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.

B.	Cha llenges to the  validity  of  the  Zoning  Ordinance,  ra1smg  procedural  questions  or alleged  defects  in the process  of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance.

C.	Special exceptions, as provided for in  this chapter and subject to all applicable requirements,  including but not limited to:





34.	Editor's Note:The Zoning Map is on ftle in the Township offices.


204:229	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-64	NORTH MIDDLETON  CODE	§ 204-64

(1)	Filing  requirements.  In addit ion  to  the  required  zoning  permit  information  (see
§ 204-70) each special exception application shall include the following:

(a)	Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.

(b)	Names   and   address   of   adjoining   property   owners,  including   properties
directly across a public right-of-way.

(c)	A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(d)	A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to demonst rate compliance with all applicable provision s of this chapter.

(2)	General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following:

(a)	The proposed  use  shall  be  consistent  with  the  purpose  and  intent  of  the Zoning Ordinance.

(b)	The proposed u se shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjoining or nearby properties.

(c)	The proposed use will not substantially change the character of the subject property' s neighborhood.

(d)	Adequate public facil ities  are  available  to  serve  the  proposed  use  (e.g., schools,  fire,  police  and  ambulance  protection,  sewer,  water   and   other utilities, vehicu lar access, etc.).

(e)	For development within the Floodplain  Overlay  Zone, that  the application complies with those requ irements listed in § 204-2 1 of this chapter.

(f)	The proposed use  shall  comply  with  those  criteria  specifically  listed  in Art icle IV of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter.

(g)	The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the Township's Comprehensive Plan.

(3)	Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board,  in  approving  special  exception applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes Listed above, including conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer, and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in Article VII.

(4)	Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the special exception pursuant to § 204-64C shall become an officia l part of the record for said special exception. Approva l of any special exception will also bind the use in accordance with the submitted site plan. Therefore, should a change in the  site  plan  be required as part  of the approva l of the use,  the applicant shall revise the site plan



204:230	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-64	ZONING	§ 204-64

prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the origina lly approved site plan shall require the obtainment of another special exception approval.

D.	Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances  where  it  is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:

(1)	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity , narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape or exceptional topographical or other   physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary   hardship is due  to  such  conditions  and not  the circumstances or conditions  generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or zone in which the property is located.

(2)	That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is not possibility that  the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter  and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable reasonable use of the property .

(3)	That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.

(4)	That the variance, if authorized, will not a lter the essential character of the zone or neighborhood  in  which  the property  is  located , nor  substantially  or permanentl y impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.

(5)	That  the  variance,  if  authori zed,  will  represent  the  minimum  variance  that  will afford relief and will represent  the least modification possible of the regulations in issue.

(6)	That variances within the Floodplain  Overlay Zone shall comply with§ 204-2 1 of
this chapter.

(7)	In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach  such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this  chapter. These condition s shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer,  and failure to  comply with  such conditions shall  constitute a violation  of this chapter and subject to the pena lties described in Article VII.

(8)	Filing requirements.  In addition to the required zoning permit  information (see
§ 204-70), each variance application shall include the following:

(a)	Ground floor plans and elevations of existing and/or proposed structures.

(b)	Names and  addresses  of  adjoining  property  owners,  including  properties
directly across a public right-of-way.





204:23 1	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-64	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-65

(c)	A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(d)	A written  description  of the proposed  use in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(9)	Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving  variance applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and  the purposes listed  above, including  conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other uses  in the same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer, and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in Article VIL

(10)	Site plan approval. Any site plan  presented in support of a variance shall become an official part of the record for said variance. Approval of any variance will also bind the use in accordance with the submitted site plan.

E.	Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.

F.	Appeals from a determination by a  Municipal  Engineer  or  the  Zoning  Officer  with reference to the administration of any provisions contained within the Floodplain Zone.

G.	Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

H.	Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 204-65 (and any subsequent amendments of the Act).Js

I.	Appea ls from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance  with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and/or stormwater management for applications not involving a subdivision/land development, or a planned residential development as regulated in Articles V and VII of the Act, respectively.J6


§ 204-65. Parties appellant before Zoning Hearing Board.

Appeals under § 204-64E, F, G, H and I and proceedings to challenge this chapter under
§ 204-64A and B may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any person aggrieved. Requests for  a variance under § 204-64D and for special exception under § 204-64C may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with the  permission  of  such landowner. Any appeal shall state:



35.	Editor's Note: Sec 53 P.S. § 10101 ct seq.

36.	Editor's Note: Sec 53 P.S. § I 050I et seq. and 53 P.S. § I 070I ct seq.


204:232	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-65	ZONING	§ 204-67

A.	The name and address of the appellant and applicant.

B.	The name and address of the landowner of the real estate to be affected.

C.	A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such proposed change together with a plot plan drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the request.

D.	A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.

E.	A statement  of the section of this chapter  under  which the request may be allowed and
reasons why it should or should not be granted.


§ 204-66. Time limitations.

A.	No person shall be allowed to  file any proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board later than   30  days  after   an  application   for  development,  preliminary   or  final,  has  been approved  by  the Zoning  Officer or the agency responsible  for granting such approval  if such  proceeding  is designed  to  secure  reversal  or to  limit  the approval  in any manner unless  such person alleges and  proves that he had no notice or knowledge or reason to believe that  such approval had  been  given. If such person has succeeded to his  interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.

B.	The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of this chapter or the Officia l Zoning Map,37 pursuant to § 204-65, as amended, shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative prelimin ary approval.


§ 204-67.  Stay of proceeding.

A.	Upon filing of any proceed ing referred to in § 204-65 and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Zoning Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay wou ld cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having juri sdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for development, preliminary or fina l, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having juri sdiction of zoning appea ls to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a



37.	Editor's No te: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.


204:233	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-67                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                   § 204-69

hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the appea l is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appella nts to post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a fmal decision of the court. The question whether or not such petition shou ld be granted and the amount of the bond shall be within the sou nd discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.

B.	If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate court su stains the order of the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction  of  zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorneys' fees incurred by the petitioner.


§ 204-68. Appeal.

Any per son, taxpayer or the Township aggrieved by  any  decision of  the  Zoning  Hearing Board may wit hin 30 days after such decision of the Zoning Hearing Board seek review by the Court of Common Pleas of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Article X-A of the Act,38 as amended.


ARTICL E VII
Administration

§ 204-69. Administration and enforcement; violations and penalties.

A.	Administ ration .

(1)	Zoning Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, appointed by the Board of Supervisors, who shall be known as the "Zoning Officer." The Zoning Officer shall be appointed at the first meeting of the Board of Supervisors in January to serve until the first meeting of January next following and shall thereafter be appointed annually to serve for a term of one year and/or until his successor is appointed. The Zoning Officer may succeed him self. He/she shall receive such fees or compensation as the Board of Supervisors may, by resolution , prov ide. The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office within the Township. The Zoning Officer may designate an employee of the Township as his assistant, subject  to the approva l of the Board of Supervisors, who shall exercise all the powers of the Zoning Officer during the temporary absence or
disability of the Zoning Officer.39



38.	Ed itor's Note: Sec 53 P.S. § 1100I-A et seq.

39.	Ed itor's No te: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch . 1,General Prov isions, Art. II).


204:234	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-69	ZONING	§ 204-69

(2)	Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:

(a)	To receive, examine and process all applications and permits as provided by the  terms  of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall also issue zoning permits for  special  exception  and  conditional  uses  or  for  variances  after  the  same have been approved.

(b)	To record and file all applications for  zoning permits or certificates of use and  occupa ncy and accompanying plans and documents and keep them for public  record.

(c)	To inspect properties to determine compliance with all prov1s1ons of this chapter as well as conditions attached to the approval of variances, special exception s, conditional uses and curative amendments.

(d)	To inspect nonconforming uses, structures and lots and to keep a filed record of such nonconformin g uses and structures, together with the reasons why the Zoning  Officer identified them as nonconformities, as a publi c record and to examine  them periodically , with the view of eliminating the nonconforming uses under the existing laws and regulations.

(e)	Upon the request of the Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, present to such bodies facts, records and any similar information on specific request s to assist such bodies in reaching their decisions.

(f)	To be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Official Zoning Map up to
date, including any amendments thereto.

(g)	Upon the approva l by the Zoning Hearing  Board of a  special  exception  or upon   the  approva l  of  a  conditional  use  by  the  Board  of  Supervisors  for development  located  within   the  Floodp lain  Zone,  written   notice  of  the approva l shall be sent by registered  mail  from the Zoning Officer  to  the Pennsylva nia Department of Community and Economic Development.

(h)	To remain eligible for the Nationa l Flood Insurance Program, the Zoning Officer shall submit a biannual report to the Federal Insurance Administration concerning the statu s of the program in the Township (the report form shall be provided by the Federa l Insurance Administration).

(i)	To render a preliminary opinion regarding a proposed land use in accordance with§ 204-65.

(j) To revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth in this chapter or otherwise permitted by law.

(k)	To provide  for reasonab le accommodation in accordance with the following:

(1]  North Middl eton Township complies with the Federal Fa ir Housing Act, as amended, and/or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended , to



204:235	01 - 0 1 - 2014
 

§ 204-69		NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-69

insure  that  policies  and  regulations ,  including  but  not  limited  to  this
		chapter , do not discriminate against persons on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, disability, or family status.
	[2]	The Township shall grant requests for reasonable accommodations  if such requests provide equal housing and accessibility opportunities to persons with disabilities, and such requests do not constitute substantial changes or deviations to standards and provisions herein this chapter.
	[3]	Persons requesting reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendment s Act and/or  the Americans with Disabilities Act shall submit a request, in writing, to the Zoning Officer, which shall at a minimum , include the following information:

[a]   The name and address of the applicant.

[b] Specific section standards and provisions of this  chapter  from which reasonable accommodation is being requested .

[c] The specific description of the reasonable accommodation being sought and the other pertinent information, including a detailed listing	of any proposed structural or location related accommodations.

[d]  The specific condition(s)  of the applicants for which reasonable
accommodation is sought.

[e] A description of the hardship, if any, that the applicants will incur should the request for reasonable accommodation being sought not be granted.

[f]	A description of any alternative methods of relieving the claimed hardship that have been considered, as well as the reason, if any, why the applicants have rejected such a lternatives.

[g] A statement describing why the requested accommodation  is necessary to afford the applicants an opportunity equal to a nonhandicapped or nondisabled person to use and enjoy  the dwelling, building, or structure in question.

[h] A description of the manner in which the accommodation ,  if granted, will be removed, terminated, and/or discontinued if no longer required to afford equal opportunity to a nonhandicapped or nondisabled person to use and enjoy the dwelling, building, or structure in question

[i]   A statement of any facts indicating whether or not nonhandicapped or nondisabled person s wou ld be permitted to utilize the property in question in a manner similar sought by applicants.





204:236	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-69	


[4]	ZONING	§ 204-69

The Zoning Officer may hold any meetings and/or hearing necessary in
		his discretion to elicit information or argument pertinent to the request
		for accommodation .
	[5]	The Zoning  Officer's  decision shall be in writing and  state the reasons
		for the decision  (including reference s to the specific sections of this
		chapter and any other relevant and related chapters of the Code of North
		Middleton Township).
	[6]	The Zoning Officer shall issue his written decision to the applicants and
		the	Township	within	30	days	of	filing	of	the	request	for
		accommodation.
	[7]	A request  for reasonable  accommodation should be directed in the first
		instance to the Zoning  Officer. In considering a request  for reasonable
accommodation,  the Zoning Officer shall, with the advice of the counsel
		of the Township Solicitor, apply the following criteria.
[a] Whether the applicants are handicapped or disabled within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments or the Americans with Disabilities Act.

[b]   The degree to  which  the accommodation  sought  is related  to the
handicap or disability of the applicant.

[c] A description of hardship, if any, that the applicants  will  incur should the request for reasonable accommodation being sought not be granted.

[d] The extent to which the requested accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant(s)  opportunities equal to a nonhandicapped or nondisabled person to u se and enjoy the dwelling, building, or structure in question.

[e] The extent to which the proposed  accommodation  may  impact other property owners in immediate vicinity.

[f] The extent to which the proposed accommodation may be consistent with or contrary to the zoning purposes promoted by this chapter, the  most recent version of the North Middleton Township Comprehensive Plan, and the community development objectives set forth in Article Iof this chapter.

(g]   The extent  to which  the requested  accommodation  would impose
financial and administrative burdens upon the Township.

[h]   The extent  to which  the requested accommodation would  impose
an undue hardship upon the Town ship.







204:237	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-69	


[i]	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-69

The   extent	to   which	the   accommodation	would	requtre   a
		fundamental  alteration  in the  nature of the Township's  regulatory
		policies, objectives and regulations.
	[j]	The extent  to which the requested accommodation would result in
		a subsidy, privi lege, or benefit not available to nonhandicapped or
		disabled persons.
	[k]	The   permanency	of   the	requested	accommodation	and   the
		conditions  under  which  such  accommodation   will  be  removed ,
		terminat ed, and/or discontinued when no longer needed to provide
		handicapped  or disabled person s with equal opportunity to use and
		enjoy the dwelling (building or structure) in question.
	[I]	The extent to which the requested accommodation will increase the value of the property during and after its occupancy by applicants.

[8]   Persons aggrieved by the Zoning Officer's determination may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.

B.	Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Township. No zoning permit or cert ificate of use and occupancy shall be granted by him/her for any purpo se except in compliance with the literal provi sions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within his/her scope of employment.

C.	Violations.

(1)	Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in u se of land or structure or the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or portion thereof shall be a violation  of this chapter. It shall also be a violation of this chapter to undertake other  deliberate actions which are contrary to the terms of this chapter and any conditions    placed upon the approval of  special  exceptions,  variances  and conditional uses.  Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.

(2)	If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter enacted under the Act or prior enabling laws has occurred , the  Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in the following:

(a)	The enforcement  notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the  violation  has  occurred, to  any  person  who  has  filed  a  written request  to receive enforcement  notices regarding that parcel and to any other person requested , in writing, by the owner of record.

(b)	An enforcement not ice shall state at least the following:

[l]  The name of the owner of record and/or any other person against whom
the Township intends to take action.

[2]   The location of the property  in violation.



204:238	01 - 01 - 2014
 

§ 204-69	


[3]	ZONING	§ 204-69

The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
		not  been  met,  citing  in each  instance the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
	[4]	The  date  before  which  the  steps for compliance  must  be commenced and the date befor e which the steps must be completed.
	[5]	That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
	[6]	That failu re to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning  Hearing  Board,  constitutes  a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
D.		Enforcement remedies. Any person, partner ship or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provi sions of this chapter enacted under the Act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pa y a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including rea sonable attorneys' fees  incurred  by  the Township  as  a  result  thereof. No jud gment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determina tion of a violation by the Magisterial  District Judge. If the defendant  neither pays  nor timely appeals the judgment , the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial  District  Judge  determining  that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation  violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgm ents, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.

E.	Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed , altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter enacted under the Act or  prior  enabling  laws, the governing body or, w ith the approva l of the governing body, an officer of the municipality, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person wi ll be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such bu ilding, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent,  in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or u se constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant , notice of that action shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the compla int on the govern ing body of the municipality. N o such action ma y be maintained unti l such notice has been given.







204:239	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-70	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-70

§ 204-70. Permits.

A.	General requirements for zoning permits .

(1)	In all activities where a building permit or land development plan is not required , a zoning permit shall be required prior to a change in use of land or structure or the erection, construction, improvement or alteration of any structure or portion thereof or the alteration or development of any improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or the erection or alteration of any signs specified in
§ 204-41 of this chapter. Zoning permit s shall also be required  for the construction
or installation of animal waste impoundment s, lakes, ponds, dams or other water retention basins. No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or maintenance of any structure or land, provided such repairs do not change the use or the exterior dimensions of the structure or otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter.

(2)	Application for zoning permits shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer.

(3)	Such zoning permits shall be granted or refused within 90 days from date of application.

(4)	No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with:

(a)	All applicable regulation s of this chapter.

(b)	Any  condit ions  imposed upon  the site by the Zoning  Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors.

(c)	Any recorded subdivision or land development plan .

(5)	In all instances in which the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable doubt as to the ability of a proposed use to meet all of the above-described requirements , it will be incumbent upon the applicant to furnish adequate evidence in  support of his application . If such evidence is not presented, the zoning permit will be denied .

(6)	Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of any building or structure or the agent of either; provided , however, that if the application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner or the qualified person making an application, that  the propo sed work is authorized by this owner. The full names and addresses of the  owner, lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.

(7)	The Zoning Officer  may call upon  other  Township  staff  and/or Township-appointed	consultants in the review of submitted materials for applications.

(8)	The Zoning Officer may revoke a  zoning  permit  or  approval  issued  under  the provisions  of  this  chapter  in  case of any  false statement  or misrepresentation  of fact  in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was ba sed or for any other cause set forth in this chapter.



204:240	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-70	ZONING	§ 204-70

(9)	Where a zoning or building permit is  required by this chapter , but the work is commenced or the use is commenced or changed prior to obtaining such permit, the fees set by ordinance or resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors for such permit shall be doubled. The doubling of the permit fee shall be required to reflect the additional expense incurred by the Township resulting from the need to inspect the property, respond to any complaints, issue any  enforcement  notices and/or process the application as soon as it is received. The payment of such increased permit fee shall not relieve any person from complying with all requirement s of this chapter or any other applicable Township ordinances or from any penalties or enforcement actions authorized by this chapter or the Act.

(10)	Issuance of permits. Upon receiving the application , the Zoning Officer shall examine the same within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or plans do not conform to the provisions of all pertinent local laws, he shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. He shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in the event such application is rejected. If satisfied that  the proposed  work and/or use conforms to the provisions of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto and that  the certificate of u se and occupancy as required herein has been applied for, he shall issue a zoning permit therefor as soon as practical but not later than 90 days from receipt of the application.

(11)	Reconsideration of application. An applicant whose request for a zoning permit has been  denied  by  the  Zoni ng  Officer  may  make  a  later  application  for a  permit, provided   that all  deficiencies  which  were  the  basis  for  the  prior  denial  of  the permit  have  been eliminated . The Zoning Officer shall not be required to make a new inspection of the application if this condition is not met.

(12)	Expiration of permit. The zoning permit shall expire after one year from the date of issuance; provided, however, that the same may be extended every six months for a  period not to  exceed an additional two years, upon written request by the applicant which demonstrates good cause to the Zoning Officer.

(13)	Compliance with ordinance. The zoning permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and should not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, except as stipulated by the Zoning Hearing Board.

(14)	Compliance with permit and plot plan. All work or uses shall conform to the approved application and plans for which  the  zoning  permit  has been  issued  as well as the approved plot plan.

(15)	Display of zoning permit.  All approved zoning permits shall be prominently displayed on the subject property during construction, renovation , reconstruction, repair, remodeling or the conduct of other site improvements. Such permit displays shall occur w ithin five days of permit issuance or prior to the commencement of actual work on the site, whicheve r occurs first. Such permit display shall be continuou s until the site receives its certificate of use and occupancy.





204:241	01-01-2014
 
§ 204-70                                   NORTH MIDDLETON CODE                                    § 204-71

(16)	Temporary use permits. It is recognized that it may be in  accordance with the purpose of this chapter to permit temporary activities for a limited period of time, which activities may be prohibited by other provisions of this chapter. If such uses are of such a nature and are so located that, at the time of application, they will:

(a)	In  no  way  exert  a  detrimental  effect  upon  the  uses  of  land  and  activities
normally permitted  in the zone, they may be permitted by special exception.

(b)	Contribute materially to the welfare of the Township, particu larly in a state of emergency, under conditions pecul iar to the time and place involved, then the Board of Supervisor s may direct the Zoning Officer to issue a permit , by right , for a period not to exceed six months. Such permits may be extended not more than once for an additional period of six months.

B.	Application for all zoning permits.

(1)	Applications shall contain a general  description  of  the  proposed  work, development, u se or occupancy of all parts of the structure or land and shall be accompanied by plans in sufficient detail as the Zoning Official deems necessary from the following:

(a)	Dimension s and shape of lot to be developed.

(b)	Location  and  dimensions  of  any  structures  to  be  erected,  constructed  and altered.

(c)	Existing   and   proposed   uses,   including   the   number   of   occupied   unit s,
bu s.inesses, etc., all structures are designed to accommodate.

(d)	Off-street parking and loading spaces.

(e)	Utility systems affected and proposed .

(f)	Alteration or development of any improved or unimproved real estate.

(g)	The size of structures and the number of employees anticipated.

(h)	Any other  lawful information that may be required by the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with this chapter.

(i)	Copies of any applicable approved subdivision or land development plans.

(2)	If the proposed  activity requiring  a zoning permit,  other than as regulated  in
§ 204-21 , is located within the Floodp lain Overlay Zone, the information required in § 204-2 1 of this chapter shall be provided.


§ 204-71.  Determination of fees.

The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, establish fees for the administration of this chapter. All fees shall be determined by a schedule  that  is  made  available  to  the  genera l public . The Board of Supervisors may reevaluate the fee schedule and make necessary alterations  to  it  by  resolution  or  ordinance.   Such  alterations  shall  not  be  considered  an


204:242	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-71	ZONING	§ 204-72

amendment  to  this  chapter  and  may  be adopted  at any public meeting of the Board of Supervisors.


§ 204-72. Amendments.

A.	Power of amendment. The Board of Supervisors  may,  from  time  to  time,  amend, supplement , change or repeal this chapter, including the Official Zoning  Map.  Any amendment, supplement , change or repeal may be initiated by the Township  Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors or by a petition to the Board of Supervisors by an interested party.

B.	Hearing and enactment procedures for zoning amendments.

(1)	Public hearing. Before hearing and enacting zoning ordinance and/or Zoning Map amendments, the Board of Supervisors shall conduct a public hearing to inform the general public of the natu re of the amendment and to obtain public comment. Such public hearing shall be conducted after public notice (as defined herein and listed below) has been given.

(2)	Public notice. Before  conducting a  public hearing,  the Board of Supervisors shall
provide public notice as follows:

(a)	Notice shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation  in the municipality . Such  notice shall  state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hear ing. The first  publication  shall  not  be more  than  30 days and the second publication shall not  be less than seven days from  the date of the hearing. Publication of the proposed  amendment  shall  include either the full text thereof or the title and brief summary, prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:

[1]   A  copy  of  the  full  text  shall  be  supplied  to  a  newspaper  of  general
circulation  in the municipality at the time the public notice is published.

[2] An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law	library or other county office designated by the County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.

(b)	For Zoning Map amendments, public notice shall also include the posting of a sign at conspicuous locations along the perimet er of the subject property. These sign(s) sha ll be posted at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the nature, date, time and location of the hearing.

(c)	For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that the validity of the ordinance and/or map is in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the request, including any plans,  explana tory material or proposed  amendments, may be examined by the public.




204:243	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-72	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-72

(d)	If, after any public hearing  held  upon  an  amendment,  the  proposed amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land previously not  affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant  to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.

(3)	Enactment notice. In addition to the public notice requirements defined herein, the Board of Supervisors must publish a reference to the time and place of the meeting at which passage of the ordinance or amendment will be considered and a reference to a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. Enactment notice shall be publi shed at least once in one newspaper of genera l circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to pa ssage. The published content of the enactment notice shall be the same as that required for public notice described in the preceding Subsection B(2)(a).

(4)	Township Planning Comm ission referrals. For amendment s proposed by parties other than the Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each amendment at least 30 days prior to public hearing to the Township Planning Commission for review and comment. The Township Planning Commission shall  submit a report  of its review, together with any recommendation s, to the Board of Supervisors within 45 days from the date of said referral. The recommendation of the Township Planning Comm ission may include a specific statement as to whether or not the proposed amendment is in accordance with the intent of thi s chapter and any officially adopted Comprehens ive Plan of the Township. The Board of Supervisors cannot act upon the amendment until it has received a recommendation from the Township Planning Commission; however, should the Township Planning Commission fail to submit its recommendation within 45 days, the Board of Supervisors may proceed without its recommendation .

(5)	County Planning Department referrals.  All  proposed  amendments  shall  be submitted to the County Planning Department at least 30 days prior  to  publi c hearing on such amendments . The County Planning Department may submit recommendation s to the Board of Supervisors within 45 days of such referral. The Board of Supervisors cannot act upon the amendment u nt il it has received a recommendation from the County  Planning  Depart ment;  however,  should  the County Planning Department fail to submit its recomm endation within 45 days, the Board of Supervisors may proceed without its recommendation.

(6)	Adjou rnment of public hearing. If during the public hearing process, the Board of Supervisors needs additional time to understand the proposal, inform the public, receive public comment and/or render a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to a  specific time and place.

(7)	Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Cumberland County Planning Department.






204:244	01 -01 -20 14
 
§ 204-72	ZONING	§ 204-72

C.	Amendments initiated by the Township Planning Commission. When  an amendment, supplement, change or repeal  is  initiated  by  the Township  Planning  Commission,  the proposal shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors which shall then proceed in the same  manner  as  with  a  petition  to  the  Board  of  Supervisor.s which  has  already  been reviewed  by the Township Planning Commission.

D.	Amendment initiated by the Board of Supervisors. When an amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Board of Supervisors, such amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall follow the procedure prescribed for a petition under § 204-72B.

E.	Amendment initiated by a petition from an interested party. A petition for amendment, supplement, change or repeal for a portion of this chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of any land to be rezoned and all of the reasons supporting the petition to be considered. The petition shall also be signed by at least one record owner of the property in question whose signature shall be notarized attesting to the truth and correctness of all the facts and information presented in the petition. A fee to be established by the Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon the filing of such petition for change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed herein. The Board of Supervisors may require duplicate sets of petition materials.

F.	Curative amendment by a landowner. A landowner, who desires to challenge  on substantive grounds the va lidity of the ordinance or the Official Zoning Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restrict s the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the Board of Supervisors (including all of the reasons supporting the request to be considered) with a written request that his challenge  and  proposed  amendment  be  hea rd  and  decided as provided  in § 609.1  and
916.1 of the Act, as amended.40 The Board of Supervisors shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request. The curative amendment shall be referred to the Township and Cumberland County Planning Department as provided for in § 204-72B and public notice of the hearing shall be provided as defined herein.

(l)	In reviewing the curative amendment, the Board of Supervisors may deny the request, accept the request as submitted or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects.  The Board  of  Supervisors  shall  consider the curative amendments, plan s and explanatory material  submitted  by  the landowner and shall also consider:

(a)	The  impact   of  the  proposal  upon  roads ,  sewer  facilities,  water  supplies,
schools and other public service facilities.

(b)	If the proposal is  for  a  residential  use, the  impact  of  the  proposal  upon regional housing need s  and  the  effectiveness  of  the proposal  in providing hou sing unit s of a type actually available to and affordable by classes of persons  otherwise unlawfully excluded by  the challenged  provisions  of the ordinance or map .





40.	Editor's Note : See 53 P.S.§§ 10609.1 and 10916.J.


204:245	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-72	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-72

(c)	The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources, and other natural  features.

(d)	The impact  of the proposed  use  on  the  site's  soils,  slopes,  woodlands, wetlands,  floodplains,  natural  resources and  natural  features,  the  degree  to which these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources  to development and any adverse environmental impacts.

(e)	The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.

(2)	The  Board  of  Supervisors  shall  render   its  decision  within  45  days  after  the
conclusion of the last hearing.

(3)	If the Board of Supervisors fails to act on the landowner' s request within the time limits  referred to in § 204-72F(2), a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.

(4)	Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the ordinance or  Zoning Map is in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of   the   request,   including   any  plan s,  explanatory   material   or  proposed amendments  may be examined by the public.

(5)	The challenge shall be deemed denied when:

(a)	The Board of Supervisors fails to commence the hearing within 60 days.

(b)	The Board of Supervisors  notifies  the landowner  that  it will  not  adopt  the curative amendment.

(c)	The Board  of  Supervisors  adopts  another  curative  amendment  which  is
unacceptab le to the landowner.

(d)	The Board of Supervisors fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and municipality.

(6)	Where, after the effective date of the Act, a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this section or a validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10609.1 or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative approval for a subdivision, land development or planned residential development. Within the two-year period , no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the




204:246	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-72	ZONING	§ 204-72

sustained  va lidity  challenge.  Upon  the filing of the preliminary  or tentative plan,
the provisions of§ 508(4) of the Act shall apply.4•

(7)	Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved but does not require further  application  under  any subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall have one  year within which to file for a zoning permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent change or amendment  in the zoning, subdivision or other governing  ordinance or p lan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in t he curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods , the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such supplemental relief as may be necessary.

G.	Curative amendment by the Board of Supervisors.

(1)	The Board of Supervisors, by forma l action, may declare this chapter or portions thereof substant ively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal, the Board of Supervisors shall:

(a)	By  resolution, make  specific  findings setting forth the declared  invalidity of
the ordinance or portions thereof which may include:

[l]  References to specific uses which are either not permitted  or not
permitted in sufficient quantity ;

[2]  References to a class of use or u ses which require revision; or

[3]  References to the entire ordinance which requires revision s.

(b)	Begin  to  prepar e  and  consider  a  curative  amendment  to  the ordinance  to correct the declared invalidity.

(2)	Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and propo sal, the Board of Supervisors shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions required by § 609 of the Act  in order to cure the declared invalidity of the ordinance.42

(3)	Upon the date of the declaration and propo sal, the Board of Supervisors shall  not be required to entertain or consider any curative amendment  filed by a landowner. Nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required  to give a report , upon request, for a challenge to the validity of the ordinance under 53 P.S. § 10609.l  subsequent to the declaration and propo sal, based upon the ground s identical to or substantiall y similar to those specified in the resolution required by this section. Upon the enactment of a curative amendment to or the reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter , no rights to a cure by amendment or challenge shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner  on the basis of the substantive



41.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).

42.	Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.


204:247	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-72	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-73

invalidity  of the unamended  zoning ordinance for which the Board of Supervisors propose to prepare a curative amendment.

(4) The Board of Supervisors, having utilized the  procedures  as  set  forth  in  this section, may not again utilize sa id procedures for a thirty-six-month period following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment or reaffirmation  of the va lidity of the  ordinance; provided , however, that if after the date  of declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Township by virtue of a decision by any court of competent juri sdiction, the Board of Supervisors may utilize the provisions of th.is section to prepare a curative amendment to the ordinance to fulfill this duty or obligation.

H.	Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there ha s been a change in the boundary of a zone or a recla ssification of the zone adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the Map (and any duly adopted Overlay Zoning Map) shall be made and shall be duly certified by the Township Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the permanent record s of the Township.


§ 204-73. Conditional uses.

A	Filing of conditional use. For any u se permitted by conditional use, a conditional use mu st be obtained from the Board of Supervisors. In addition to the information required on the zoning permit application, the conditional use application must show:

(1)	Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.

(2)	Names  and addresses  of  adjoining  property  owners,  including  properties  directly across a public right-of-way.

(3)	A  scaled drawing  (site plan)  of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to
demon strate compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(4)	A  written   description   of  the  proposed  use  in  sufficient  detail  to  demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provi sions of this chapter.

B.	General  criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following:

(1)	The propo sed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of th.is chapter.

(2)	The  propo sed  u se shall  not  detract  from  the use and  enjoyment  of adjoining  or
nearby  properties.

(3)	The proposed use will not affect a change in the character of the subject property's
neighborhood.

(4)	Adequate facilities are available to serve the proposed use (e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.).

(5)	For development within the Floodplain Overlay Zone, that the application complies with those requirements of Chapter  112, Floodplain Management.



204:248	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-73	ZONING	§ 204-73

(6)	The proposed  use shall comply with those criteria  specifically listed in Artic le IV of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with all other applicable regulations of this chapter.

(7)	The proposed use will not substantially 1mpa1r the integrity of the Township's Comprehensive Plan.

C.	Conditions. The Board of Supervisors, in approving conditiona l use applications , may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed above, includ ing conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone. These conditions shall be enforceab le by the Zoning Officer, and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in this article.

D.	Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional use pursuant to Subsection A shall become an officia l part of the record for said conditional  use. Approva l of any conditiona l use will also bind the use in accordance with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a change in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of a zoning pennit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the origina lly approved site plan shall require the obtainment of another conditional use approval.

E.	Hearing procedures.

(1)	Before voting on the approva l of a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors shall hold  a pub lic hearing thereon, pursuant to pub lic notice. The Board of Supervisors shall  submit each such app lication to the Township Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such application to provid e the Township Planning Commission   an  opportunity  to  submit  recommendations.  If, after  any  public hearing held upon  an application, the proposed application is revised, the Board of Supervisors shall hold  another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the application.

(2)	Public notice, as defined herein, and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer,  such other persons as the Board of Supervisors shall designate by ordinance and to any person who bas made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board of Supervisors. In add ition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuou sly posted on  the affected tract  of  land  at  least  one week prior to the hearing.

(3)	The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings.
Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the Secretary, notice and advert ising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however , shall not include legal expenses, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expe11 witness costs.

(4)	The parties to the hearing shall be the Township , any person affected by the application  who  has  made  timely  appearance  of  record  before  the Board  of



204:249	01  -01-2014
 
§ 204-73	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ 204-73

Supervisor s and any other person, including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors  shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board of Supervisors for that purpose.

(5)	The Chairman or Acting Chairman  of the Board of Supervisors shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and paper s, including  witnes ses  and documents requested by the parties.

(6)	The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.

(7)	Formal  rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence may be excluded.

(8)	The Board of Supervisors may keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board of Supervisors. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board of Supervisors if the transcript is ordered by the Board of Supervisors, or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the Board of Supervisors  if  such appeal is made, and, in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person  requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.

(9)	The Board of  Supervisors shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with  any party  or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and  opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice  of any communication,   report s,  staff  memoranda  or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity  to contest the material so   noticed,    and   shall    not   inspect   the   site   or   its   surroundin gs   after   the commencement  of hearings  with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.

(10)	The governing body shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,  make writt en findings on the condition al use application within 45 days after the last  hearing  before the  governing  body. Where the application  is contested  or
·denied, each decision  shall  be  accompanied  by  findings  of  fact  or  conclusions ba sed thereon, together with any reasons therefor. Conclusions ba sed on any provisions of this chapter or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provi sion relied on and the reasons why the conclu sion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.

(11)	Where the governing body fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to hold the required hearing within. 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in


204:250	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ 204-73	ZONING	§ 204-73

favor of the applicant because of the failure of the governing body to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the governing body shall give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this chapter. If the governing body shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.

(12)	Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right  of  any  party  opposing  the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent juri sdiction. A copy of the  final  decision  or,  where  no  decision  is  called  for, of  the  findings  shall  be delivered   to  the  applicant  personally  or  mailed  to  him  no  later  than  the  day following its date.

F.	Time limitation .

(1)	If a conditional use is granted, the  necessary  permit  shall  be  secured  and  the authorized action begun  with in two years after the date when the conditional use is finally   granted and the building or  alteration,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  be completed   within   three   years   of   said   date.  For   good   cause,   the  Board   of Supervisors  may  at any  time,  upon  application  in writing,  extend  either of  these deadlines.

(2)	Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said two-year period or having obtained the permit should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant ha s waived , withdrawn or abandoned his application, and all approva ls and permits granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board of Supervisors.

(3)	Should the appellant conunence construction or alteration within said two-year period, but should he fail to complete such construction or alteration within said three-year period, the Board of Supervisors may, upon l 0 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the granted conditional use, if the Board of Supervisors finds that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within such three-year period and if the Board of Supervisors further finds that conditions have altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the conditional use that revocation or rescission of the action is justified.

(4)	As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as part of the original application before the Board, the granting of a timetable associated with  the request which would supersede the deadlines imposed in § 204-73F(l) through (3). In so doing, the applicant must demon strate that the times requ ested are logically related to normal and expected progress of the project. In approving a timetable under this section, the Board must establish and bind a definite tirneframe for the issuance of a zoning permit and the completion of construction of the project.



Zone standards

District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Max. Impervious Coverage Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Max. Height
Ag 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
RR 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-1a 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-1b 32,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 25% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-1c 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 30% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-1d 15,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 35% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-2a 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-2b 32,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 25% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-2c 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 30% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-2d 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 35% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
R-2e 5,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 50% 35 ft. 0 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
R-2f 5,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 50% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
VMUa 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
VMUb 32,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 25% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
VMUc 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 30% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
VMUd 7,500 sq. ft. 60 ft. 45% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
VMUe 3,250 sq. ft. 30 ft. 55% 35 ft. 0 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
NCa 43,560 sq. ft. 150 ft. 20% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
NCb 32,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 25% 35 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
NCc 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 30% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 
NCd 7,500 sq. ft. 60 ft. 45% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
NCe 3,250 sq. ft. 30 ft. 55% 35 ft. 0 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
NCf 3,250 sq. ft. 30 ft. 55% 35 ft. 10 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.


204:251	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
Chapter DL DISPOSITION LIST

§ DL-1.  Disposition of legislation.

The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of North Middleton adopted since the 2000 publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).) The last legislation reviewed for the 2014 republication of the Code was Ord. No. 2013-2, adopted 6-6-2013.


§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.

Ordinance Number	Adoption
Date	

Subject	

Disposition
2000-1	1-8-2000	lntermunicipal agreement for	NCM
		Recreation Director	
2000-2	8-3-2000	Solid waste and recycling	Ch. 170
2000-3			Not adopted
2000-4	11-2-2000	On-lot septic systems	Superseded by Ord. No.
			2007-2
2000-5	11-2-2000	Vehicles and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2000-6	12-19-2000	Street vacation	NCM
2000-7	12-19-2000	Street vaca tion	NCM
2000-8	12-19-2000	Wastewater  pretreatment  amendment	Superseded by Ord. No.
			2007-2
2001-1	1-2-2001	Adoption of Code	NLP; see Ch. l, Art. II
2001-2	3-15-2001	lntermunicipal agreement for grant	NCM
2001-3	6-21-2001	Intermurricipal  agreement for Exit 12
project	NCM
2001-4	10-18-2001	Salaries amendment	Ch. 45
2002-1	1-17-2002	Code amendments	Chs. 66, 70, 92, 106,
126, 140 and 196
2002-2	6-7-2002	Sewers and water amendment	Superseded by Ord. No.
2007-2
2002-3	6-20-2002	Building  construction amendment	Ch. 80
2002-4	11-21-2002	Bond	NCM
2003-1			Not adopted
2003-2	1-16-2003	Building construction amendment	Ch. 80
2003-3	7- 17-2003	Solid waste and recycling	Ch . 170



DL:l	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ DL-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ DL-1

Ordinance
Number	Adoption
Date	

Subject	

Disposition
2003-4	10-2-2003	On-lot sewage disposal systems	Superseded by Ord. No.
			2007-2
2003-5	9-4-2003	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2003-6	8-7-2003	Subdivision and land development	Superseded by Ord. No.
			20 1 1-2
2003-7	9-18-2003	Zoning amendment	Superseded by Ord. No. 2011-2
2003-8		Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2003-9		Bond refinancing	NCM
2003-10	12-18-2003	Sewers and water amendment	Superseded by Ord. No.
			2007-2
2004-1	2-19-2004	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2004-2	4- 1-2004	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2004-3	7-1-2004	Vehicles and traffic amendment	Repealed by Ord. No.
			2007-2
2004-4	4-15-2004	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2004-5	6-17-2004	Uniform construction codes	Chs. 80 and 95
2004-6			Denied
2004-7	10-7-2004	Vehic les and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2005-1	1-20-2005	Vehicles and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2005-2	3-17-2005	Supervisors salaries amendment	Ch. 45, Art. I
2005-3	3-17-2005	Cable television franchise	NCM
2005-4	7-21-2005	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2005-5			Denied
2005-6	11-3-2005	Zoning amendment	Superseded by Ord. No. 201 1-2
2005-7			Denied
2006-1	1-3-2006	Emergency and municipa l services	Superseded by Ord. No.
		tax	2007-6
2006-2	2-16-2006	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2006-3	2-2-2006	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2006-4	3-16-2006	Zoning amendment	Superseded by Ord. No.
2011-2
2006-5	4-6-2006	Recreation Advisory Board	Ch. 41
2006-6			Vacant
2006-7	6-1-2006	Street vaca tion	NCM
2006-8			Denied





DL:2	01 - 01 - 2014
 
§ DL-1	DISPOSITION LIST	§ DL-1

Ordinance Number	Adoption Date	

Subject	

Disposition
2006-9	11-2-2006	Parks and recreation areas	Ch. 140
		amendment	
2006-10	11-2-2006	Intergovernmental  agreement:  Land	NCM
		Partnerships  Grant Program	
2006-11	12-7-2006	Plan review agreement	NCM
2007-1			Number not used
2007-2	8-7-2008	Brush, grass and weeds amendment;	Chs. 76; 92; 137; 164;
		outdoor burning amendment; outdoor	170; superseded by Ord.
		wood-fired  boilers; sewers and water;	No. 2011-2; 196;
		solid waste and recycling	superseded  by Ord. No.
		amendment; subdivi sion and land	2011-2
		development  amendment;  vehicles	
		and traffic amendment; zoning	
		amendment	
2007-3	11-1-2007	Fireworks	Ch. 109
2007-4	l 1-1-2007	Subdivision and land development	Superseded by Ord. No.
		amendment	2011-2
2007-5			Number not used
2007-6	12-6-2007	Local services tax	Ch. 186, Art. III
2008-1	2-7-2008	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2008-2	3-3-2008	Sewers, sewage and wastewater amendment; water rates and charges	Superseded by Ord. No. 2007-2
		amendment	
2008-3			Not adopted
2008-4	9-4-2008	Fire police	Ch. 16
2008-5	10-2-2008	Peddling and soliciting	Ch. 146
2008-6	10-2-2008	Special fire police mutual aid and	NCM
		emergency  assistance agreement	
2008-7	10-2-2008	Sewers and water amendment	Ch. 164
2008-8	11-6-2008	Solid waste and recycling	Ch. 170
		amendment	
2008-9	11-6-2008	Joint composting facility agreement	NCM
2008-10	11-6-2008	Joint UCC Board of Appeals	NCM
		agreement	
2008- 11	1-5-2009	Capital Region Insurance Trust	NCM
		agreement	
2009- 1	2-5-2009	Income Tax Officer amendment	Ch. 186, Art. VI
2009-2	2-5-2009	Floodplain  management	Ch. 1I2
2010-1	3-4-2010	Vehicles and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2010-2	4-1-2010	Sewers and water amendment	Ch. 164


DL:3	01  -01-2014
 
§ DL-1	NORTH MIDDLETON CODE	§ DL-1

Ordinance Number	Adoption Date	

Subject	

Disposition
2010-3	12-2-2010	Earned income tax	Ch. 186, Art. I
2011-1	7-7-2011	Stormwater  management	Ch. 175
2011-2	11-3-2011	Manager  amendment; animals
amendment;  outdoor burning	Chs. 21; 70; 92; 134;
superseded by Ord. No.
		amendment;  nuisances  amendment;	2013-2; super seded by
		subdivision and  land development;	Ord. No. 2013-2
		zomng	
2012-1	3-1-2012	Insurance: fire loss claims	Ch. 117
2012-2	3-1-2012	Vehicle s and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2012-3	3-1-2012	Vehicles  and traffic amendment	Ch. 196
2013-1	5-2-2013	Zoning Map amendment	NCM
2013-2	6-6-2013	Subdivision and land development ;	Chs. 180; 204
		zoning	










































DL:4	01 - 01 - 2014
 



HISTORY

AN INFORMAL HISTORY OF NORTH MIDDLETON TOWNSHIP

Cumberland County, Pennsylvania Published July 1976
Elected Township Officers:

Board of Supervisors: Harold E. Boldosser, chairman, Emerson N. Miller, Roy W. Kelso; Virgin­ ia L. Fulton, secretary-treasurer; Glenn R. Espenshade, auditor; Elmer R. Warner Jr., chairman of auditors; Charles F. Fraker, secretary, board of auditors; Mary K. Barrick, tax collector; J. Russell Barrick , assessor; Raymond W. Anderson, constable; Steven J. Fi shman, solicitor.

Bicentennial  Committee:

Elmer R. Warner Jr., chairman; Virginia L. Fulton; Irene Clark; William Biega; Dorothy Sutton;
Mary K. Barrick; Lois B. Hoch ; Paul D. Hoch, writer.

The writer owes a special thanks to Clark Crain , Frank Hoy, William A. DeWalt, W. Robert Brown, Emerson N . Miller, and Roy Shughart, long-time residents of the township , whose recol­ lections contributed much of the information found in the following pages.



NORTH MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP

Directly north of Carlisle and wrapped neatly halfway around both the east and west ends of town lies a rectangular area of 26 square miles that is Nort h Middleton Town ship. She is bounded on the north, at the top of North Mounta in, by Perry County. To the west are West Pennsboro and Lower Frankford Townships, and her neighbor to the east is Midd lesex Township. Her southern borders are the railroad tracks south of the Newvi lle Road, Carlisle Bora line, and the Trindl e Road. Curving around the southern edge of Carlisle and meeting North Middleton on either side is her sister townsh ip, South Midd leton.

Inside these boundaries are 16,707 acres, or enough for about 130 average sized farms. This is used as a basis for comparison becau se agriculture was, and still is, the basic industry of the township. There are presently 78 operating farms in North Middleton.

Geographical Features:

Most of the township area is best described by the words "rolling hills", hills that push up against the foot of the "Kau-ta-tin-chunk", or endless mountains, as the Indians called them. These moun­ tains are part of a long, smooth-topped ri dge that extends in a westerly direction from the Sus-




01 -01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


quehanna River. Covering the height s is a wide variety of trees, ranging from soft, workable pines to the flint-hard oaks and maples, while much of the Valley was originally covered by a sparse growth of bu shy vegetation mingled with rich grasses and an abundance of wild fruits and berries. There is even a spot approximately in the center of the township called Cactus Hill where beauti­ ful Spring-flowering cactus abound in the wild.

The most singular feature of the topography is the snaking Conodoguinet Creek, "for a long way nothing but bends" as the Indian name indicates. This creek, by far the largest stream in Cumber­ land County, enters North Middleton ju st west of Meadowbrook and leaves the confines, some nine wiggly mi les later, just south of the intersection of Routes 34 and 499.

Normally a placid, semi-navigable creek, it sometimes, during rainy seasons, turns into a raging tonent, spilling over its banks and wreaking havoc along the way, as it did in recent memory with hurricanes Agnes in 1972 and Eloise in 1975. The Conodoguinet serves as a dividing line be­ tween the two types of soil found in the town ship. The ground north of the stream is composed mainly of slate and shale, while on the other side of the water limestone is found in full measure. It's been said by the son of a former tax collector that limestone farmers grow better crops, but slate-land farmers pay their taxes faster. Of course, the answer from the other side of the creek is that slate taxes are lower because the land is poorer . Actually, it's ju st about a standoff, and the diligent farmer can be successful on either side.

On the south bank of the creek, where it comes closest to the Pennsylvania Turnpike, is a lime­ stone cave in the side of a steep hill. The opening is a semi-circular archway about 10 feet high, and the passage extends into the cave about 270 feet before it branches into three directions, lead­ ing on the right to a large chamber known as "the Devil' s dining room".

Legends surround the cave like the mist that clings to the creek when the weather is just right. Lewis the Robber supposedly used the cavern as a hideout from time to time during the early 1800's when he was perpetrating his petty crimes in the area . And bones of all kinds were found in the passages by early explorers. There is a priceless story about a small dog that entered the mouth of the cave and emerged sometime later in the vicinity of the Army Post, giving rise to the belief that passages run all the way under the east end of Carlisle.

Early Settlers:

The first white men to come into the area were the Indian traders, in the 1720's, searching for skins and furs. When they carried back across the wide Susquehanna tales of the broad and lush valley to the west they were followed in the l730's by increasing numbers. The good news of the exciting new land was especially  welcome by the Scotch-Irish of Lancaster County and other eastern parts of the province that were predominantly German .

So much friction had developed between these two groups that finally, in 1743, the proprietaries refused to sell any more land cast of the Susquehanna to the bothersome Scotch-Irish but made liberal offers to the adventurous  nationality  on lands west  of the river. It was the hope of the




ii	01-01-2014
 
PREFACE


Penns to populate Lancaster and York Counties with the quiet, industrious Germans and Cumber­
land County with the rowdy Scotch-Irish.

So successful was the offer that they moved into the Cumberland Valley by the hundreds , and by 1750 all but 50 families of the 5,000 people of the new area were Scotch-Irish. Many of these people settled in the area that is now North Middleton, where there was a plentiful supply of both timber and fresh water.

Early land warrants show names like Matthews, Davison, Bowers, Reed, and Watson, all of good Scotch-Irish stock. The same patents are liberally sprinkled with phrases such as "beginning at a marked white oak'', or "continuing to a heap of stones". Marked trees were a common tool of the early surveyors and often were the only trees left standing after a settler finished clearing his land to farm.

One of the earliest cluster of people in the township was the gathering known as "Armstrong's settlement'', ju st down the creek a short distance from Meeting House Springs. The area had an especially clean and fresh water supply emanating from the springs and was an ideal spot for a few families to settle on.

Another early settler in that area was Richard Parker, who, records in the land office indicate, set­
tled on the Conodoguinet with his family in 1724.

Most of these early Scotch-Irish  settlers were very impatient with the policies of the Penns in which any land to be settled had to first be bought from the Indians for a fair price. With the rapid influx of these white people the Indians became alarmed and reminded the proprietaries repeated­ ly about unfinished treaties.

With the Indians thus aroused, the French took advantage of the situation and allied many of the tribes against the English. Raids began to take place in the North Valley, and it was a common sight for the settlers to be working in their newly cleared fields with a rifle near at hand for pro­ tection.

A stockade, Fort Lowther, was built on the site of the present square in Carlisle, but with only a
few militia to man the fort its condition deteriorated. And so did relations between the two races .

Under constant attack and harassment by the savage natives, mostly Delawares, the citizens peti­
tioned Governor Morris for additional protection.

As a result , Colonel Stanwix was sent into the Cumberland Valley, and in 1757 erected earth­ works just outside the town of Carlisle, on the northeastern edge. These earthworks were the be­ ginning of what would become, 200 years later, one of the oldest anny posts in the nation.

The first murder of a friendly Indian in Cumberland County probably took place in the area that is
now North Middleton Township. A Delaware by the name of Doctor John lived with his wife and





111	01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


two children "in a hunting cabin on Conodoguinet Creek, not far from Carlisle" in the w inter of
1760.

Although apparently on good enough terms with the white settlers to visit their houses, it was said
that he boasted of killing 60 white men himself, and wou ld gladly do it again if the war resumed .

One February morning the bodies of Doctor John and his son were found , while his wife and oth­ er child had disappeared, presumably also murdered.

The biggest fear of the settlers was that repri sals would be made against them by other Indians, and two years later the case was still being discussed at a conference in Philade lph ia between Governor Hamilton and relatives of the victims.

Formation of the Township:

When the Susquehanna was crossed and the westward movement first began, Lancaster County extend ed indefinitely to the West. But in 1750 there were enough inhabitants on the new side of the river to demand a county of their own so that they wou ldn 't have to travel to Lancaster to transact bu siness in the county seat.

That year Cumberland County was formed, made up of East and West Pennsborough and Middle­ ton Townships. In 1810 the latter was divided into North and South Middleton, and again, in 1859, Midd lesex was carved out, leaving North Middleton Township with its present boundaries.

Churches:

Since the first settlers of the area were Scotch-Irish, it's only natural that the first church was Presbyterian, established at Meeting House Springs about three miles west of Carlisle, in 1734. In 1757 the congregation moved to Carlisle, and now there are no Presbyterian churches in the township.

Wh ile several churches were formed , served for a period, and then went out of existence, there are now eight worshipping congregations within the boundaries of North Middleton.

The oldest of these is the Waggoner's United Methodist Church on the Long's Gap Road . In 1818 the first class met in the home of Phillip Waggoner, an early evangelical preacher. But not until 1851 was the Waggoner's Evangelical Church building actually built.

The cornerstone of the present church reads, "Evangelical Church, Bu ilt in 1851, Blowed down and, Rebuilt 1885". And numerous improvements and additions to the structure have been made since.








lV	01-01 - 2014
 
PREFACE


The cemetery is filled with stones of the late l 800's inscribed with the names of well-known ear­ ly families, and the oldest legible one belongs to "Mary Ann Dunlap, wife of John, died May 17, 185 1, at the age of 70"
The other churches in the township are: Mountain View Baptist,
Cornman Road

Great Hope Baptist ,
Fem Drive

Cavalry Road Church of God, Cavalry Road

Triumphant Church of God,
Long's Gap Road

Church of God in Caprivi,
Waggoner' s Gap Road

Church of the Nazarene, Sterrett's Gap Avenue

Army War College Chapel, Carlisle Barracks

Barns:

Most indicative of the chara cter of North Middleton Township in 1976 are its barns, for it is, after all, a sprawling rural community. Still standing in the township are 78 of the buildings, nearly all fine examples of the "Pennsylvania barn".

This type is a two-story structure with access to the second floor being gained by a bank built up at the rear of the barn. Contained on this second level are the granery, mows, and the threshing floor.

The barn roofs are mostly gabled types, with the two slanted planes of the roof running from the ridge pole, or center beam, to both the front and the back. In addition, many of these are a "salt­ box" style, in which the rear side of the roof extends toward the ground much farther than the front and usually is on the north side of the barn.

The kind of stone used for the foundation follows closely the underlying rock type of the area. Of
44 sandstone barns, all but one are found north of the Conodoguinet Creek. And all except four of




v	01 -01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


the 17 limestone barns lie south of the creek. There are 17 additional barns that utilize a combina­ tion of the two types or some undetermined rock.

A great deal of wood wa s used in both the sheathing and the supporting timbers, these hewed
from trees and held together at the joint s with wooden pegs called trunnels (tree nails).

Unique to Pennsylvania barn s, and present on nearly every one of those in North Middleton is the "overshot'', or the part of the second floor that projects out over the lower level in the front of the barn. The name came to include the open floor of this area, u sually made of concrete and a coarse stone aggregate, and there was many a North Middleton farm boy whose job it was each morning before school to "clean the overshot".

Most of barn s in the town ship were built in the second half of the I 800's, but there was a date stone on the original Emerson Miller barn that read "1819, A.W.". It 's safe to say that the first barn erected in the town ship closely followed the coming of the first settler, for large barns were a strictly American characteristic and represented the hope of the newcomers .

Several barns have been built by men still living in the town ship, usually following the mo st common cause of destruction, fire. Even the barn s built in the 1940's were constructed exactly like those of the early 1800's.

At the barn raising from 60-70 men would tum out. The entire timber framework was laid out on the ground and cut to fit, then it was put up piece by piece. Eight by eight timbers are heavy, and it usually took at least four men to put them in place.

But one man , Roy Shughart, is said to have regularly carried twelve foot eight by eights by him­ self. In fact, he built the barn on the Minnich farm in one month , from picking the foundation stones off the ground, to hewing timbers, to finishing the roof.

In 1943 Emerson Miller 's new barn on Route 74 was built by laying out on the ground, and only
one piece did not fit when it was all put together.

Time may be running out on these native American buildings, the Pennsylvania barn s. Each year their number is lessened by a stray bolt of lightning or by the progress called residential develop­ ment.

Schools:

June 10, 1954, marked the last day that students in North Middleton Township attended a one­ room schoolhouse. The next September about 450 children , in grades 1 through 8, attended the new school, now named Crestview, on Long 's Gap Road.








VI	01-01-2014
 
PREFACE


Prior to its openin g there were seven of the one-room variety scattered over the township. They were: Pleasant Hall, the oldest, Union Hall, Willow Grove, Basin Hill, Evergreen, Fairview , and Franklin Hall.

Today, the student body at Crestview is made up of 511 students, and the school is the largest elementary school in the Carlisle School District. 17 teachers work under the administration of the principal, Richard Ocker, and plans are under way for a new addition to alleviate crowded condition s.

Presently , three classes are meeting in temporary quarters outside the main school building, but the new space will be available for the 1976-77 school year .

Bridges:

With a major creek like the Conodogui net winding its way through the township there is bound to be abundance of bridge s. Many of these were covered wooden bridges , but they have now all dis­ appeared from the town ship, replaced by concrete and steel.

In 1792, the first spot on the creek to be spanned was the site of Hays ' Bridge on Meadowbrook Road. Many of the early bridges succumbed to either fire or the elements, and such was the case with Hays ' Bridge. The third bridge to stand on the spot was built in 1825 at a cost of $1,500, only 21 years after the first covered bridge was ever built in America. The structure lasted until 1951 when it was replaced by a modem type after being tom down.

The last covered bridges built in the township were Waggoner 's and Watts ', both being erected in 1889. The last of these to come down was Watts' when it burned in 1970. For the last six years the road has been closed because no bridge has ever replaced the old span. Before it was finally razed, the Waggoner 's bridge was offered for sale for $400 by the township supervisors, but there were no takers.

Gone forever are the romantic old bridges, through whose sides many a schoolbo y made a splash­
ing jump into the muddy Conodoguinet below.

Taverns:

In the early days of the settlement of the town ship, taverns played an important political as well as socia l role. Many times it was in these inns that leaders and politicians met to develop philoso­ phies or even plot rebellion.

As travel increased, so did the frequency of accommodation s, and in the early 1800's there were several taverns along the stagecoach route.

In 1841, Samuel Williams, tax assessor for North Middleton, prepared a list of taverns, their pro­ prietors, and  the  amount  of  tax.  They  were:  Sulphur  Spring  House, David  Cornman,  $1.50;





Vll	01 -01-20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


Mountain House, Benjamin Kutz, $1; Nort h Middleton Inn, George Swigart, $0.80; Waggoner's Gap Hou se, Abraham Waggoner , $1; and Middlesex House, John Wonderlich , $1.

Presently, there are only three public bars or taverns in North Middleton Township ; the Garden Cave, about half a mile north of Carl isle on the Carlisle Springs Road , the Fireside Inn, just west of Carlisle on the Newville Road , and the 720 Club, on North Hanover Street. In addition there is the private Y.F.W. on the Trind le Road.

Changed, too, is the revenue realized by the township from these establishmen ts. Whereas  the
total annua l tax for the five inns in 1841 was $5.30, the income from liquor licenses is now $800.

Public Protection:

Part-time constables and Justices of the Peace were the law enforcement in North Middleton Township until 1965 when William S. Weaver was appointed to work as a uniformed policeman. For three years, however, keeping the peace remained a part-time proposition.

But the influx of new residents into the township gained such momentum that in 1968 the need was felt for a full-time policeman , and Weaver filled  it. Presently the department consists of Chief Weaver, one additiona l full-time man, Mervin Anderson , and four part-timer s. To enable the men to cover the area, two police cars are operated by the department.

Fire protection was provided by an annual contract between the town ship and the Union Rural Fire Company of Carlisle. Since there was a good deal of distance involved between many points in the township and the firehouse, the citizens often had to rally and fight the fire themselves. This was particularly true in the case of forest fires which occasiona lly flared up in the northern mountainou s area.

Often these fires, which were usuall y started by lightning, burned for days, and the men of the township would be called upon to scrape and dig fire lines until the blaze was under control. Within the memory of many current residents is one summer when two separate fires were burn­ ing in the North Mountain at the same time.

Again the increase in population demanded more protection than the tenuous arrangement with the Union Fire Company afforded, and the board of supervi sors first discussed buying their own fire apparatus in 1952. Today the company has one tanker and one pumper and is raising funds to buy another. Even with the added protection the contract with the Union is still renewed annually.

Public Improvements:

It 's safe to say that the township's citizens began improvements almost as soon as they got down out of their wagon s. The roads were cleared and bridges were built, but for anything that we now think of as even crudely modern , the people had to wait until the turn of the twentieth century.






Vlll	01 - 01 - 20 14
 
PREFACE


The first of the new conveniences to come to North Middleton was the telephone. About 1911 poles were erected, wires were strung, and 22 subscribers had the new little wonder in their hous­ es. One of these was Bill DeWalt, a current resident of the township, whose family has lived in the area for more than 100 years. Count less children were sent across the fields to the neighbor 's farm to summon someone for a phone call. Many small "switcher lines" or "farmer lines" went into busine ss and served the township for a while, but the last of these, the Waggoner's Gap Rural Telephone Company, ended operations in 1946, and the entire area is current ly being served by the United Telephone Company of Pennsylvania.

Then in 1939, the township saw its first paved road, West Louther Street extended . Since that first two-thousand -four-hund red-six-foot -stretch of hard road, many more have been added, providing easy access to all points.

In this Bicentennial year of 1976, only 1/2 mile of public dirt road remains, a section of Long' s
Gap Road extended.

Electricity, as it is now provided by the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company, came in the late l 930's. Prior to that each farmer or other resident, if he wanted electric lights, had to maintain his own power plant. This was a 32-volt storage battery that needed to be constantly recharged by a gasoline generator. As complicated as it sounds, there were many of these private power sources in the township.

Things that the township 's citizens of 1976 take for granted without a second thought came into being during little over a decad e and a half that started with the first sidewalks, on West Louther Street extended, in 1945.

Zoning, which now governs all new building and establishment of businesses, was first men­ tioned at a supervisor s' meeting in November, 1948.

Things really got rolling in the 1950's with the first discussion of acquisition of property for a township shed (1953), voting machines (1954), plans for development of Schlusser Village (1954), and the first request for the first traffic light by the Carlisle Barrack s ( 1957).

After seemingly interminable discussion the traffic signal was installed in 1961, and city water and sewage were made available in 1962.

Residential building bas mushroomed in the township in the last 10 years, roughly doubling the population, until it seems a far cry from the same gentle fann land that in 1937 built and burned the last limestack in Cumberland County, requiring 144 four-horse wagon loads of limestone in the process.









ix	01 - 01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


Recreation:

The people of Carlisle have from the beginning of the town looked for ways to relax and enjoy themselves. As often as not, the direction in which they've looked is that of North Middleton Township.

W11en the area was first established, of course, the streams and mountains to the north provided fish and game for both food and sport. Almost every kind of wildlife imaginable, from beavers to elk and buffalo, inhabited the township in its early days.

The Conodoguinet was full of fish. Every spring shad ran up the creek to spawn, and suckers were taken by the hundreds.

But with the onslaught of civilization , many of the species quickly disappeared , although as late as 1966 bobcats were still occasionally reported in the North Mountain .

Still, every October, crowds are thrilled  by the derring-do  acrobatics of migrating hawks along
the fly-way at the top of Waggoner 's Gap.

Organization came to recreation with the Carlisle Sulphur Springs Hotel in 1830 that grew to a 200 room extravaganza by the time fire destroyed it in 1867. Many of the young country's wealthy sons made a stay at this plush spa.

And Cave Hill was rapidly becoming a favorite gathering spot of the townspeople. Ladies would be driven out on a warm summer afternoon to take tea with their friends in the cool mouth of the cave. Boating, swimming, and ice skating also brought crowds according to the season.

In the 1890's a trolley run was established to Cave Hill that made the round trip every half hour. Acceptance was so good that Bellaire Park and a dance pavilion were built to entice even more people to the area: Even after the demise of the trolley in the 1920's, Cave Hill continued to be a favorite for a long time.

Another busy spot on the creek was Meadowbrook. There, also, were a park and pavilion, and in addition, this area even had a very popular roller skating rink.

Currently, there are many casual activities enjoyed such as hunting, fishing, horseback riding, boating, snowmobiling, and just plain hiking. And in support of that are two township-maintained recreation areas, one on Waggoner' s Gap Road and the other on Fem Avenue.












x	01-01-2014
 
PREFACE


PREFACE


The Town ship of No11h Middleton has, over the years, passed through a process of legislative change common to many Amer ican com munities. Wh ile only a few simple Jaws were necessary at the time of the establishment of the Township, subsequent growth of the community, together with the complexity of modem life, has created the need for new and more detailed legislation for the proper function and government of the Township. The recording of local law is an aspect of mun icipal history, and as the community develops and changes, review and revision of old laws and consideration of new laws, in the light of current trends, must keep pace. The orderly collec­ tion of these records is an important step in this ever-continuing process. Legislation must be more than mere chronological enactments reposing in the pages of old records. It must be availa­ ble and logically arranged for convenient use and must be kept up-to-date. It was with thoughts such as these in mind that the Board of Supervisors ordered the following codification of the Township's legislation.


Contents of Code

The various chapters of the Code contain all currently effective legislation of a genera l and per­ manent nature enacted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Middleton, includ­ ing revisions or amendments to existing legislation deemed necessary by the Board of Supervi­ sors in the course of the codification.


Division of Code

The Code is divided into part s. Part I, Administrative Legislation, contains all Township legisla­ tion of an administrative nature, namely, that dealing w ith the administration of government, that establishing or regulating municipal departments and that affecting officers and employees of the municipal government and its departments. Part II, General Legislation, contains all other Town­ ship legislation of a regulatory nature. Items of legislation in this par t generally impose penalties for violation of their prov isions, whereas those in Part I do not.


Table of Contents and Grouping of Legislation

The Table of Contents details the arrangement of material alphabetically by chapter as a mean s of identifying specific areas of legislation. Wherever two or more items of legislation have been combined by the editor into a single chapter, the use of art icle designations has preserved the identity of the individual enactments, and the titles of the articles are listed beneath the chapter title in order to facilitate location of the individual enactments.










X l	01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


Reserved Chapters

Unassigned chapter numbers do not appear in the Table of Contents but are available for assign­
ment to new enactments. In this manner, new subject matter can be included alphabetically .


Pagination

A unique page-numb ering system has been used in which each chapter forms an autonomous unit. The first page of each chapter is the number of that chapter followed by a colon and the nu­ meral "l." Thus, Chapter 6 would begin on page 6:1. By use of this system, it is possible to add or to change pages in any chapter, or add new chapters, without affecting the sequence of subse­ quent pages.


Numbering of Sections

A chapter-re lated section-numbering system is employed in which the section number indicates the number of the chapter and the location of the section within that chapter. Thus, the first sec­ tion of Chapter 30 would be § 30-1, while the sixth section of Chapter 57 would be § 57-6.


Scheme ·

The scheme is the list of section titles that precede s the text of each chapter. These titles are care­ fully written so that, taken together, they may be considered as a summary of the content of the chapter. Taken separately, each describes the content of a particu lar section. For ease and preci­ sion of reference, the scheme titles are repeated as section headings in the text.


Histories

At the end of the Scheme (list of section titles) in each chapter is located the legislative history for that chapter. This History indicates the specific legislative source from which the chapter wa s derived, including the enactment number, if pertinent,  and the date of adoption. In the case of chapters containing parts or articles derived from more than one item of legislation, the source of each part or article is indicated in the text, under its title. Amendment s to individual section s or subsections are indicated by histories where appropriate in the text.


Codification Amendments and Revisions

New chapters adopted during the process of codification are cited in chapter histories with refer­ ence to "Ch. 1, General Provisions," where the legislation adopting the Code and providing for substantive revisions will appear after final enactment. Sections and subsections that are amended or revised during the process of codification are indicated in the text by means of Editor's Notes also referring to "Ch. 1, General Provision s." Following adoption of the Code, during the course of routin e supplementation , these references will be updated to a History of the Code Adoption legislation.





XU	01-01-2014
 
PREFACE


General References; Editor's Notes

In each chapter containing material related to other chapters in the Code, a table of General Ref­ erences is included to direct the reader's attention to such related chapters. Editor's Notes are used in the text to provide supplementary information and cross-references to related provisions in other chapters.


Appendix

Certain forms of local legislation are not of a nature suitable for inclusion in the main body of the Code but are of such significance that their application is community-wide or their provisions are germane to the conduct of municipal government. The Appendix of this publication is reserved for such legislation and for any other materi al that the community may wish to include.


Disposition List

The Disposition List is a chronological listing of legislation, indicating its inclusion in the publi­ cation or the reason for its exclusion. The Disposition List will be updated with each supplement to the Code to include the legislation reviewed with said suppleme nt.


Index

The Index is a guide to information. Since it is likely that this publication will be used by persons without formal legal tra ining, the Index has been formulated to enable such persons to locate a particular section quickly. Each section of each chapter has been indexed. The Index will be sup­ plemented and revised from time to time as new legislation is added.


Instructions for Amending the Code

All changes to the Code, whether they are amendments, deletions or additions, should be adopted as amendment s to the Code. In doing so, existing material that is not being substantively altered should not be renumbered.

Adding new sections. Where new sections are to be added to a chapter , they can be added at the end of the existing material (continuing the numbering sequence) or inserted between existing sections as decimal numbers (e.g., a new section between  §§ 65-5 and 65-6 should be designated
§ 65-5.1).

Adding new chapters. New chapters should be added in the proper alphabetical sequence in the appropriate division or part (e.g., Part I, Administrative Legislation , or Part II, General Legisla­ tion), utilizing the reserved chapter numbers. New chapter titles should begin with the key word for the alphabetical listing (e.g., new legislation on abandoned vehicles should be titled "Vehicles, Abandoned" under "V" in the Table of Contents, and a new enactment on coin-operated amuse­ ment devices should be "Amusement Devices" or "Amusement Devices, Coin-Operated" under "A" in the Table of Contents). Where a reserved number is not available, an "A" chapter should





Xlll	Ol-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON CODE


be used (e.g., a new chapter to be included between Chapters 166 and 167 should be designated
Chapter 166A).

Adding new articles. New articles may be inserted between existing articles in a chapter (e.g., adding a new district to the Zoning Regulations) by the use of "A" articles (e.g., a new article to be included between Articles XVI and XVII should be designated Article XVIA). The section number s would be as indicated above (e.g., if the new Article XVIA contains six sections and existing Article XVI ends with§ 166-30 and Article XVII begins with§ 166-31, Article XVIA should contain§§  166-30.1 through  166-30.6).


Supplementation

Supplementation of the Code will follow the adoption of new legislation. New legislation or amendments to existing legislation will be included and repeals will be indicated as soon as pos­ sible after passage. Supplemental pages should be inserted as soon as they are received and old pages removed, in accordance with the Instruction Page which accompanies each supplement.


Acknowledgment

The assistance of the Township officials is gratefully acknowledged by the editor. The codifica­ tion of the legislation of the Township of North Middleton reflects an appreciation of the need s of a progressive and expanding community. As in many other municipalities, officials are faced with fundamental changes involving near ly every facet of community life. Problem s increase in num­ ber and complexity and range in importance from everyday details to crucial areas of civic plan­ ning. It is the profound conviction of General Code that this publication will contribute signifi­ cantly to the efficient administration of local government. As Samuel Johnson observed, "The law is the last result of human wisdom acting upon human experience for the benefit of the public."



























XIV	01-01-2014
 
























INDEX
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 

DEFI   ITfONS   OTE: For th e convenience of th e Code user. all terms defined in this Code a rc in­ clud ed in th e Index under the
h eadin g "Definitions and Abbrevi­
ation s."


-A -

ABANDONMENT
Insurance,   1 17-4
N ui sances, 134-3
Sewers and water,  164-2, 164-73,
164-80
Zoning, 204-22, 204-49. 204-53 ,
204-63, 204-73
A BBR EVl.ATIO   S,see DEFIN I­ TIONS AND ABBREV IA­ TIONS
ACCES ORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTU R ES
Floodplain  management,  1 12-23
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-59, 180-65
Zon ing, 204- 13 - 204- 16, 204-25,
204-44,204-48 -204-50
ACCESSORY USES AND
STRUCTURES
Zoni n g, 204-13 -204-20 , 204-25,
204-35, 204-44, 204-47 -
204-50, 204-55
See also CONDITI ONAL USES ;
NONCONFO RMING USES ;
PERMITTED USES ; SPE­ CI AL EXCEPT ION USES
A DULT USES
Zoning, 204-19, 204-35 A DVERTISING
Building constru ction, 80-2
Drug paraphernalia , 106-3 Manager, 21-8
Recreation Adv isory  Board, 41-5
Zonin g, 204-25, 204-37, 204-4 1,
204-49, 204-50, 204-63, 204-
73
ADV I SOR Y  BOARD
Recreation Advisory Board , 41-1
-4 1-6
See also  RECREATION  A DV!­
SORY BOARD AFFORDA BL E HOUS ING, see
FA IR HOUSING AGRICULTURA L USES
Zoning, 204-47
AGRICULTURAL ZONE (AG)
Zoning, 204-13
A IR CONDITION I NG
Floodpla in man agement , 112-24
Stormwater management, 175-24
Zoning, 204-37, 204-40, 204-49
A IR POLLUT ION
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-68
Zoni ng, 204-37, 204-50
See also POLLUTIO N
 
A IRPOR T OVERLAY  ZONE (A PO)
Zoning, 204-22
ALA RM S, 66-2, 66-3
Assessments, 66-3
Centra l Receiv ing Station, 66-4
Centra l Receiving Station : re-
sponse to alann, 66-4
Charges, 66-3, 66-7 Ch ief of Police, 66-2
Costs and expenses, 66-7
Definitions, 66- 1
Emergencies, 66-2 - 66-4
Enforcemen t, 66-7
False alarms, 66-3, 66-7 Fire Department , 66-4, 66-6 Liabili ty, 66-6
Liabili ty of N01th M iddleton
Town ship,66-6
Notices, 66-2, 66-3
Not i fication by subscriber,66-2
Obligation and duty of subscriber, 66-5
Police Departmem , 66-2, 66-3,
66-6, 66-7
Police officers, 66-2
Records, 66-4
Reports, 66-4
Sewers and water, 164-87, 164-
108
Violations and penalties, 66-5,
66-7
See also FALSE ALA RMS
ALARMS, FALSE, see FALSE
ALARMS
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Parks and recreati on areas, 140-4
ALUM  I NUM
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment, 180-75
AMER I CANS WITH  DISABILl­
TI E  ACT
Zon ing, 204-69
See also DISABILITY; DlSA­
BLED PERSO NS AMUSEMENTS
Fireworks,    I 09-2
Taxation , 186-32, 186-34 - 186-
37
AMUSEMENT TAX
Taxation, 186-32 - 186-43
ANC HOR ING
Floodplain managem ent. 112-23,
I12-24, 112-27
ANIMALS, 70- 1, 70-3, 70-4
Appeals, 70-5
Allomey's fees. 70-5
Conduct, activities and conditions constituti ng violations, 70-3
Costs and expenses, 70-5 Definition s, 70-2
Dogs, 70-3
Exemptions, 70-4
Fees, 70-5
Fireworks,  l 09-5
Floodplain mru1agement , I 12-24 Liabi lity, 70-5
 
Notices, 70-5
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Police  Departm ent, 70-5
Sewers and water, 164-34
Short title, 70- 1
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 180-85
V iolat ions and penal Lies, 70-3 -
70-5
Zoning,204-13, 204- 14,204- 1 7 -
204-19, 204-33, 204-35,204-
37, 204-47, 204-49, 204-50,
204-70
See also DOGS ANTENNAS
Zoni ng, 204- 13-204·20,204-25, 204-29,204-35,204-44,204-
49
A PARTMENTS
Solid waste and recycling, 170-5,
170-8
Zoning, 204-16 -204-18,204-26,
204-30, 204-33-204-35,
204-48, 204-50
APPEALS
Animals, 70-5
Bu ilding consuuction, 80-2
Construction Codes, Unifonn, 95-
4
Drug parnph cma lia, 106-4
Floodplain managemem , I  12- 16,
1 12-20
General  provisions,  I -7
Loitering, 126-2
Parks and recreation areas, 140-9 Pedd ling and soliciting, 146-9 Real estate sales, 152-3
Rental property registry, 156-6
Sewers and waler, 164-24 Stonnwat er management , 175-32 Subdivision and land develop-
ment , 180- 13, 180-87, 180-
103
Taxation , 186-28, 186-41 , 186-43
Zoni ng, 204- 10, 204-63 - 204-70,
204-72, 204-73
AREA, YARD AND BULK REC­
ULATIONS, see YARDS AR R EST WARRANTS, see
SEARC H WARRANTS ;
WARRANTS ASH ES
Disord erly conduct , 102-2
Solid  waste and  recycling,  1 70-5
See also FlY AS H
ASSESSMENTS
A lanns, 66-3
Insurance, 117- 1
Real estate sales, 152-1 - 152-3
Subdivision and land develop- ment, 180-14
Taxation,  J 86-4 1
ATTORNEY, see DISTRlCT AT­
TORNEY
AITORNEY 'S FEES
An imal s, 70-5
Drug paraphernalia , 106-4 General prov isions, 1-6, 1-7



01-0 1 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  INDEX




 
Loitering, 126-2
Parks and recreation areas, 140-9
Real estate sales, 152-3
Ren ta l  prope1ty  registry,  1 56-6 Sewers  and  water,   164-75,  164-
 
BOARD OF SUPERV ISORS
Sala1ies and compensation , 45- 1 -
45-3
Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180- 100,  180-10 I
 
Board of Appeals, 80-2 Code Official, 80-2
Costs and expenses, 80-2
Fees, 80-2
Fire Chief, 80-2
 

 
Solid waste and recycl ing, 170-19 Subdivision and land develop-
ment,  180-103
Taxation , 186-43
Zoning, 204-67, 204-69
See also DISTRICT ATTOR­ NEY
AUT HORIT IES, MUN ICIPAL
Carlisle Suburban A utho1ity, 7-1, 7-2
A1ticles of lnCOITJOration, 7-2
Intention  to organ ize autho1ity, 7- 1
LeT01t Regional Auth o1ity, 7-3,
7-4
A 1ticles of l nc01lJoration , 7-4
Intention to organize authority, 7-3


-B ­
BACK FI LLING
Stonnwater  management,    1 75-28
See also EXCAVATIONS ; FILL
BACKGROUN D CHECKS
Peddling and soliciting, 146-5, 146-6
BARR ICADES
Sewers and water, 164-4, 164-22 Veh icles and haffic, 196-13 Zoning,  204-49
BATTERIES
Zoning, 204-49
BED AND BREAKFAST Zoning, 204-35, 204-48
BEER, see A LCOHOLIC BEVER­
AGES
BICYCLES
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-44, 180-75
Zon ing, 204-37
See also PEDALCYCLES BL ASTING, see EXPLOSI VES BLIGHT
I nsurance,  I  17-4
Zoning,204-2
BLOCK S
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-24, 180-27, 180-
35
Zoning, 204-17, 204- 18, 204-25,
204-37, 204-49
BOARD OF APPEALS
Build ing constru ction, 80-2 Constrnction Codes, U n iform, 95-
4
See also A PPEALS
 
Zoning, 204-48
BOA RD OF ZONING APPEALS,
see APPEALS
BOATS AN D BOATI NG
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
Veh icles and traffi c, 196-17
Zon ing, 204-35, 204-37, 204-44,
204-49
BOIL ERS,  see  OUTDOOR WOOD-F I RED BOILERS
BONDS
Fireworks, 109-4, 109-7, 109-8
Junkyards, 120-5
Manager, 2 1-6
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-91, 180-94, 180-
95
Zoning,204-47,204-49,204-67
BONFIRES, see BURN ING; BUR N ING, OUTDOOR; FIRES; OPEN BURN ING
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
Costs and expenses, 76-6, 76-7
Definition s, 76- 1
Height regul ations, 76-2, 76-3 Licenses and pennits, 76-7 Liens, 76-6
Notice of violation, 76-5
Notices, 76-5, 76-6
Not ices of violations, 76-5 N uisances, 76-2
Responsibility for cutting vegeta­
tion, 76-4
Sewers and water, 164- 108 Subdiv ision and land develop­
ment, 180-38, 180-89
Township may cut vegetat ion up­ on failure to compl y with no­ tice, 76-6
Unlawful to pennit vegetation to
exceed eight inches in h eight ,
76-3
Vegetat ion over eight inches high constitutes  n uisance, 76-2
Violations and penalties, 76-4 -
76-7
Zoning, 204-25, 204-30, 204-35,
204-49
BUFFERS
Stonn water managemen t, 175-3 Subd ivision and land develop­
ment, 180-59, 180-91
Zon ing, 204-26, 204-30, 204-44,
204-49,204 -50,204-55
See also SCR EENS AN D
SCREEN ING
BU ILDING CONSTRUCTION
Additions, insertions and changes, 80-2
Advertising, 80-2
Appea ls, 80-2



2
 
Licenses and pennits, 80-2
Notices, 80-2
Notices of violat ions, 80-2
Records, 80-2
Stop-work ord ers, 80-2 Varia nces, 80-2
Violations and penalt ies, 80-2 Zon ing Hearing Board, 80-2 Zon ing Officer, 80-2
See also CONSTRUCTION;
CONSTRUCT ION COD ES,
UN IFORM
BU ILDI NG  INS PECTOR, see
CODE ENFO RCEMENT OF­ FICER; CODE OFFICI A L; IN­ SPECTIONS; ZONING .OF­ FICER
BUILDING OFFICIAL, see CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; CODE OFFICIAL
BU ILDING PERMI TS
Floodp lain management , l 12-2,
1 12-5 - 1 12-16, 1 12-24
Manager, 2 1-8
Outdoor wood-fired boi lers, 137-
3
Stom1water managemen t,  175- 11
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-33, 180-52
Zoning, 204-23, 204-37, 204-46,
204-48, 204-70
See also LICENSES AN D PERM ITS; ZON ING PER ­ M ITS
BUILDING S, NUM BERING  OF
Costs and expenses, 86-2
Identification numbers required, 86-1
Monumen ts, 86- I
Signs, 86- 1
V iolations and  penalties, 86-2
BURNING
Burning, outdoor, 92- 1, 92-3 -
92-5
Solid waste and  recycling, 1 70-
22, 170-23
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment , 180-69
See also FIR ES; OPEN  BU RN­
ING
BURNIN G, OPEN, see FIRES; OP EN BURN ING
BURN ING, OUTDOOR, 92-1, 92-
3 -92-5
Costs and expen ses, 92-6
Definitions, 92-2
Exception s, 92-3
Fanns and fanning, 92-4
Fi re Chief, 92-5
Fire hazards, 92-4
Fires, 92-3, 92-4



01 -0 1- 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Fires prohibited on public proper- ty, 92-3
Hazardous wastes, 92-4
Licenses and permits, 92-6
Meetings, 92-5
Nuisances, 92-4
Open buming, 92-4, 92-5
Ou tdoor burning, 92-1
Parks and recreat ion areas, 92-3 Police Department, 92-4
Recyclables, 92-4
Recycling, 92-4
Resttict ions on fires on pri vate
prope1ty, 92-4
Safety standards, 92-4, 92-5
Short title, 92-1
Temporary restrictions, 92-5 Violations and penalties, 92-6 Zoning Officer, 92-4
See also FIRES; OPEN BURN­ ING; OUTDOOR BURN­ ING
BUSES
Vehicles and traffic, 196-20


-C­
CAMPGROUNOS
Zon i ng, 204-14,  204-35, 204-49
CAM PING
Parks and recreat ion areas, 140-4 Zoni ng,204-49
CAMPS
Zoning,204-49
CAMPSITES
Zon i ng, 204-49
CARDBOARD, see CORRUGAT­ ED CA RDBO ARD
CARLISLE SUBURBAN  AU­
THORITY
Authorities, municipal , 7-1, 7-2
CEASE ANO DESIST ORDERS
Zon ing, 204-64
CEMETERIES
Zoning, 204-14, 204-35 , 204-49
CENTRAL RECEIVING STA­
TrON
Alarms, 66-4
CERTIFICATES OF INSU R­
ANCE
Zoning, 204-49
See also FIR E INSURANCE ;
INSURANCE
CERTIFICATES  OF  REGIS­ TRATION, see REG I STRA­ TION
CERTIF ICATES OF USE
Zoning,204-69, 204-70
CERTIFICATES OF USE AND
OCCU PANCY
Zoning, 204-69, 204-70
CESSPOOLS
Sewers and water, 164-2, 164-11
CHARGES
AJamJS, 66-3, 66-7
Insurance, 117-1
 
Sewers and water, 164-8 - 164-
10,  1 64-27,  164-29,  164-30,
164-37
Solid waste and recycling, 170-5,
170-6
Stormwater management, 175-22 Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-17
Zoning, 204-37,204-72
See also COSTS AND EX­
PENSES; FEES
CH I EF OF POLICE, 35-3
A lanns, 66-2
Peddling and soliciting,  146-6, 146-8, 146-9
Vehicles and traffic, I96-3, 196-
14, 196-21, 196-28
See also POLICE CHIEF CHURCHES, see PLACES OF
WORSHIP
CODE ENFORCEMENT  OF- FICER
Manager, 2 1-8
Solid waste  and  recycli ng,  1 70-20
See also ZON ING OFFICER CODE   OFFICIAL
Buildin g construction, 80-2 Construct ion Codes, U niform, 95-
3
See also CODE ENFORCE­
M EN T OFFICER; CON­ STRUCTION CODE OFFI­ CIAL
COLLECTOR, see TAX COL­
LECTOR
COM BUSTIBLES, see EXPLO­ SIVES; FLAMMABLE S
COMMERC IAL DISTRICTS
Zoning, 204-1 7
COMM ERCIA ULIGHT 1.NDUS­
TR I AL ZONE (C/LI)
Zoning, 204-19
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Zoni ng, 204-44
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES,
see CONTAG IOUS DISEASES COMPENSATION
Fire company, 15-2
Manager,21-5
Peddling and soliciting, 146-3 Recreation Adviso1y Board, 41-4 Salaiies and compensation, 45-1 -
45-3
Sewers and water, I64-49
Taxation , 186-18
Zon ing, 204-48 , 204-62, 204-63,
204-69. 204-73
See also SALAR I ES AND
COM PENSATION
COMPLA INTS
Manager,2 1-8
N uisances,  134-5
Zoning, 204-69, 204-70
COMPOSTING
Solid waste and recycling, I70-17 Zoning, 204-40, 204-44, 204-49
COMPREHENS IVE PLAN
Recreation Advisory Board , 4 I-5



3
 
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-33, 180-85 - 180-
87
Zoning, 204-1 I , 204-23, 204-64,
204-69, 204-72, 204-73
CONDIT IONAL USE PERMITS,
see LICENSES AN D PER­ M ITS
CONDITIONAL  USES
Su bdivision and land develop­ ment,  180-24
Zoning, 204-6, 204- 13 -204-20,
204-23, 204-25, 204-37,204-
46, 204-69, 204-73
See also ACCESSORY  USES; NONCONFORM ING USES; PERMITTED   USES;SPE­ CIA L EXCEPTION USES
CONFIDENTIALI TY
Manager, 2 1-8
Taxat ion, 186-39 CONSERVAT ION DISTRICTS
Floodplain management, I12-8
Sto1mwater   management,     1  75-10,
175-15, 175-16
Subdivision and  land develop­ ment,   1 80-25,  180-28, 180-
30,  1 80-73,  180-78,  180-82,
180-83
Zoning, 204-47
CONSERVAT ION EASEMENTS,
see EASEMENTS CONSTRUCTION
Construct ion Codes, U nifo1m , 95-
1 -95-3
Floodp lain management, 112-1,
I12-2, I 12-5, 1 12-7 - I I2-9,
112- 1 I- I  12-13,  112-18,
112-21 - 112-25, 112-28,
I12-32
Nuisa nces, 134-3
Sewers and waler, 164-3 - 164-5,
164- 1 1, 164-16, 164-21, 164-
57, 164-72, 164-73, 164-75,
164-76, 164-78, 164-80, 164-
86, 164-87, 164-89, 164-90,
164-93, 164-114, 164-1 16
Stonnwater management, 175-3 -
1 75-5,  175-10, 175-15, 175-
2 1, 175-28, 175-29
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-5, 180-24 - 180-
26, 180-28, I80-29, 180-32 -
1 80-45, I80-51, I80-72, 180-
74, L80-77, 180-79- 180-82,
180-84, 180-89, 180-92, 180-
101
Taxation,   186-15,  !86-2 1
Vehicles and traffic, 196-6, 196-
13
Zoning , 204-22 , 204-23, 204-25,
204-37, 204-40 -204-42,
204-48 -204-50, 204-63,
204-69 , 204-70,204-73
See also BU ILDING CON ­
STRUCTION





01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETO N INDEX



 
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFI­
CIAL
Construction Codes, Unifonn, 95-
3
See also CODE OFFICIAL CONSTRUCTION  CODES, UNI­
FORM, 95-1 -95-3
Admi nistration and enforcement,
95-1
Adoption of standards, 95-2
Appeals, 95-4
Board of Appeals, 95-4 Code Official, 95-3
Constru ction Code Official , 95-3 Effect on other ordinances, 95-5 Fees, 95-6
Inspections, 95-3
Process for administration and en- forcement, 95-3
Two-fa mily dwellings, 95-3
Util ities, 95-3
See also BU ILDING CON­ STRUCTION
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL, see CODE ENFO RCEMENT OFFICER; CODE OFFICI AL
CONSTRUCTION    PERMI TS, see BU ILDING PERMITS; LI­ CENSES AN D PERM ITS;
ZON ING PERMITS CONSTR UCTION  SIGN S, see
SIGNS
CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
Zoning, 204-42 CONTAGIO US DISEASES
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment,  180-70
CONVALESCENT HOME S, see
NURS ING HOMES CONVENIEN CE  STORES
Zon ing, 204-18, 204- 19, 204-35 CORRUGATED CARDBOARD
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4,
170-5
COSTS AND  EXPENSES
A lam1s, 66-7
Animals, 70-5
Bru sh, grass and weeds, 76-6, 76- 7
Building construction, 80-2 Buildings, numberi ng ot:86-2 Bu m ing, outdoor, 92-6
Cu rfew, 98-6
Disorderly conduct,  I02-4 Drug paraphemalia,  106-4
Floodplain  management,   112-7, 1 12-15, 112-32
General provisions, 1-6, 1-7
Insurance, 117- 1 - 117-3, 117-6
Junkyards,  120-14
Loitering, 126-2
Nuisances,   1 34-5,   I 34-6
Outdoor wood-fired boi lers, 137- 4
Parks and  recreat ion areas,  I 40-9 Pedd ling and sol iciting, 146- 1O Real  estate sales,  152-3
Recreatio n Advisory Board, 4 1-4
 

Rental prope11y registry, 156-6 Sewers and water, 164-2 - 164-6,
164-11, 164-14, 164-16, 164-
17,  164-21-164-23,   164-30,
1 64-32,  I 64-35,   164-39,  164-
67, 164-7 1 , 164-75, 164-76,
164-80, 164-82, 164-85, 164-
89, 164-90, 164-92, 164-97,
164- 108, 164-1 12, 164-1 15,
164-116
Solid waste and  recycling,   170-5, 1 70-6,  170-15, 1 70-19
Stonnwater management,  175-2,
175-23, 175-31
Subdivision and land devel op­
m ent , 180-1 I,180-14, 180-
17, 180-18, 180-20, 180-23,
180-26,  180-28,  1 80-29,  180-
34,  180-44,  180-60,  1 80-62,
1 80-79, 1 80-91 ' 180-92, 180-
95 - 180-97, 180-100, 180-
103
Taxatio n , 186-7, 186- 18, 186-29,
I 86-30,  186-35,  186-43
Vehicles and tratlic, I 96-3, 196- 4, 196-8, 196- 1 2 - 196- 14,
196-21, 196-24, 196-29
Zoning, 204-22, 204-25, 204-37,
204-48' 204-49' 204-5 1, 204-
57, 204-63, 204-67, 204-69,
204-70,204-72,20 4-73
See also CHARGES; FEES
COWS, see  LIVESTOCK
CROSSWALKS, see  STR EETS AN D SIDEWALKS
CU LVERTS
Subdivi sion and land develop­
ment, I 80-24, 180-30, 180-
75, 180-76, 180-8 1, 180-93
CURBS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-24,  180-30, 1 80-
34, 180-38, 180-39, 180-75,
180-89, 180-93
Vehicles and traffi c, 196-6
Zoning, 204-32, 204-35, 204-36,
204-48
CURFEW,  98- 1
Costs and expenses, 98-6
Definitions, 98-2
Exceptions,   98-3 General prov isions,  I -7
Licenses and pennits, 98-6
Minors, 98-3 - 98-5
Short title, 98- 1
U nlawful conduct of minors, 98-3 Unlawfu l conduct of owners or
operators of est ablishments, 98-5
Unlawfu l conduct of parents, 98-4 V iolations and penalties. 98-3 -
98-6
See also MINORS







4
 

-O ­
DAY-CARE FACILITIES
Zoning, 204-48 -204-50
See also FAM I LY DAY-CARE DEBRIS,see  GARBAGE,   RU B­
BISH AN D REFUSE
DECKS
Zoning, 204-40
DEFENSE AND  I N DEMN IFICA­ TION, see LIABILITY
DEFINITIONS AND ABBR EVI ­
ATIONS
Aba ndonded orju nkcd vehicle,
134-2
Abut, 180-10, 204-12
Accelerated erosion, 180-1O Access drive,  180-10,204- 12
Accessory apartment,204-12
Accessory use or structure, 112- 34
Access  spaci ng,   1 80-10
Acreage, net, 180-10, 204-12
Act,  I 64-41, 204-12
Act537, 164-102
Adjacent, 180-10,204-12 Adm ission, 186-33
Adul t-related tenns and phra ses,
204-12
Agreement,  164-3 1, 164-70
Agribusiness, 204- 12 Agricultura l activity, 175-9 Agricultural  operation, 204-12
Ag1iculture, 204- 12
Airport overlay zone tenns and phrases,  204-12
Airstrip, 204- 12
A larm, 66-1
A larm device, 66-1
Alley (or service drive), 180-10, 204-12
Alterations, 204- 12
A ltemate system, 164-102 A lternative sewer, 204-12 Aluminum, 170-3
A musement, 186-33
Animal  equivalent unit (AEU),
204-12
Animal hospit al, 204-12
Apartment building,  170-3
Applicant, 175-9, 180- 10
Appl ication for development ,
180-10
Appoint ing autho1ity,  1 80- 10
Ashes, 170-3
Assisted-liv ing facil ity, 204-12
Atti c, 204-12
Auction, 204-12
Auction house, 204-12
Authority,  164-1, 164-7, 164-19,
164-26, 164-3 1, 180-10
Authorization,  146-2
Authorized agent, 164-102
Auto mated banking facility, 204-
12
Au tomobile filling and/or service station, 204- 12




01 - 01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Au tomobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle renlaVsales,  204-12
A u tomobile, heavy equipment
and similar motor vehicl e re­ pa ir center, 204-12
A utomobile w recking, jun k and scrap storage and  sales estab­ l ishments (junkyard), 204- 12
Basement , 112-34
Bed-and-breakfa st, 204- 12
Berm , 1 80-10
Best  management practice
(BMP), 175-9
Billboard, 204-12
Block , 180- 10
Board, 120-2, 164-31, I 64-41,
164-70, 164-84, 164-102,
204-12
Boardi nghouse (includi ng "room­
ing house"), 204-12
Board of Supervisors, 180-10 BOD (biochem ical oxygen de-
mand),   I 64-7
Bulfer,204-12
Building, I12-34, 180-10, 204- 12
Bui lding, accessory, 204- 12
Building area, 204- 12
lluilding facade, 204- 12 Buildin g footptim, 204-12 Building height, 204-12 Building main, 164-19 Building orientation,204-12 Bui lding, pri ncipal, 204-12 Building setback line, 180-10,
204-12
Building sewer, 164-I
Bulky waste, 1 70-3
Camper,204- 12
Campground , 204-12 Camping un it, 204-12 Campsite, 204-12
Capped sewers,  180- 10
Carport, 204- 12
Cartway, 180-10, 204-12
Car wash, 204- 12
Cemetery, 204- 12
Centra lized sewage system, 180-
1 0
Centra l  recei ving station, 66-1 Ccrt ificiition , 1 80- 10
Ci vil enforcemen t notice, 1-4
Ci vi l enforcement proceeding,  1-
4
Clear sight t1iangle,  180-10 Clear-sight t riangle, 204- 12
Clinic, medica l, 204- 12
Clu b, clubhouse or lodge, private, 204-12
Codes Enforcement Officer
(CEO), 164-102
Collector,  164-84,  186-1, 186-20,
186-33
Co-location,204-12
Commercial establish ments, 170-
3
Commercial recreation, 204-12 Commingled, 170-3
 
Common open space, 180-10,
204-12
Commonwealth , 164-19
Communications, 66- 1 Communica t ions antenna,  204-12 Communications  equipment
bu ilding, 204-12 Communication s t ower, 204-12
Commun ications tran smitting and receiv ing facility, 204- 12
Commw1ity activ ities, 170-3
Commu nity sewage system, 164-
4 1
Compl etely d1y space, 112-34
Comprehensive Plan, 180- 10,
204-12
Conditional use, 204-12
Condominium, 180-10,204- 12 Conservat ion district, 175-9 Conse1vat ion plan,204- 12
Consulting engineer, 164-31
Consumer  fireworks,   109- 1
Continu ing care retirement com-
mu ni ty, 204-12 Contractor's oflice, 204- 12 Cont ractor's office and storage
yard, 204- 12
Conven ience store, 204-12 Convention center, 204- 12
Copy shop/business service, 204-
l 2
Corrugated cardboard, 170-3
County , 180- 10
County licensee, 170-3
County Planning Commi ssion ,
180-10
Coun ty Planning Department,
180- 10
Craftsman or artisan studio, 204-
12
Crosswa lk, 180- 10
Cul-de-sac, 180- 10
Curb, 180-10
Current year. 66-1 Day  care, 204-12 DCED,  1 86-20
Ded ication, 180- 10
Density, net, 204- 12
DEP, 164-70, 164-84, 1 75-9, 204-
12
Department , 164-41, 164-102
Design stOJm, 175-9
Deten tion volume, 175-9 Deve loper, 1 64- 102, 180-10
Developm ent , I12-34, 180-10,
204- 12
Developm ental disability , 204-12 Deve lopm entally disabled person,
204- 12
Development pl an , 180-10 Developmen t site (site), 175-9 Direct alarm device, 66- 1 Discon nected impervious area
(DI A), 175-9
Display  tireworks,  I 09- 1
Distribut ion, 204-12
Disturbed area, 175-9
Domestic pets, 204- 12



5
 
Dra inage, 180- 10
Drive-in, 204-12
D1ivc-through,204-12
Driveway, 180-10,204-12 Drug paraphe rnalia, 106-2 Dwelling, 180- l 0, 204- 12
Dwelling unit , 164-7, 1 64-26,
1 70-3, 1 80- 10, 204-1 2
Ea rned income, 186-20 Earth distu rbance, 180-10
Earth disturbance activity , 175-9 Earthmoving activity, 180- 10,
204-l 2
Easem ent, 180-10,204-12 Effecti ve date, 186-1 Emergency servicc(s), 66-1
Empl oyer, 186-20
Enactment , 186-1
Enginec1ing speci ficat ions, 180-
10
Engineer, pro fessiona l, 180-10,
204- 12
Engineer, Township, 180-10,
204- 12
Eq ui va lent dwelling un it (EDU),
164-l02
Erosion,  175-9,   1 80-10
Erosion and sedimen t pollurion
control pl an, 180-10 Essentially dry space, 112-34
Essential services, 204- 12 Establ ishment,98-2 Excava tion, 180- 10
Existing condition,  175-9 Fa lse alarm, 66- 1
Famil y, 204- 12
Farm occupation,204-12
FEMA , 175-9
Fence, 204-12
Fill, 180-10, 204- 12
Financial institut ion, 204- 12
Fire  Depart ment, 66- 1
Flood,  112-34
Floodplain, 175-9 Floodplain area, I1 2-34 Floodproofing,  112-34
Floodway, 1 1 2-34,  175-9
Floor area, gross, 204- 12
Floor area, h abitable, 204- 12 Floor area,  net,204-12
Floor area  retail, n et, 204- 1 2
Food service facil ity , 204- 12
Forest m anagement/ti mber opera-
t ions, 175-9
Forest ry , 204- 12
Frontage, 180- 10, 204-12
Fu neral home, 204-12
Future tight-of-way, 180-10 Garage, priva te, 204- 12
Garage/yard sale, 204-12
Garbage, 134-2, l70-3, 204-12
Glass, 170-3
Glossy paper, 170-3
Golf course. 204- 12
Governing body,  180-10, 186-1,
204-12
Group care facility , 204-12
Group home, 204- 12



01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Guarantee, completion,  180-10
Halfway house, 204-12
Haul er, 170-3
Haza rdous material, 204-12 Hazardous waste, 170-3, 204-12 Hazardous waste facil ity, 204-12 HOPE, 170-3
Hearing,  164-4 1
Heavy equipmenl, 204-12
He, his,  1 86-20
Helicopter pad  (plivatc), 204- 12
Heliport, 204- 12
High-grade office paper,  170-3 Him, 186-20
Historic resources phrases and
te11ns, 204-12
Historic strncturc, 1 12-34
Home improvement center, lum­ ber, building matelia ls sales faci lity, 204- 12
Home occupation , 204-12
Horse boarding stables, 204- 12 Ho1ticuln1re, 204-12
Hospital, 204- 12
Hotel, 204-12
Hydrologic soil grou p (HSG ),
175-9
Identified floodplain area, 112-34
Impervious area, 180-10, 204-12
lmpe1vi ous cover, 180-10, 204- 12 lmpe1v ious lot coverage, 204-12 Im pervi ous surface, 180-10
Impervious surface (impervious
area), 175-9
Improved prope11y, 164-1, 164-7,
164- 19, 164-26, 164-31, 164-
84, 164-102
Improvements, 180-10
Indi rect alann device, 66- 1
Individual , 186-20
Individu a l  sewage system ,   164-4 1
l ndusuial  establi shment,  164-1,
164- 19, 164-31
I ndustria I   use,  204-12
Industrial wastes, 164- 1, 164-7
I ndustry,  204-12
Initiating official, 1-4
I nstallation,    164-41
I nstitutional  establishments,  170-
3
Intentional false alarm, 66-1
Issui ng authority,  1 -4
Joint use access d1ive, 1 80- 10 Joint-use  access  drive, 204-12 Joint use driveway,  180-10 Joint-use driveway,  204-12
Junk, 120-2, 134-2, 204-12
Ju nk dealer, 120-2
Junkyard , 120-2, 204-12
Karst,  1 75-9
Kenn el, commercial, 204-12
Know ingly , 98-2
Landd evelopment , 112-34, 164-
102, 180-10
Land development (develop­
ment ), 175-9
Landowner, 180-10,204- 12
 
Landscape architect, professional,
180- 10
Landscaping, 180-10
Large solar energy production fa­
ci lity, 204-12
Large w ind energy produ ction fa­
cility, 204-12
Lateral , 164-1, 164- 1 9
Lau ndry and dry-clean ing estab­ lish ment (indusllial), 204-12 Laundry and dry-cleaning estab- lishmen t (persona l), 204- 12
Leafwa ste, 170-3
Lease,   164-3 I
Legal holiday, 146-2
Lessee, 156-2
Lessor, 156-2
Library, 204- 12
Lighting- related terms and
phrases , 180-10,204-12
Livestock, 204- 12
Loading space, 204- 12
Local Tax Enabling A ct, 186- 1
Long-tenn-care nursing facility,
204-12
Lot, 164-102, 180-10,204-12
Lot area, 180-10, 204-12
Lot coverage, 180-10, 204- 12
Lot line, 180-10,204-12
Lot of record,  180-10, 204- 12
Lot w idth, 180-10, 204- 12
Lowest  floor,  I   1 2-34
Main,  164-19
Mal function, 164-102 Mandatmy participation , 170-3 Manual, 164-70
Manufactu re, 204-12
Manufactu red  home,  1 12-34,  180-
10, 204-12
Manufactured home park, 112-34
Manure, 204- 12
Manure digester, 204-12 Manure storage faci lity, 204-12 Massage th erapist, 204- 12 Massage therapy establishment,
204-12
Material, 92-2
Meter,  164-3 1
Mineral extraction or recovery
operat ion, 204-12
M inerals, 204- 12
Mini-storage  warehou ses, 204- 12
Minor, 98-2
M inor repair, 112-34
Mobile home, 170-3, 180-10,
204-12
Mobi le home lot , 180- 10, 204-12
Mobi le home pa rk , 180-10, 204-
12
Mobi le home parks, 170-3 Motel, 204- 12
Motor freigh t tc1minal , 204-12 Motor vehicle auction, 204-12 Multiunit residential conversion ,
204-12
Municipal Authority Engineer, 180-10
Municipal establishments,  170-3



6
 
Municipality,   1 64- 102,   170-3,
175-9,  180-10,204- 12
Municipal-owned uses, 204-12
Natum l disaster,  66- 1
Natu re preserve and wi ldlife sanctualies, 204-12
Net profits, 186-20
New const rnction, 112-34, 204- 12
Newspape r,   1 70-3
Nightclub,204-12
No-impact home occupation, 204- 12
Noncommerc ial keeping of live-
stock, 204-12
Nonconfon ning lot, 204-12 Nonconfonning structure, 204-12 Nonconfonni ng use,204- 12 Nonconfo1mity, dimensional ,
204-12
Nonprofit  use, 204- 12
Nonresident, 186-1
Nonres id ential unit,  164-7
No1th Middleton Township, 186- 20
Notification,  66-1
NRCS, 175-9
Obstn1ction, 180-10, 204-12
Occupation, 186-20 Office, medical, 204-12
Office, professional  bu siness, 204- 1 2
Official plan, 164- 102
Official Township time, 98-2 Off-track betting parl or, 204-12 One-hundred year flood, 112-34 On-lot sewer service, 204-12
On-lot water service, 204-12
Open space, 204- 12
Operator, 98-2
Ornamenta l pond and wading
pool, 204-12
Outdoor cafe/dining, 204- 12
Outdoor fa1mers/Oea market,
204-12
Outside display and sales, 204-12 Owner, 70-2, 164-1, 164-7, 164-
19, 164-26, 164-31, 164-41,
164-70, 164-84, 164-102
PA DEP, 180-10,204-12
Parent, 98-2
Park, 204- 12
Parking, 204-12
Parking compound , 204-12
Parking lot, 204-12
Parking space, 204-12
Parking structure, 204-12
Paved area, 204-12 Peak discharge, 175-9
Penn DOT,204-12
Percolation test, 180-10
Person , 66-1, 76- 1, 92-2, 1 12-34,
120-2, 134-2,  146-2, 156-2,
164-1, 164-7, 164-19, 164-
26, 164-102, 170-3, 186-33,
204- 12
Personal care home, 204-12 Personal care home center, 204-
12



0 1 -0 1 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Personal notice, 120-2
Personal se1vice business, 204-12
Pe1vious area, 175-9
Pervious mate1ial or surfac e, 204-
12
Pesticide, 204- 12
Pet, 170-3
pH , 164-7
Place of worship, 204-12
Plan, 180-10
Planned  center, 204-12
Planning Code, 180-10
Planning Comm ission ,  1 80-10,
204- 12
Planning module for land devel-
opment , 164-102
Plat , 180- l 0
Police department, 66- 1
Post office,204- 12
ppm, 164-7
Premi ses, 204-I2
Principal waste-handling facility, 204- 12
Private aillJOTt, 204-12 Processing, 204-12 Processing cen ter, 170-3 Producer, 186-33
Professional land surveyor, 180-
10
Prohibited mate1ials, 92-2
Project site, 175-9
Promoter, 146-2
Publi c, 204-12
Public aillJOrt, 204-12
PubIic grounds, 180- I 0
Public hearing, 180-10,204- 12
Publi c meeting, 204- 12
Publi c notice, 120-2, 180- 10, 204-
12
Public nuisance, 170-3
Publ ic place, 98-2, 134-2
Publi c/private works facility, 204- 12
Publi c sewer, 204- 12 Publi c utiliti es, 204-12 Publi c water, 204- 12
Qual ified professional, 175-9
Radioa ctive matc1ial, 204-12 Radio station, 204-12 Railroad yard, 204- 12
Rail ya rd , 204- 12
Recreation, active, 180-10
R ecreational/ceremonial fires, 92- 2
Recreational vehicle, 112-34,
180-10, 204-12
Recreational vehicle park , 204-12
Recreation, passive, 180-10
R ecyclabl e mate1ials/recyclables,
170-3
Recycling business/center, com­ mercial/industrial , 204-12
Recycli ng business/center, house­
hold waste, 204- 12
Recycling collection serv ices, 170-3
Recycling containers, 170-3
Regu lated activities, 175-9
 
Regu lated ea1th disturbance activ­
ity, 175-9
Regulati ons, 164-41
Regula to1y flood elevation , 112-
34
Remain, 98-2
Renewable energy source, 180-10
Rental, 204- 12
Repair, 204-12
Repeti tive loss, 112-34 Replacement location, 164-102
Repo1t , 180- 10
Research and development, 204-
12
Research laboratory, 204-12
Reserve strip, 180- 10
Resident, 186-1, 186-15 Residential buildin g, 170-3 Residential dwelling unit, 164-70 Residential premis es, 164-70 Residential un it, 170-3 Restaurant, 204- 12
Retai l, 204- 12
Retail business, 204-12
Reta ining tank, 164-84
Retention volume/removed run-
off, 175-9 Retum period, 175-9
Riding schoo ls, 204- 12
Right-of-way, 180- 10, 204-12
Riparian   buffer,   175-9 Road,  I 80-10
Road access point, 180- 10 Roadsid e stand, 204-12 Roadway , 180- 10, 204-12
Rubbish, 134-2, 1 70-3 Running at large, 70-2 Rw1off, 175-9
Rura l occupation, 204- 12
Safe sight distance, 180-10 Sanitary sewage, 164-1 , 164-7
Satellite dish antenna , 204- 12
Sawmi ll, 204- 12
School ,204- 12
Screening, 180-10, 204-12
Screen  pl anting,  .1 80-10, 204-J 2
Secrctaiy, 164-41
Sediment, 175-9, 180-10
Sediment basin ,  1 80-10
Sediment pollution , 180- 10
Seepage pi t/seepage trench, 180-
10
SEO, 164-4 1, 164-70, 164-84
Septic tank , 180-10 Setback , 180-10, 204·I 2
Setback  Iine, 180-10, 204- 12
Sewage, 164-70, 164-84, 164-102
Sewage disposal system (on-site),
180- 10
Sewage disposal system (public),
180-10
Sewage Enforcem ent Officer, 164-102
Sewage facilities, 164-102
Sewer, 164-1, 164-7
Sewer system, 164-1, 164-7
Shooting range, 204-12
Shopping center, 204-12



7
 
Sight distance, 180-10
Sign, 204-12
Single and sepa rate ownersh ip,
164-102, 204-12
Sketch plan, 180-l 0
Skilled or intermediate nursing care,204-12
Slope, 180-10
Small flow sewage treaunent fa­
cility, 164-70
Small solar energy system , 204-
12
Small w ind energy system,204-
12
S111olde1ing, 92-2
Soil stabilization, 180-10
Soil survey, 204- 12
Solar collector system, 204- 12
Solar-related equ ipment, 204- 12
Solid waste, 170-3
Solid wa ste collection services,
170-3
Special except ion , 204-12
Special pennit, I12-34
State wa ter quality requirement s,
175-9
Storage, 204- 12
Storefront, 204- 12
Stonnwater, 175-9
Stonnwat er management basin,
204-12
Stonnwater management best
management practices, 175-9
Stormwater management  faci lity,
175-9
Stonnwater management plan,
175-9, 180-10
Stormwatcr  management   site plan,  1 75-9
Story, 204-12
Street, 180-10, 204-12
Street center line, 204- 12
Street frontage , 204-12
St reet line, 180- 10,204-12
Street, p1ivate, 180-10, 204- 12
Street, public, 180-10, 20-12 Streci 1ight-of-way line. 180-10,
204-12
Structure, 112-34, 164-102, 180-
10, 204-12
Subdivider, 180- 10
Subdi vision, 112-34, 164-41,
164-102, 175-9, 180- 10
Subdivision and land develop­ ment ordinance (SALDO), 204-12
Subscriber, 66- l
Substantial additions to manufac­ tured home parks, 112-34
Substant ial damage, 112-34
Su bsta nt ial improvement, 1 12-34,
204- 12
Substant ially completed, 180-10
Supervisors,  164-31,   1 80-10
Surveyor, 180- 10
Suspended solids, 164-7
Swale, 180- 10
Swimming pool, 204- 12



01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Syst em, 164-3 1. 164-41
Tavern/bar, 204- 12
Tax,  186- 1, 186-20
Tax Collector, 186- 15 Taxing authority, 186-1 Tax retum, 186-1
Tax year, 186-1, 186-20
TCC, 186-1
TCD, 186- 1
Telephone dialer ala1m device, 66- 1
Test, 164-41
Test ing,204-12
Theater, indoor, 204-12
Theater, outdoor and drive-in,
204- 12
Tile disposal  field, 1 80- 1O
Topsoil, 180-10
Toter cart, 170-3
Townhouse,  170-3
Townhouse complex, 170-3
Township, 120-2, 164- 1, 164-7,
1 64- 19,  164-26,  164-31, 164-
41, 164-70, 164-84, 164-102,
170-3, 175-9, 180-10, 186-
20, 186-33, 204- 12
Township collection service, 170-
3
Township Colkctor, 170-3 Township Engineer, 164-70 Tmnsient retai l business, 146-2 Travel plaza, 204-12
Treatm ent center, 204-12
Truck drop lot, 204- 12
Truck( s), 170-3
Turbine height , 204-12 Undeveloped land, 180-10 Un ifonn construction code
(UCC), 112-34
U nit, 180-10
Usable open space, 180-10
USDA , 175-9
Use, 204- 12
Use and occupan cy permit,204- 12
Used grease or recyclabl e biofu-
els, 134-2
Variance,204- 12
Vegetation , 76-1
Vehicle, commercial, 204- 12
Vehicle, motor, 204- 12 Vete1inarian's office, 204-12 Warehou sing, disuibution and
wholesaling, 204-12
Waste, 204-12
Watercourse, 180- 10, 204- 12
Water facility, 180-10
Wat ershed, 175-9, 180- 10, 204-
12
Waters of the commonwealth ,
180-10
Waters of this commonwealth ,
175-9
W ater survey , 180- 10
Water system, 164- 19, 164-26
Wetland,  175-9
Wetlands, 180-10, 204-12
Wholesale, 204-12
 
Wind  charger, 204- 1 2
W ind energy conservation system
(WECS), 204- 12
Windmill, 204- 12
Window ,204- 12
Wind turbine, 204- 12
Wind turbin e tower, 204-12 Working hours , 164-1, 164- 19,
164-31, 164-41
Yard, 204-12
Y ear, 66-1
Zoning, 204- 12
Zoning ce1tificate of u se and oc-
cupancy, 204-12
Zoning officer, 204-12
Zoni ng ord inance, 180-10
Zoning pe 1mit, 204- 12
DEMOLITION
Zoning, 204-23, 204-49
DESIGN STANDARDS
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-24,  180-30,  180-
32 - 180-45
Zoning, 204-20, 204-36, 204-54
See also P ERFORMA NC E
STAN DA RDS
DINING   FACILIT I ES
Zon ing, 204-48, 204-49
See also RESTAURANTS
DIRT
Disorderly  conduct,  I 02-2
See also EXCAVATIONS; FILL DISABILITY
Manager, 2 1 -8
Taxation,  1 86-2 1 .1
Zoning, 204-69
DISABL ED PERSONS
Zoning, 204-69
See also AM ER ICANS WITH DISABILITIES  ACT;
HAND ICAPPED  PERSONS
DISABLED VETERANS, see
VETE R ANS
DISCRIMINATION
Zoning, 204-69
DISORDERLY CONDUCT, 102-
1 , 102-2
A shes,  I 02-2
Conduct, activ ities and conditions constituting disorderly con­ du ct, 102-2
Costs and  expenses,   I 02-4
Di1t, 102-2
Garbage, rubbish and  refuse, I 02-
2
G lass, 102-2
Hea1ings,   I 02-3
Licenses and perm its, I 02-2, I 02-
4
No ise, 102-2
Pedalcycles, 102-2
Police officer a member of the pu bl ic, 102-3
Police officers, 102-3
Tit le, 102-1
Vehicles,  102-2
Violations and  penalties,  I 02-3, 102-4



8
 
See also NOISE
DISTRICT  ATTORNEY
Police, 35-6
See also ATTO R NEY'S FEES
DISTURBING  THE PEACE, see
NOISE
DOG S
Anima ls, 70-3
Parks and recrea tion areas, 140-4
See also ANIMALS
DRAI NAGE
Floodplain managemen t, 112-1, 112-7, 112-24
Junkyards,  120-12
Nuisances, 134-3
Sewers and  wa ter,  164-1 I
Stonnwater management, 175-3,
175-14, 175-1 5, 175-24
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-25,  180-34,  1 80-
36, 180-58, 180-74, 180-75,
180-8 1 ' 180-84
Zoning, 204- 13, 204-32, 204-35,
204-36,204-49,204-50
DRIV E-THROUG H RESTAU­
RANTS
Zoning, 204-49
See also R ESTAURANTS
DRIVEWAYS
Stormwater mana gement, 1 75-5 Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-24, 1 80-34, 180-
37,  1 80-45,  1 80-61,  180-77,
180-84, 180-89
Zoning, 204-17, 204-18 , 204-25,
204-26,204-30,204-32,204-
35, 204-41 , 204-44, 204-48 -
204-50
DRUG  PARAPHERNALIA
Advertising,     I 06-3
Appeal s, 106-4
Attorney's  fees, I 06-4 Costs and  expenses,  106-4 Definitions,  106-2
Drugs,   I 06-3
Fees, 106-4
Hospitals,   I 06-3
Liability,   I 06-4
Licenses and perm its, 106-3, 106-
4
Prohibited  conduct,   I 06-3 Sales,  I 06-3
Sho1t title,  106- 1
Tests,  I 06-3
V iolations and pena lties, 106-3, 106-4
DRUGS
Drug paraphernalia, 106-3
DUM PS AN D DU MPING
Sewers and water, 164-85
Solid waste and recyc ling, 170-2
Zoning, 204-49
DUMPSTERS
Subdivision and land develop­ ment,  180-34
Vehicles and traffic, 196-7 Zon ing, 204-26, 204-44




01 - 01 - 20 14
 
NORTH MlDDLETON  INDEX




 
DUST
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-24, 180-55, 180-
60.  180-8 1
Zon ing, 204-32, 204-37, 204-49


-E ­
EARNED I NCOME TAX
Taxation , 186-1 - 186-9 EASEMENTS
Outdoor wood-tired boilers , 137-
2
Sewers and water, 164-5, 164-73 StonTlwa ter management, 175-15 Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-7, 180-14. 180-24,
180-27,  1 80-30,  180-34,  180-
36, 180-74, 180-79, 180-84 -
180-87, 180-93
Zoning, 204- 17, 204- 18, 204-23,
204-26, 204-32, 204-40, 204-
48
ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE S
Zoning. 204-49
ELECTROMAGNE TIC INTER­
FERENC E
Zoning, 204-25, 204-37, 204-50
ELEVATORS
Zoning, 204-29
EMERGEN CIES
Alarms, 66-2 -66-4
Fire police, 16-1
Floodpla in management , 112-6, 112-17, 112-19, 112-2 1, 112-
32
Sewers and water, 164-22, 164-
1 11
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-34, 180-75, 180-
81
Taxa tion, 186-2 1
Vehicles :ind traffi c, 196-3, 196-
14, 196-28
Zon ing, 204-23, 204-37, 204-43,
204-48   204-50, 204-70
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Floodplain management, 112-6,
1 12- 17,  1 12- 19,  1 12-2 1,  112-
32
Zoning, 204-48, 204-49
EME RGENCY VEHICLES
Subdiv ision and land develop­
ment, 180-34
Zoni n g, 204-49, 204-50
ENCROACHMENTS
Floodplain management, 112-6,
112-21,  1 12-22
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-76, 180-77, 180-
85-180-87
Zoning, 204-22
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER ,see
CODE ENFORCEMEN T OF­ FICER
ENG INEER ,see TOWNS HIP EN­
G INEER
 
EROSTO  AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Stonnwatcr management, 175-2,
175- 10, 175- 15, 175-33
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment.  180-25,  180-28, 180-
30, 180-72, 180-75, 180-78 -
180-80, 180-87' 180-88, 180-
93
Zoning,204-26, 204-47, 204-64
See also SOI L EROSION AND SEDIMENT  CONTROL
ESCROW ACCOUNTS
Recreat ion A dviso1y Board , 41-6 Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-91
Zoning, 204-49
EXCAVAT IONS
Floodplain management,  112-12
Sewers and water, 164-4, 164-22 Subdi vision and land develop-
ment, 180-82, 180-85 - 180-
87
Zoni ng, 204-49, 204-70
See also BACKF I LLING ; DIRT; FILL
EX PENSES, see COSTS AN D EX­
PENSES
EXPLOSION HAZA RDS, see
FLAMMAB LES EXPLOSI VES
Floodpla in mana gem ent , 1 12-24
Sewers and water, 164-11
Zoning , 204-37, 204-49
See also FLA MMAB LES


-F­
FA IR HOUSING
Zoning, 204-69
FALSE ALARMS, 66-3, 66-7
See also ALARMS
FAM I LY DAY-CA RE
Zon ing, 204-50
See also DAY-CA RE FACILI­ TI ES
FARMS AN D FARMING
Burn ing, outdoor, 92-4 Sewers and water, 164-20
Solid waste and recycling, 170- l7
Subdi vision and land develop- ment, 180-24,  1 80-34
Zoning, 204- 13, 204- 14, 204-25,
204-29,204-35,204-44,204-
47, 204-49 -204-51
See also RIGHT TO FARM
FAST-FOOD   R ESTAU RANTS, see DINING FACI LITIES; DRJVE-THROUGH  RES­ TA URANTS;  RESTAU ­ RANTS
FEES
A nima ls, 70-5
Bui lding construction, 80-2
Construction Codes. Unifonn,95- 6
Drug paraphernalia , 106-4



9
 
Fireworks,  I 09-8
Floodplain management , I 12-14
General prov isions, 1-6. 1-7
JunJ..'.)'ards, 120·6
Loitering, 126-2
Parks and recreation areas, 140-9
Peddling and soliciting, 146-3 -
146-5
Real esta te sales,  1 52-3
Recreation Advisory Board, 41 -6 Rental prope1ty regislly, 1 56-6 Sewers and water, 164-3,  164-8,
164-16, 164-2 1 , 164-29,  164-
49,  1 64-52,   164-64,  164-75,
164-76, 164-80, 164-82, 164-
89, 164-90, 164-92, 164-95,
164-1 12, 164-115
Solid waste and recycling, 170-19
StonTlwater managem ent , 175-19,
175-22, 175-23, 175-28
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-4, 180-11, 180-17,
180-18, 180-23, 180-26, 180-
29, 180-4 1, 180-49, 180-53,
180-9 1, 180-96, 180-97, 180-
103
Taxation. 186-34, 186-35, 186-43
Zoning, 204-41, 204-49, 204-51,
204-63, 204-67, 204-69 -
204-73
See also CHARGES ; COSTS
AN D EXPENSES
FENCES
Junkyards, 120- 12
Sewers and  wate r, 164-5,  1 64-6
Zoning, 204-25, 204-26, 204-28,
204-35,204-40, 204-47 -
204-50, 204-55
See alsa H EDGES; HEIG HT REGULATIONS
FILL
Floodplain management , 1 12-24 StonTlwater management , 175-26 Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-77,  1 80-82,  180-
85 - 180-87
See also BACKF ILLI NG;  DI RT;
EXCAVAT IONS
FI LLING STATIONS, see SER­
V ICE STATIONS FINAL PLAN S
Sewers and water,  164-106
Subdi v ision and land develop­
ment , 180-3, 1 80-6, LS0-13 -
180-16,  1 80-20,  180-24, 180-
25, 180-27 - 180-31, 180-34,
180-38, 180-39, 180-43, 180-
49, 180-72, 180-76, 180-78,
180-79, 180-83, 180-91 -
180-93, 180-95
FINANC IAL  I NSTITUT IONS
Recreation Advisory Board , 41 -6
Zoning, 204-17 -204-19, 204-36,
204-48
FINES, see VIOLATIONS AN D
PENALTIES





01-01 -2014
 
NORTH  MIDDLETON INDEX




 
FIRE ALARMS, see ALA RMS;
FALSE ALARMS
FIREARMS
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
See also GUNS; WEAPONS
FIRE CHIEF
Building  construction,80-2
Burning, outdoor, 92-5
FIRE COMPANY
Ju nior Firefi ghters, 15-1, 15-2
Auth oriwtion,   1 5-2 Compensation,    15-2 Fire  Department,   15-2
Title, 15- 1
FIRE DEPA RTMENT
A larms, 66-4,  66-6 Fire company,   I 5-2
Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-25
FIRE EXTI NGU ISHERS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-69 FIR E HAZARDS
Burning, outdoor, 92-4
Zoning, 204-50
FIRE HYDRANTS
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-24, 180-25, 180-
30, 180-63, 180-69, 180-93
Zon ing, 204-32, 204-37
FIRE INSU R ANCE,  117- 1
See also CERTIFICATES OF
INSURANC E; fNSUR­ ANCE
FIR E INSURANCE CLAIMS, see
CERTIFICATES OF INSUR ­
ANCE; I NSURANC E F IR E  LANES
Zoning, 204-50
FIR E POL ICE
Authority limited to nonemergen-
cy deployment, 16-3
Emergencies, 16-1 Manager's authority, 16-2 Meetings, 16-2, 16-3
Notices, 16-2
Purpose,  16- 1
FIRE PREVENT ION
Subdivi sion and land develop­
ment , 180-69 FIRE PROTECTION
Subdi vision and land develop­ m ent, 1 80-34, 180-69
Zoning, 204-37
FIRES
Burning, outdoor, 92-3, 92-4
Pa rks and recreati on areas, 140-4
See also BURN ING ; BURNING ,
OUTDOOR ; OPEN BURN­ IN G; OUTDOOR BURN­ ING
FIREWORKS, 109-2,  109-5, 109-6
Amusements, 109-2
Anima ls, 109-5
Application for continuance, I 09- 8
Application  for perm it,  I 09-4
Bond  requirements,  I 09-7
 

Bonds,  I 09-4,  I 09-7,  I 09-8
Definitions, 109-1
Fees, 109-8
1nspeetions,   I 09-3
Licen ses and perm its, 109-2, 109-
4 - 109-8
Parks and rec reation areas, 109-2, 140-4
Pe1m it requ ired for displ ay, 109-2
Penn its to be nontransferable,
109-6
Safety requi remen ts for displays, 109-3
Safety  standard s,  I 09-3
Sales,  I 09-5,  I 09-6
Township  Treasurer,   I 09-4 Use  for agricultural   purposes,
109-5
Violations and penalties , l 09-9
See  also  EXPLOS I VES
FISHI NG
Parks and recrea tion areas, 140-6
Zoning, 204-44
FLAMMABLES
Floodplain management , 112-24 Sewers and water, 164-11
Zoning, 204-49
See also EX PLOSIVES
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Subdivi sion and  land develop­ ment , 1 80-24
FLOODPLA IN  MANAGEMENT
Act ivities Requirin g Special Per- mits, 1 12-28
Constru ction, 112-28
Floodplains,   1  12-28
Genera l,  1 12-28
Hospita ls,  I  12-28
Impro vements, 1 12-28
Manufactured home parks, 112-28
Manufactured homes, 112-28 N ursing homes, 112-28
Admin istration,  1 12-5-  112-16
Appeals,  112- 1 6
Appli cation   procedures  and requireme nts,  I  12-7
Buildi ng pem1its, 112-5 - 112-
16
Build ing pe1mit s required,
112-5
Changes,  112- 10
Conservation districts, 112-8
Construction , 112-5, 1 12-7 -
112-9, 112- 11 - 112-13
Costs and expenses,   112-7, 1 12-15
Drainage, 112-7
Emergencies, 112-6 Emergencymanagement,112-
6
Encroachments, 112-6
En forcement,  I 12-1 S
Excavations,   1 12- 12
Fees, 112- 14
Floodplains, 112-7- 112-9,
1 12-13
Floodways,   I   12-7



10
 
Gas, 112-7, 112-12
Grades and grading, 112-12 Hearings, 112-16
Improvements,  1 12-6,   1 12-7
Inspection and revocation,
1  12-13
Inspections,    1 12-13
Issuance of build ing pennit,
112-6
Licen ses and pennits, 1 12-5 -
1 12- 16
Notices, 112- 15, 112- 16
Nu isances, 112- 15
Placards,  112-11
Planning Commission, 112-9
Records,  1 12-13
Reports, 112-13
Review by Cou nty Conserva­
tion Dist rict, 112-8
Rev iew of application by oth- ers, 1 12-9
Safety standards,  I  12-6
Start of construction,  I  12-12 Ut i lities, 1 12-7
Violations and penalties, 1 12-
13,  1 12-15
Water, 1 12-6, 112-7, 112-12
Watercourses,   1 12-6,  112-7 Zoning  He-d ring Board,  112-16 Zoning pen nits,  I  12-6
Existin g Strncturcs in  Iden ti fied
Floodplain  Areas,   I   12-29,
112-30
Floodplains,  1 12-30
Floodways,   I   1 2-30
Improveme n ts,  112-29,  1 12-30
General Provisions, 1 12-1 - 112-
4
Abrogation  and greater re-
strictions, 112-3
Applicability, 112-2
Bu ilding penni ts,  I  12-2
Constrnct ion, 1 12- 1 , 1 12-2
Drainage,  112-1
Floodplains, 1 12-1, 112-3,
112-4
I ntent,  1 12- 1
Liability,  1 12-4
Licenses and perm its, 112-2
Safety  standards,  1 12-1
Wam in g and disclaimer of lia- bi lity,  1 12-4
Water,  112- 1
Watersupply,  112- 1 Identification of Floodplain  Are-
as, 112-17- 112-20
Appeal s, 112-20
Boundary disputes,  1 12-20
Changes in identification of
arca, 112-19
Construction, 112-18
Descri ption of noodplain are­
as, 112-18
Emergencies,  112-17, 1 12- 19
Emergency management, 1 12-
17,  1 12-19
Floodplains, I 12- 17 - I 12-20
Floodways,   1 12-18



0 1 - 01-20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Insurance,  1  12- 17,  112-18
Planning Commission, 112-20
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 180-77
TechnicalProvisions,112-21-
112-27
Accessory bu ildings and struc­
tures, 112-23
Air conditioning , 112-24
Anchoring,  112-23, 1 12-24,
1  12-27
Animal s, 112-24
Building penni ts, 112-24 Construction, 112-21 - I 12-25 Design and construction
standards,  I  12-24
Development which may en­ danger h uman life, 112-26
Drainage, 112-24
Elevation and floodproofing requirements, 112-23
Emergencies, 112-21
Emergency management , 112-
21
Encroachments,  112-21, 112-
22
Explosives, I12-24
Fill, 112-24
Flammables, 112-24
Floodplains, l 12-2 1 - I  12-24,
112-26, 112-27
Floodway s, 112-22, 112-26,
112-27
fuel , 112-24, 112-26
Gas, 1 1 2-24
General, 112-21
Grades and grading, 112-23
Height  regulations,   1 12-23,
112-24
I mprovements , 112-21 , I 12-
23, 112-27
Landfi lls, 112-24
Licenses and pennits, 112-21,
I12-22, I 12-24
Manufactured homes, 112-27
Obstructions, 112-23, 112-24
Parking , 112-23 Pollut ion, 112-26
Radioactive substances, 112-
26
Sanita1y faci l ities, 112-23 Screens and  screening,  I12-23 Sewage disposal, private,  112-
24
Special rcquin.:me nts for FW and FA areas, 1 12-22
Special requirem ents for man­
ufactured homes, 112-27 Storage, 112-23, 112-24, 112-
26
Storage tanks , 112-24 Stonnw ater, 112-24 Uniform Construction Code
coordination, 112-25
Utilities. 112-23, 112-24
Vehic les, 112-23
Walls, 112-23, 112-24
Water,  I 12-24
 
Watercou rses, 112-21, 112-22,
112-26, 112-27
Tenninology , 112-33, 112-34
Definitions , 112-34 Interpretation , 112-33
Variances, 112-31, 112-32
Construction, 112-32
Costs and expenses, 112-32 Emergencies, 112-32 Emergency managemen t , 112-
32
Floodpla ins,   112-32 Floodways,  I I 2-32 General,   112-31 Insurance,    112-32
N uisances,  1 12-32
Records, 112-32
Reports, 112-32
Safety standard s, II2-32
Variance procedures and con- ditions, 1 12-32
FLOO DPLArN  OVERLAY
ZONE (FPO)
Zoning,  204-2 1
FLOODPLA INS
Floodplain management, 1 12-1 ,
112-3, 112-4, 112-7 - 112-9,
112-13, 112-17 - 112-24,
112-26 - 112-28, 1 12-30,
1 12-32
Ou tdoor wood -fired bo ilers, 137-
2
Stormwater management. 175-2, 175-3
Subdiv ision and land develop­
ment,  180-24, 180-28,  180-
30, 180-41, 180-77' 180-89
Zoning. 204-8, 204- 13 -204-2 1,
204-41 ,204-49, 204-50, 204-
55, 204-64, 204-69, 204-70,
204-72,204-73
FLOODWAYS
Floodplain management, 112-7,
112-18, 112-22, 1 12-26, 112-
27,  1 12-30, 112-32
Zoning,204-50
FLY ASH
Zoning, 204-37
See also ASHES
FOOD ESTABLISHM ENTS, see DIN ING FACILITIES ; RES­ TAURANTS
FOOD   SERVICE   ESTABLISH­ MENTS,see DI N ING FACI L­ ITIES; RESTAURANT S
FOREST RY
Su bdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-89
Zoning. 204-13 - 204-20,204-26,
204-30,204-35, 204-47
FORESTRY  USES
Zoning, 204-47
FRESHWATER WETLANDS,see
WETLANDS FUEL
Floodplain management, 112-24,
112-26
Sewers and water,  164-1 1



1 1
 
Stormwater management , 175-24 Zoni ng, 204-35, 204-49
FUMES
Zoning, 204-49, 204-50
See also GAS; GASES;ODORS; VAPORS


-G-
GAR AGES
Zoning, 204-25, 204-32, 204-35,
204-49
GAR AGE SALES
Zoning, 204-25, 204-49
See also SALES; YARD SALES
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND RE-
FUSE
Disorderly conduct, l 02-2
Junkyards,  120-12
N uisances, 134-3
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
Subdi vision and land develop-
ment, 180-54, 180-68, 180-
69
Zoning, 204-26,204-44, 204-49
See also TRASH
GAR DEN APARTMENT S, see
A PARTMENTS GAS
Floodplain management, l 12-7,
112-12, 1 12-24
Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 1 80-36
Zoning, 204-35, 204-37
See also FUMES :ODORS GASES
Sewers and water, 164-1 I
See also FUMES; ODORS
GAS STATIONS, see SERV ICE STATIONS
GENERAL PROVIS IONS
Violations and Penalti es,  1- 1 - 1-
8
Amendment and modificat ion,
1-5
Appeals , 1-7
Attorney's fees, 1-6, I-7
Authority,  1-2
Costs and expenses,  1-6,  1 -7
Curfew, 1-7
Definitions, 1-4
Enforcement procedure, fonn and service of civil en ­ forcement notice, 1-6
Fecs,l-{),1 -7
Meetings, 1-7
Noise, 1-7
Notices, 1-6
Parking, 1-7
Polluti on, I-7
Pu rposes and background , 1-3
Records,  1-6
Relationship to other ordi­
nances,  1-8 Safety standards, I -7 Title. 1-1




01 -OJ - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Violation of ordinances and
penalties,    I -7
Water, l-7
 


HAND I CAP
 
-H -
 

204-48 -204-50, 204-55,
204-57
See also FENCES
 
GLARE
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-54,  180-88
Zoning, 204-25, 204-37, 204-4 1,
204-49, 204-50
GLASS
Disorderly  conduct,  I 02-2
Solid waste and recycl ing, 170-4,
170-5
GRADES AND GRADING
Flood plain management , 112-12,
1 12-23
Sewers and wate r, 164-80, 164-95 Sol id waste and recycling, 170-4 Stonnwater management, 175-3,
175-26
Subd iv ision and  land develop­ ment,  180-24,  1 80-25,  180-
28, 180-30, 180-34  180-42
180-74, 180-75, 180-81 - '
180-87, 180-89, 180-91
Zoning, 204-35, 204-37, 204-41,
204-48 - 204-50, 204-70
GRADI NG PLANS
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 180-83
GRAND FATH ERING
Zoning, 204-44
GRASS, see BRUS H , G RASS AND
WEEDS
GRAV EYARDS,  see  CEMETER ­ I ES
GROUNDWATER
Sewers and water, 164-11, 164-
108
Stormwat er management, 175-2,
175-3,   1 75-24
Subdi vision an d land develop­
ment , 1 80-25, 180-30, 180-
88
Zoning, 204-45, 204-49
GROU P HOMES
Zoni ng, 204- 13 -204-18, 204-48
GUARANTEES
Subdi vision and land develop­
m ent, 180-25, 180-28, 180-
9 1
Zoning, 204-47, 204-49 GUARANTIES
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-94
Zoning, 204-37
GUNS
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
See also FI REA R MS; WEA P­
ONS
GUTTER S
Su bdivi sion an d land develop­
m ent , 180-39, 180-75
Zoning, 204-36
 
Zoning, 204-69
HAN DICAPP ED PARKING
Zoni ng, 204-35
See also PARK I NG
HAN DICA PPED PERSON S Zoning, 204-35, 204-69
See also DI SABLED PERSONS
H AZARDOUS MATERIALS AND SUBSTAN CES
Sewers and water, 164-1 I 0
Stonnwater management, 175-24
Zonmg, 204-37, 204-48, 204-49
See also TOXIC SUBSTA NCES
HAZARDOUS WASTES
Burni ng, outdoor, 92-4
Soli? waste and  recycling, 1 70-11 Zomng,  204-49
See also TOX IC SUBSTANCES
HEALTH HAZA RDS
Sewers and water,  164-95 Subdi vision and  land develop­
ment, 180-51 , 180-68
HEARING OFFICER
Zoning, 204-61 , 204-63
See also ZONING  HEARING
BOAR D HEARING S
Buildin g constmction , 80-2
Disorderly  cond uct,  I 02-3
Floodplain management, 112- 16
Junkyards, 120-6, 120-7
Manager, 21-8
Peddl ing and soliciting, 146-9 Sewers and water, 164-65 Subdivi sion and land develop-
ment, 180-13, 180-14, 180-
71, 180- 100, 180-102
Taxation,  186-4 1
Zoning, 204- 10, 204-13 - 204-20,
204-4 1, 204-47'204-56, 204-
60 -204-70,204-72, 204-73
See also ZONING HEARING
BOA RD
H EATING
Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-54,   1 80-88
Zoning, 204-37
H EDGES
Zoning, 204-28, 204-35, 204-40,
204-49
See also FENCES HEIGHT REG U LATION S
B111Sh, grass and weeds  76-2  76-
3	'	'
Floodplain management, 112-23
112-24	'
Junkyards,  120- 12
Outd or wood-fired boilers, 137-

Su bdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-7, 180-58, 180-89
Zoning, 204-3, 204-5  204-22
204-25,204-26,io4-29,io4-
32, 204-35 - 204-37, 204-44,




12
 
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4
See also PAPER
HIGHWAYS,see STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS
HISTORIC FEAT U R ES
Subdivisio n and land develop­
ment, 180-33
Zon ing,204-23
HISTORIC R ESOU R CES
Zoni ng, 204-8, 204- 13 - 204-20,
204-23
HISTORIC R ESOURCES
OVER LAY ZONE (HRO)
Zon ing, 204-23
HOLDING TANKS
Sewers and wa ter, 164-44,  164-
73, 164-108
Zon ing, 204-49
HOLIDAYS
Pedd ling and soliciting, 146-7 Sewers and water, 164-60, 164-63
HOME OCCU PATIONS
Zoni ng, 204-13 -204-1 8 204-35
204-4 1,204-50	'	'
H ORSES
Zon ing, 204-35, 204-47
See also LIVESTOCK
H OSPITALS
D1ug paraphernalia , 106-3
Flood plain management,  112-28
Zon ing, 204-13 , 204-14 , 204-17 -
204- 19,204-35, 204-36, 204-
49
HOTELS
Zon ing, 204- 19, 204-35 -204-37
204-49	'
See also MOTELS
HOUSES OF WORSHIP, see
PLACES OF WORS HI P
HOUSING  STANDARDS,see
FAIR HOUSING
H UNTING
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
HYDRA NTS, see FIRE HY­
DRANTS


- 1-

ICE REMOVAL, see SNOW AND
ICE REMOVAL
ILLUM INATION, see  LIGHTING
IMPOUN DMENT
Zoning, 204-25, 204-44
IM PROVEM ENTS
Floodpla in ma nagement   I  12-6
1 12-7,  112-21,  1 12:23,  112-
27 - 112-30
Junkya rds, 120-12
Manager, 2 1-8
Recreation  Ad v isory  Board, 41-5
Sewers and water, 164-5  164-6
164-80, 164-95, 164.-1 06  '
Stonnwater management , 175-28



0 1 -01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-5, 180-6, 180-13 -
180-15, 180-24, 180-26, 180-
28 - 180-31, 180-34, 180-43,
 
Notification of Pennsylvania Departm ent  ofConununi­ ty and Economic Devel­ opment, I 17-5
 
Location of junk yards,  120-9 Ma intenance ofj unky ards,   I 20-
12
Notices , 120-6, 120-7
 

 
180-97,  180-10 1
Zoning, 204-19, 204-20, 204-26,
204-27, 204-35, 204-40,204-
47 -204-49, 204-55, 204-65,
204-70
INCOME TAX OFFICER
Taxation, 1 86-64
INDEMNIFI CATIO   ,see LIA­ BILITY
INDIVIDU A L SEWAG E DIS­ POSAL, see SEWAGE DIS­ POSAL, INDI VIDUA L
I NDUSTRIAL    WASTES
Sewers and water, 164-2,  1 64-4,
1 64- 11 , 164- 16
INDUSTRIAL ZONE (JND)
Zoning, 204-20
INFESTATION
Zoning, 204-49
INSECTS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-54, 180-55, 180-
89
Zoning,204-25
See also VECTORS
INSPECTIONS
Construction Codes, U ni fotm , 95-
3
Fireworks, I09-3
Floodplai n  management,  112- 13
Junkyards, 120- 12, 120-13 Peddling and soliciting, 146-6
Sewers and wa ter, 164-4, 164-11,
164-12, 164-22, 164-60, 164-
62,  1 64-63,  164-81,  164-86,
164-108,  164-109,  164-1 1 1,
164-115
Stormwat er mana gement, 175-2 1
- 175-23, 175-28, 175-29
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-26, 180-29, 180-
70, 180-71 , 180-75, 180-79,
180-92, 180-94'  1 80-96,  180-
97
Taxation , 1 86-30, 186-39
Zoning, 204-37, 204-44, 204-70
INSURAN CE,  1 17-1 - 1 1 7-3
Fire Loss Claims, 117-1 - 117-6 A bandonment , 117-4 Assessments, I 17-1
Blight, 1 17-4
Charges,  1 17-1
Constru al of prov isions, 11 7-4
Costs and expenses, 117-1 -
117-3, 117-6
Fire insurance,  117- 1
I n surance compa ny  rigbt s re- served,  1 17-3
Liability,   1 1 7-1,  117-2
Liens, 1 17-1 - 117-3
Limits of liability,  1 17-2
No tices, 117- 1, 117-5
 
I17-1
Violations and penalties,  117-
1,  117-6
Floodplain  management,  1 12- 1 7,
112-18, 112-32
Recreation Adviso1y Board, 41-6
Zoning, 204-25, 204-37, 204-49,
204-69
See also CERTI FICATES OF
INSURANCE;  FI RE  I    -
SU RANCE
INTERNET
Stormwater manage men t, 175- l0,
175-33
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment,  1 80-75
INTOXICATIN G BEVERAGES, see A LCOHOLIC BEV ERAG­ ES
IN VESTIGATIONS
Peddling and solicit ing, 146-6
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-87
Taxation, I86-39


-J ­

.JU N IOR FIREFIGHTER S
Firecompany, 15- 1,  15-2
JU NK DEAL ERS
Junkyards, 120- 1, 120-3, 120-6,
120-7, 120-9, 120- 1 I
JUN KYARDS
A pplication for license, 120-4
A pplication for license for exist­
ing junk yards, 120- 1 3
Basis for denial of license renew- al, 120-11
Bond requirements, 120-5
Bonds, 120-5
Compliance wit h  regulations, 120-3
Compliance with zoning and sub-
division regulations, 120- 10 Costs and expenses, I20- I4 Definitions, 120-2
Drainage, 120- 12
Fees, 120-6
Fences, 120- 12
Garbage, rubbish and refuse, 120-
12
Hearings, 120-6, 120-7
Height regulations, 120-12
I mpro vem ents,  120- 12
Inspect ions,  120- 12,  1 20-13
Issuance of license and renewa ls,
120-7
Ju nk dealers,  120-1, 120-3, 120-6,
120-7, 120-9, 120-11
Licenses and pennits, 120-3 -
120-7, 120-11 - 120- 14



13
 
Postingof license, 120-7
Pu rpose, 120-1
Rodents, 120- 12
Safety standards, 120-1
Screens and screening, 120- 12
Setbacks, 120-4, 120- 12
Status of existingjun kya rds, I20-
8
Storage, 120- 12
Trees, I20- 12
Vehicles,   1 20- 12
Vem1i n, 120-12
Violations and penalties, 120- I I,
120- 12, 120-14
Walls, 120- 12
Water, 120- 12
Watercourses, 120- 12
Zoning, 204-20, 204-25,204-49
JUV ENILES, see CU R FEW; M I ­
NO RS


-K -
KENNELS
Zoning, 204-1 3, 204- 14, 204-20,
204-35, 204-49


-L-
LANDFI LLS
Floodplain management,  1 12-24
Zoning, 204-49
LANDLORDS
Solid  waste and recycling,  1 70-8
LAN DSCAPING
Sewers and water, 164-5, 164-6
Subdi v ision and  land develop­
ment, 180-25, 180-30, 180-
88 - I80-90, 180-93
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-26, 204-30,
204-35,204-37, 204-40, 204-
48 -204-50, 204-55, 204-69
See also SCREENS AN D
SCR EEN I NG
LAWNS
Stormwater mana gement. 175-24 Subdivision and land develop­
ment, I80-89
Zon ing, 204-26, 204-49
LEA F WAST!;:
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4,
170-5
LEASHING
Parks and recreation areas , 140-4
LEFT AND/OR RIGHT TU RNS A T CERTAIN INTER SEC­ TIONS
Vehicles and  traffic, I 96- 10
LETORT REG I ONAL AUT HOR­
ITY
Authorities, m unicipal, 7-3, 7-4



01 - 01- 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
LETTERS OF CR EDIT
Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-91 LIABILITY
 
Stonnwater management,  175-2, 175-3, 175-6, 175-1 1, 175-
20, 175-24, 175-30
Subdivision and land develop­
 
180-30, 180-34, 180-35, 180-
37 - I 80-39, 180-41, 180-42,
180-57, 180-58, 180-70, 180-
74, 180-75, 180-77, 180-81,
 





 
Loitering, 126-2
Parks and recreation areas, 140-9 Real estate sales, 152-3
Rental property registry, 156-6 Sewers and water, 164-3, 164-6,
164-21, 164-75, 164-78, 164-
 
Taxation, 1 86-35 - 186-37, 186-
40, 186-41, 186-43
Vehicles  and traffic,  196-2 1
Zon ing, 204-5. 204-22, 204-23,
204-25,204-30,204-32,204-
33, 204-35 -204-38, 204-41
 
204-50, 204-59, 204-69
LOW- AND MODERATE ­ INCOME HOUSING, see FAIR HOUSING
LOW-/ MEDIUM-DENSITY  R ES­
IDENTIAL ZONE (R-1)
 

 
Solid  waste  and  recycling,   170-8, 1 70-19
Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-6, 180-34, 180-73,
 
70, 204-72,204-73
See also BUILDI NG PERMI TS;
ZON I NG  PERMITS
LIENS
 



MAGAZ I NES
 

-M-
 
180-94, 180-103
Taxation,   1 86-8,  186-2 1.l,  186-
22,  186-24,  186-29,  1 86-36,
186-4 1, 186-43
Vehicles and trafiie , 196-3, 196- 4, 196-27
Zoning, 204-49, 204-67, 204-69
LIBRARIES
Zon ing, 204- 1 7, 204- 1 8, 204-35,
204-48, 204-49, 204-72
LICENSES AN D PERM ITS, 186- 35, 204-70
Brush , grass and weeds, 76-7 Buildin g construction, 80-2 Burning, outdoor, 92-6
Cu1few, 98-6
Disorderly  conduct,   I 02-2,  I 02-4 Drugparaphemalia,     106-3,   106-4
Fireworks, I 09-2, I 09-4 - I 09-8
Floodplain  management,  112-2,
112-5 - I12-16, I12-21, 112-
22, 112-24
Junkyards,120-3-120-7,120-11
- 120- 14
Loitering, 126-2
Manager, 2 1-8
Nuisa nces, 134-6
Outdoor wood-fired boilers, 137-
3, 137-4
Parks and recreat ion areas, 140-4, 140-9
Peddling and soliciting, 146-3,
146-5- 146-7, 146-10
Renta l property registry, 156-6
Sewers and water, 164-3, 164- 14,
164-16,  164-17,  164-21,  1 64-
23, 164-30, 164-39, 164-44 -
164-49, 164-51, 164-57, 164-
65, 164-69, 164-71, 164-73,
164-80, 164-92, 164-95, 164-
104,  164-109,  1 64-111, 164-
113
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4, 170-8-170- 10, 170-13, 170-
16
 
Bnish, grass and weeds, 76-6
In surance, 117-1 - 117-3
Sewers and water, 164-3, 164-4,
164-10, 164-22, 164-108,
164-116
Stormwater management , 175-22 Taxation, 186-47
LIGHTI NG
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-40, 180-58, 180-
60
Zoning,204-22,204-25,204-35-
204-37, 204-41, 204-49
See also STREETLIGHT ING LIQUOR , see ALCO HOLIC BEV­
ERAGES
LITTER
Parks and rc,'Creation areas, 140-4
Zoni ng, 204-44, 204-49, 204-50
LITTER CONTR OL
Zoning, 204-49
LIVESTOCK
Zoning, 204-13, 204-14, 204-25,
204-35, 204-50
See also HORS ES
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
Taxation , 186-20, 186-2 1, 1 86-
2 1.1, 186-22 - 186-31
LOITERING,  126-1
Appeals, 126-2
Auomey's fees, 126-2 Costs and expenses, 126-2 Fees, 126-2
Liability, 126-2
Licenses  and  pennits,  126-2 Loitering  prohibited,  126- 1
Violations and pena lties, 126-2
LOTS
Outdoor wood-fired boi lers, 137-
2
Sewers and water, 164-73, 164-
100, 164-106
Stormwater management, 175-5 Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-13 - 180-16, 180-
24, 180-25, 180-27, 180-28,



14
 
Solid waste and recycling, 170-5
MAJOR SU BDI V I SIONS,see SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
MANAGER
Advertising, 21-8
Appointment authorized, 21-3
Appo intments, 21 -3, 2 1-4, 2 1-8
Bond, 21-6
Bonds, 2 1-6
Building pennits, 2 1-8
Code Enforcement Officer,21-8 Compatible offices, 21-9 Compensatio n , 2 1-5
Complaints, 21-8
Confidentiality, 2 1-8
Creation of office, 2 1-2 Delegation of non legislative pow-
ers and duties, 2 1-7
Disability, 21 -8
Duti es of Townshi p Manager,21-
8
Hearings, 2 1-8
Improvemen ts, 21-8 Licenses and pe1mits , 21-8 Meetings, 21-8
Planning Commission, 21-8 Police Department, 21-8 Powers and duties, 21-7 Qualifications, 2 1-4
Reports, 21-8
Safety standards, 21-8
Support by Secretary and Town-
ship employees, 21-10
Title, 21-1
Township Treasurer, 2 1-9
Vacancies, 21-3
Water, 21-8
Zoning Hearing Board, 21-8 Zoning Officer, 2 1-8
MANHOLES
Sewers and water, 164-16, 164-
108
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-93




01 - 0 1-20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
MANUFACTURE D HOME PAR KS
Floodplain  management,   I   12-28
See also MOBILE HOME
PARKS
MA N UFACTU R ED HOMES
Floodplain management, 1 12-27,
112-28
See also MOBILE HOMES
MANU R E
Sewers and  water,  164- 1 I
Solid waste and recycling, 170-17
Subdivision and land develop- ment, I80-24
Zoning, 204-47, 204-50
MARKER S
Sewers and water,  164- 109
Solid waste and recycling, 170-6 Subdivision and land develop-
men t, 180-24, 180-30, 180-
42
MASTER  PLAN, see COM PR E­
HENSIVE PLAN
MEDIU M-/ HIGH-DENSITY RESIDEN TI A L ZON E (R-2)
Zoning, 204- 16
MEET INGS
Burn ing,outdoor, 92-5 Fi re police, 16-2, 16-3 General provi sion s, I -7 Manager, 2 l-8
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
Recreation A dvisory  Board, 4 I -3,
4 1-5
Salaries and compen sation, 45- 1,
45-2
Stom1water managemen t,  175-23 Su bdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-20, 180-22, 180-
24, 180-26, 180-27, 180-29,
180-100
Vehicles and trnffic, 196-12
Zoning, 204-14, 204-17,204-23,
204-49 , 204-69, 204-7 1 , 204-
72
METE RS
Sewers and water, 164-28, l 64-
29, 164-32 - 164-38, 1 64-40
MlN ING
Zoning, 204-37, 204-49, 204-70
MINORS
Cm-few , 98-3 - 98-5
Zoning, 204-49
See also CURFEW
MINOR SUBDI V ISIONS
Subdivision  and  land  develop­ ment,  180- 15, 1 80-28
See also SUBDI V I SION  AN D
LAND DEVELOPMENT MINUTES
Recreation Adv is01y Board, 4 1-5
Subd ivision and land develop­ ment, 180-38, 180-39, 180-
100
See also RECO R DS
MIXE D USE DISTRICTS
Zoning, 204- 18
 
MOBI LE HOME PARK S
Solid waste and recycling, 1 70-5 Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-41 , 180-46 - 180-
71
Zon in g,204-16, 204-34, 204-35,
204-48
See also MANUFACTURE D
HOME PA RKS MOBI LE HOMES
Solid waste and recycling, 170-5 Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-41 , 180-46 - 180-
55, 180-57 - 180-62, 180-64,
180-65, 180-68 - 180-7 1
Zonin g, 204-1 6, 204-34, 204-35,
204-43, 204-48, 204-49
See also MANUFACTU R ED HOMES
MON U MENTS
Buildings, n umbe1ing of, 86-I Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-42, 180-93
MOORING
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 MOTELS
Zon ing,204-19, 204-35,204-36,
204-49
See also HOTELS MULTIFAMILY      DWELLINGS
Zon ing, 204- 16 -204- 18, 204-26,
204-30, 204-33 -204-36,
204-48
MUTU AL A ID
Police, 35-6, 35-7


-N-

NATU RAL FEATU R ES
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-24, 180-30, 180-
45
Zoning, 204-49, 204-64, 204-72
NATU RAL R ESOU R CES
Sewers and water, 164-100 Stonnwater management, 175-33 Subdivision and land develop-
men t, 180-85, 180-87
Zoning, 204-13, 204-27, 204-64 ,
204-72
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMER­ CI AL ZONE (NC)
Zoning, 204- 18 N EWSPA PER
Solid waste and recycli ng, 1 70-4,
170-5
NEW SPA PERS
Solid waste and recycl ing , 170-4, I70-5
See also PA PER
NOISE
Disorderl y conduct, 102-2 Gcncml prov isions, 1 -7 Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-24, 180-54, 180-
88




15
 
Zom ng,204-1 7, 204-18, 204-37,
204-49,204-50
See also DISORDERLY CON­
DUCT
NONC ONFORMIN G BU ILD­ INGS, STRUCTUR ES ANO USES, see ACCESSO RY US­ ES; CON DITIONAL USES; PERM ITIED USES; PROHIB­ ITED USES; SPECLAL EX­ CEPTION USES
NONCONFORMING LOTS
Zoning, 204-59
NONCON FORMING  SIGNS, s ee
SIGNS
NONCONFORMI NG  U SES
Zoning, 204-22 , 204-53 -204-58,
204-64,204-69
See also ACCESSO RY USES;
CON DITIONA L USES; PERMITIED  USES;  PRO­ HIBITED USES; SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
N ONCONFOR MITIES
Zon ing,204-22 , 204-52 -204-59,
204-69
N ONRESIDENTIA L USES
Z-0ning, 204-49 NOTICES
A la1ms, 66-2, 66-3
Animals, 70-5
Brush, gra ss and weeds, 76-5, 76-
6
Building constru ction, 80-2
Fire police, 16-2
Floodplain   management.  1 12-15,
I   12-I6
General prov isions, 1-6 Insurance, 117-1, 1 17-5
Junkyards,  120-6, 120-7
N u isances, 134-5
Outdoor wood-fired boilers, 137-
2
Peddling and soliciting, 146-9 Police, 35-7
Real estate sales, 152-2
Sewers and water, 164-2- 1 64-4,
164-20- 164-22, 164-30,
164-34, 164-59, 164-60, 164-
63, 164-65, 164-76, 164-78,
164-90, 164-93, 164-1 11,
1  64-113
Solid waste an d recycling, 170-
13, 170-19
Stonnwater managem ent,l75-17,
175-22,   1 75-30
Subdivision and land develop­
m ent, 180-13, 180-25, 180-
28, 180-38, 180-39, 180-7 1 ,
180-92, 180-94, 180-100,
180-102
Taxation,  186- 19, 186-21.L, 1 86-
4 1
Vehic les and trn ffic, 196-3, 1 96-
13, 196-21 , 196-30
Zoning, 204-7, 204-22, 204-25,
204-4 1 , 204-49, 204-60, 204-
63, 204-64,204-66,204-67,



0 1 -01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX



 
204-69,204-70 ,204-72,204-
73
NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS
Brush, grass and weeds, 76-5 Building constructi on, 80-2 Nuisances, 1 34-5
Zoni ng, 204-49
See also V IOLATIONS AND PENALT I ES
NUISANCES , 134- 1, 134-3 - 134-5
Abandonm ent, 134-3
Actions in equity authorized, 134-
7
Activiti es or conditions constitut- ing nuisance, 134-3
Brush, grass and weeds, 76-2
Burning, outdoor, 92-4
Compla ints, 134-5
Construction,  134-3
Costs and expenses, 134-5, 134-6
Definitions, 134-2
Drainage, 134-3
Floodplain management, 112-15,
1 12-32
Garbage, rubbis h and refuse, 134-
3
Junkyards, 120- 12
Licenses and permits, 134-6 Notice of violations, 134-5 Notices,  134-5
Notices of violations, 134-5 Outdoor wood-fired  boilers,  137-
2
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
Records, 134-3
Recycling, 134-3
Sewers and  water,  164-2,  1 64-77,
164-79, 164-9 1, 164-94, 164-
95, 164-108, 164-1 16
Short tit le, 134-1
Signs, 134-3
Solid waste and recycling , 1 70-
10, 1 70- 19
Storage, 134-3
Stormwater,  134-3
Stonnwater management,  134-3,
175-30
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-24, 180-54, 180-
55
Swimming pools,   1 34-3
Un lawful to maintain nuisances ,
134-4
Violat ions and penal ties, 134-4 -
134-6
Water, 134-3
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-37, 204-44,
204-49
NUMBER I NG OF BU I LDINGS, see BUILDINGS, NUMBER ­ ING OF
NURS I NG   HOMES
Floodplain management, 112-28
Zoning, 204-15 -204- 17, 204-35,
 

-0 -

0BSTRUCTIONS
Floodp lain manageme nt, 112-23, 112-24
Sewers and water. 164-5, 164-34
Subd ivision and land develop­ ment, 180-34, 180-76, 180-
89
Zon ing, 204-22, 204-26, 204-32,
204-40, 204-49
OCCUPANCY   PERMITS,see ZON ING PERMITS
ODORS
Sewers and water, 164-108
Solid waste and recycling, 1 70-13
Subd ivision and land develop- ment,  180-24, 180-54
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-37, 204-47,
204-49, 204-50
See also FUMES ; GAS; GASES
OFFENSES,see VIOLATIONS
AND PENALTI ES
OFFICE  OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, see EMERGENCY MANAGE ­ MENT
OFFICIAL MAP
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-14
See also ZON ING MAPS
OFF-STREET  LOAD ING
Zon ing, 204-32, 204-36, 204-55
See also PARKIN G
OFF-STREET PARKING
Subdivision and land develop­ ment,  180-64
Zoning, 204-17. 204-18, 204-35,
204-36,204-49,204-50,204-
55, 204-70
See also PARK ING
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING S, see
SING LE-FAM ILY  DW ELL­
IN GS
OPEN BURNING
Burnin g, outdoor, 92-4, 92-5 See also BURN ING ; FIRES OPEN FIRES,see BURNING ;
BU RNING , OUTDOOR ;
FIRES;OUTDOOR BURN ING
OPEN SPACE
Recreation Advisory Board , 41-5
Su bdivisio n and land develop­
ment, 1 80-7,  180-24, 180-4 1,
180-58, 180-62,   1 80-86,  180-
87, 180-91
Zon ing, 204-27, 204-48, 204-49
OUTDOOR BU RNING
Burning, outdoor, 92-1
See a/so BURN ING ; BURN I NG , OUTDOOR; FIRES ; OPEN BU RN ING
OUTDOOR  WOOD-FIRED
BOILERS
 

Existing outdoor wood- fired boil-
ers, 137-3   ·
Floodplains,   1 37-2
Height regu lations, 137-2
Licenses and permits,  137-3, 137-
4
Lots, 137-2
Not ices, 1 37-2
Nuisances , 137-2 Pennined use, 137-2 Perm itted uses, 137-2 Records, 137-2
Setbacks, 137-2
Short title, 137-1
Violations and penalties,  137-4
Yard s, 137-2


-P-
PAPER
Solid  waste and  recycling,  1 70-4,
170-5
Zoni ng, 204-49
See also HIGH-GRADE OF­ FICE PAPER ; NEWSPA­ PERS
PARADES
Vehic les and traffi c, 196-3
PARKING
Floodplain ma nagement,  1 12-23
Gencrdl provisions,  1-7
Ju nkyards , 120-4
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Peddling and soliciting, 146-8 Stoimwatcr managemen t , 175-5 Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-24, 180-34, 180-
35, 180-44, 180-58 - 180-6 1,
180-64,   1 80-75
Vehicles and traffic, 196-2 - 196-
4, 196-10, 196-15- 196- 17,
1 96- 19 - 196-21
Zoning, 204-2, 204-1 7- 204-20 ,
204-25,204-26,204-30,20 4-
32, 204-35- 204-37, 204-44,
204-48 -204-50, 204-55,
204-70
See also HAN DICAPPED PARKI NG; OFF-STREET LOADI NG; OFF-STREET
PARKING
PARKING  FOR HANDICAPPED, see HANDI CAPPED PARK­ ING
PARKING METERS, see ME­ TERS
PARKING OFF-STR EET, see
OFF-STREET PA RKI NG
PARKS AND RECREATION
AR EAS, 140-4, 140-6
Alcoholic beverages, 140-4
Anima ls, 140-4
Appeals, 140-9
 


tions, 140-2



16	01-01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Authority to close area, 140-7 A u 1horit y to establish events,
140-5
Bicycles, 140-4
Boats and boating, 140-4 Burning, outdoor, 92-3 Camping, 140-4
Costs and expenses, 140-9 Dogs, 140-4
En forcement . 140-8
Fees, 140-9
Firearms, 140-4
Fires, 140-4
Firew orks,   I 09-2,  140-4
Fishing, 140-6
Garbage, rubbi sh and refuse, 140-
4
Gu ns, 140-4
Hours, 140-3
Hu nting, 140-4
Leash ing, 140-4
Liability, 140-9
Licenses and permits, 140-4, 140-
9
Litter, 140-4
Meetings,  140-4
Mooring, 140-4
N uisances,  140-4
Parking, 140-4
Peddling and soliciting, 140-4 Police ol1icers, 140-8
Prohibited acts, 140-4
Recreational  vchicks,  140-4 Regu lations for pa rks and recrea-
tion  facilities,   140- 1
Signs, 140-4
Speed limits, 140-4
Subdiv ision and land develop- ment, 180-24, 180-4 1, 180-
60
Trapping, 140-4
Trash , 140-4
Trees, 140-4
Vehicles, 140-4
Violations and penalties, l40-9 Wa ter, 140-7
W eapons, 140-4
Zonin g, 204-14 -204-1 8, 204-27,
204-35, 204-48, 204-49
See also PLA VG ROU N DS; RECREA TION A N D
PARK S DI RECTORS; RECREATION A REA S
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER,see
DISORD ERLY CON DUCT;
NO ISE
PEDALCYCLES
Disorderly conduct,  l 02-2
See also BICYCLES
PEDDLI N G AN D SOLICITrNG,
146-3, 146-6
A ppeal from denial or revocation of authoriza tion, 146-9
Appea ls, 146-9
A pplication for autho1ization re­
quired, 146-5
A ppoi ntments, 146-7
Background checks, 146-5, 146-6
 
Chief of Pol ice, 146-6, 146-8,
146-9
Compensation, 146-3 Condilions of issuance, 146-3 Costs and expenses, 146- 10 Definitions and interpretation,
146-2
Denia l or revocation of authoriza- t ion,  146-8
Fee, 146-3, 146-4
Fees, 146-3 - 146-5
Hca1in gs, 146-9
Holidays, 146-7
Inspections, 146-6
Investigation s, 146-6
In vestigations and gra nting of au- thorizat ion, 146-6
License required,  146-3
Licenses and permits, 146-3, 146-
5 - 146-7, 146- 10
Notices, 146-9
Parking, 146-8
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Police Chief, 146-3, 146-5 Pmhibited acts, 146-7
Record s, 146-6
Representation by pmmoter, 146-
4
Safety stan dards, 146-6, 146-8 Sales, 146-6
Setbacks, 146-8
Sho1t title, 146-1
Signs, 146-8
Violation s and penalties, 146-8,
146-10
See also SA LES PEDESTRIAN S
Su bd iv ision and land develop­
ment, 180-44, 180-60, 180-
6 1
Zonin g, 204-17,204- 18, 204-26,
204-30, 204-37 , 204-49,204-
50
PENALTIES  FOR   OFFENSES, see V IOLATIONS AN D PEN­ ALTI ES
PENSIONS A ND RETIREMENT ,
see CH. 26; RETIREM ENT PER CAPITA TAX
Taxation, 186-14 - 186-19 PERFORMANCE GUARAN­
TEES, see GUA RA NTEES;
GUARANT I ES PERFORMANCE     STANDARDS
Stonn water management, l75-3
Zoni ng, 204-37, 204-50
See also DES IGN STAN DA RDS PERM IT  PARK I NG,see PARK­
ING
PERM ITS, see LICENSES AN D
PERM ITS
PERM ITIED U SES
Outdoor wood-fired boi lers, 137-
2
Zoning , 204-6,204-13 -204-20,
204-23, 204-49,204-50, 204-
55




17
 
See also ACCESSOR Y USES; CON DITI ONA L USES ; NONCONFO RM ING  USES ; SPECIA L EXCE PTION
U SES
PLACES OF WOR SHIP
Zoning, 204- 13 -204-20, 204-35,
204-48, 204-49
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL  DE­
VELOPMENTS
Zoning, 204-64 , 204-72
PLANNING   COMM ISSION,  3 1- 1
- 3 1-3
Composition , 31-2
Establishment, 31- 1
Floodplain   management,   112-9, 1 12-20
Manager, 2 1-8
Powers and du ties, 3 1-3
Subdi v ision and land develop-
ment, 180-3,  1 80- 1 1, 180-20,
180-22,  1 80-24,  180-26,   180-
27, 180-29, 180-32, 180-34,
180-43, 180-44, 180-89, 180-
100, 180-102
Tenns of office, 3 1-2
Zon ing, 204- 17, 204-23, 204-60,
204-72 , 204-73
PLASTICS
Sol id was te and recyc l ing,l70-4,
170-5
PLAYGROUNDS
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-24
Zoning, 204- 14 -204- 18, 204-35,
204-49
See also PA RKS AND RECRE­
ATION A REAS; R ECREA­ TION A REAS
PLU MB!   G
Sewers and water, 164- 108
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-67
POLI CE
Mu tual A id, 35-6, 35-7 Agreement  authorized, 35-6 Dist1ict Attorney, 35-6
N otices, 35-7
Tenn.  of agreement, 35-7 Police Depa11111ent, 35-1 - 35-5
A ppointments, 35-2 Chief of Police, 35-3 Compos ition , 35-3
Establishm ent of Depa1tment , 35-2
Probation , 35-4
Rules, regu lations and person­ nel policy manua l, 35-5
Salaries and compensation, 35-
4
Title, 35- 1
POLI CE CHIEF
Peddling and soliciting, 146-3, 146-5
See also CHI EF OF POLICE
POLI CE D EPA RTMENT, 35- 1 -
35-5
A lamtS, 66-2, 66-3, 66-6, 66-7



111-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 

Animals, 70-5
Burni ng, outdoor, 92-4 Mana ger, 2 1-8
Vehicles and traffic, 196-3
POLICE OFFICERS
A lanns, 66-2
Disorderly  conduct,  I 02-3
Parks and recreation areas, 140-8 Vehicles and traffic , 196-5, 196-
14, 196-2 1 , 196-3 1
POLITI CAL SIGNS,see SIGNS
POLLUTION
Floodplain management , 112-26 General prov isions, 1-7
Sewers and water, 164-99, 164-
108
Sto1mwater management, 175-2,
175-24, 175-30, 175-33
Subdi v ision and  land  develop­ ment,  1 80-28,  I 80-30,  180-
68,  1 80-73,  1 80-80,  180-87,
180-88
Zoning, 204-37, 204-50
See also A l R  POLLUTION; WATER   POLLUTION
POOLS, see SWI MMI N G POOLS PORCHES
Zoning, 204-17, 204-40
PRELIMINARY  PLANS
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment, 1 80-6, 180-13, 180- 15,
180- I 6, 1 80-24 - 180-27,
I 80-29 - 180-3 1, 180-44 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL
FEATURES,see NATURAL
FEATU RES
PR ESERVATIO N OF   ATURAL
 
RATES, see FEES
REAL ESTATE SALE S
Notification of Streetlighting As-
sessment, I 52- 1 - 1 52-3
Appeals, 152-3
Assessme nts, 152-1 - 152-3 Attorney's fees, I 52-3
Costs  and  Cl(penses,   1 52-3
Fees, 152-3
Liability, 152-3
Not ice of streetlighting as­
sessment to pu rchasers of
real  estate,  1 52-2
Notices, 152-2
Purpose,  152- 1
Tax Collector, 152-2
Violations and penalt ies, 152-3
REAL ESTATE SIGNS,see
SIGNS
REALTY TRANSF ER TAX
Taxation, 186-44 - 1 86-47
RECORDS
A lanns, 66-4
Building constru ction, 80-2
Floodpla in management, 112- 13,
112-32
General prov isions, 1-6
N uisances,  1 34-3
Outdoor wood-fired boilers, 137-
2
Pedd ling and soliciting, 146-6
Recreation Advi sory Board , 41-6
Sewers and water , 164-22, 164-
32, 164-36, 164-49, 164-73,
164-80, 164- 1 15
Stonnwater ma nagement,  175-22
Subdiv ision and land develop­
 
Open  space, 4 I -5
Organ ization and conduct, 4 1-2 Powers and duties, 41-5 Records, 41-6
Recreat ion and Parks Directors,
41-3
R ecreation areas,4 1-5
R ecreation escrow accoun t, 4 1-6
Repo1ts, 41-3, 4 1-5, 41-6
Tenn, 41-2
Township Treasurer,41-6 RECREAT IONAL FIRES, see
F IRES
R ECREATIONAL VE HICLES
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Sewers and water, 164-85 Vehicles and traffic, 196-20
Zoning, 204-14, 204-35, 204-44,
204-49
RECREATION AND PA RKS DI­ RECTOR S
Recrea tion Adviso1y Board, 4 1-3
See also PAR KS AN D R ECRE­
ATION AREAS
RECR EATION AREA S
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4,
140-6
Recreation Adv isory Board, 41-5 Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-38
Zon ing, 204-27, 204-50
See also PARKS AN D RECRE­ AT ION AREAS ; PLAY­
GROUN DS
R ECYCLA BLES
Burn ing, outdoor, 92-4
Solid waste and recycling, 170-4
 

 
PRIVACY  PROT ECTION, see
CONFID ENTI A LITY
PRIVIES
Sewers an d water, I 64-2
PRIVY VAULTS
Sewers and water, 164-2
 
34,  1 80-38,  180-39,  180-44,
I 80-83,  1 80-84,  180-9 1, 180-
100, 180-10 1
Taxation, 186-24,  186-28, 186-
30, 186-39, 186-40
Zoning, 204- 17, 204- I 8, 204-23,
 
Subdi vision and land develop-
ment,  I  80-68
R ECYCLI NG
Burnin g, outdoor, 92-4 N uisances, 134-3
Solid waste and recycling, 170-1,
 


 

ING OFFICER; H EAR INGS PUBLIC  NOTI CES, see NOTICES PUBLI C  RECORDS, see  REC­
ORDS
PU BLIC RECORDS, A CCESS TO,see RECORDS
PU BLIC SAFETY, see SAFETY
STAN DARDS


-R -
RADIATION
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-54
Zoning, 204-25, 204-37, 204-50
RADIOACTIVE  SUBSTANCES
Floodplain management, 112-26
 
See also MINUTES
RECR EATION  ADV ISORY BOARD
Advertising,  4 1 -5
Appo intment, 41 -2
Appo innnents, 4 1-2
Compensation, 41-4
Comprehensive Plan , 4 1-5 Costs and expenses, 41-4 Escrow accou nts, 4 1-6 Establi shment of Board,41 - 1 Expenses of members, 4 1-4
Fees, 41-6
Financial institution s, 41-6
Improvemen ts, 41-5
I nsurance, 41-6
Meetings, 41-3, 41-5
Member responsibilities, 41-5
Membersh ip, 41-2
Minutes, 41-5



18
 
Zoning, 204-18 -204-20, 204-26,
204-44, 204-49, 204-50
See also SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
REFRIGERATORS,  A BAN­ DONED,see ABAN DON­ MENT
REFUSE, see GARBAGE, RU B­
BISH AND REFUSE
REGISTRATION
Rental  property  registty,  I 56-3 Sewers  and  water,   l64-36 Subdi v ision  and land  develop-
ment, 180-12, 180-24
Zoning, 204-25, 204-44, 204-49,
204-64
See also R ENTAL PROPERTY REG ISTRY





01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH  MIDDL ETON INDEX




 
REGISTRY
Rental property registty,  I 56-1 ,
156-3
RENTA L PROP ERTY, see
LAN DLOR DS; TENANTS RENTAL PROPERTY REGIS-
TRY, 156-1 , 156-3
Appea ls, I 56-6
Attomey's fees, I56-6
Ch ange of occupancy or vacancy to be repo1ted, l56-4
Costs and expenses, I56-6
Definitions,  156-2
Fees, 156-6
Liability,  156-6
Licenses and pennils, 156-6
Registrati on,  I 56-3
Registty of all rental prope1ties,
156-3
Reports, 156-3 - 156-5
Sho1t Lit le, 156-1
Status of occupancy reports,  156-
5
Vacancies, 156-4
Violations and penalties, 156-6
REPORTS
A lanns, 66-4
Floodplain management, 112-13,
1 12-32
Insurance, 117-1
Manager, 21-8
Recreat ion Adviso1y Board, 41-3, 41-5,  41-6
Ren tal property registry, 156-3 -
156-5
Sewers and water, 164-49, 164-
86, 164- 115
Solid waste and recycling, 170-8,
170-9, 170-1 3
Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-4,  180-17,  1 80-25,
180-26, 180-29, 180-30, 180-
44, 180-77, 180-87, 180-92,
180-94
Taxation, 186-37- 186-41, 186-
43
Vehicles and traffic, 196-21
Zoning, 204-37, 204-49, 204-6 1,
204-63,204-69,204-72,204-
73
RESID ENTIAL  CONSTRU C­ TION, see BUILDING CON­ STRUCTION; CONSTRUC­ TION;CONSTR  UCTION CODES, UN IFOR M
RESIDENTIAL  DISTRICTS
Zoni ng, 204-37
RESIDENT IAL USES
Zoning, 204-48
RESTAU RANTS
Zon ing, 204- 17 -204-19, 204-35,
204-48 , 204-49
See also DIN ING FACILI TIES;
DRIVE-THROUGH  R ES­ TAURANTS
 
RETAIL  li'OOD ESTA BLISH­
MENTS, see RESTAURANTS
RETA INING WALLS
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-82
Zoning, 204-26, 204-40
RETIR EMENT
Zoni ng, 204- 16, 204-17, 204-35,
204-48, 204-49
RIGHT OF ENTRY
Sewers and water,  164-1 1 1
Stormwater management, 175-27
RIGHT TO FARM
Subdivision and land develop­ ment,  180-24
See also FARMS AND FA RM ­
ING
ROADS, see STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS
ROA DSIDE STANDS
Zoning, 204- 13 -204-18, 204-35,
204-50
RODENTS
Ju nkyard s, 120-12
Subdi visio n and land develop­
ment, 180-54, 180-55, 180-
68
Zoning, 204-49
See also VECTORS
ROOFS
Zoning, 204-25
RUBBISH, see GAR BAGE, RUB­ BISH AND REFUSE
R U RAL RESO U RCE ZONE (RR)
Zon ing, 204- 14


-S-

SAFETY STANDARDS
Burning, outdoor, 92-4, 92-5
Fireworks, 109-3
Floodp lain managemen t, 112-1,
112-6, 112-32
General provisions, I-7
Junkyards,  120-1
Manager, 2 1-8
Peddling and soliciti ng, 146-6,
146-8
Sewers an d water, 164-4, 164-25,
164-34,  164-69, 164-108
Solid waste and recycl ing, 170-2,
170-10
Stonnwater management , 175-2, 175-5, 175-7, 175-30
Subdivision and I.and develop­
ment, 180-2, 180-7, 180-24,
180-32, 180-34, 180-35, 180-
37- 180-39, 180-51, 180-75,
180-84, 180-87
Zoning, 204-2, 204-4, 204-6, 204-
7, 204-22, 204-23,204-25,
204-37,204-38,204-4 1,204-
47 -204-50
SALARIES AND COM PENSA­
TION
Board of Supervisors , 45-1 -45-3




19
 
Compensation of Superv isors,
45-1
Compensation of Supervisors
limited, 45-2
Meetings, 45-1, 45-2
Pay ment of compeusation, 45-
3
Police, 35-4
Taxation, 186-22, 186-23
See also COM PENSATION
SALES
Drug paraphernaIia, I06-3 Fireworks, 109-5, 109-6 Peddling and soliciting , 146-6 Real estate sales, 152-2
Solid waste and recycling, 170-16
Subdi v ision and land develop-
ment, 180-13, 180-24, 180-
42, 180-8 l
Zoni ng, 204- 17 -204-20, 204-23,
204-25 - 204-27, 204-35,
204-37, 204-4 1,204-42, 204-
44, 204-49, 204-50
See also GARAGE SALES;
YARD SALES
SALES, SPECIAL, see GARAGE
SALES; YAR D SALES SANITA RY  FACILITIES
Floodplain management,  112-23
Subdivision and land develop­
m ent, 180-67
See also TOILET FAC ILITIE S
SANITARY LANDFILL,see
LANDF I  LLS
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS,
see ANTENNAS SCHOOLS
Sewers and water, 164-8
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment,  I80-24,  180-38, 180-
44
Taxation,  186-22
Vehicles and traffic, 196- 12, 196-
17
Zoning, 204-2, 204-13-204-20,
204-27. 204-35, 204-47' 204-
49, 204-64, 204-72,204-73
SCREENS AN D SCREE N ING
Floodplain management , I 12-23
Junkyards, 120-12
Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-35, 180-89 - 1 80-
9 l , 180-93
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-26, 204-30,
204-35 -204-37, 204-44,
204-47 -204-50, 204-55
See also BUFFE R S; LAND­
SCAP ING
SEARCH WARRANTS
Sewers and water, 164-4
See also WARRANT S
SECU RITY STANDARDS
Sewers and water, 164-34 Zoning, 204-37, 204-49







Ol - 01 - 20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
SEDIMENTATION, see EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL; SOIL EROSION AND SEDI­ MENT CONTROL
SEDIME NT  CONTROL, see
EROS ION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL; SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMEN T CONTROL
SEEING EYE DOGS, see DOG S
SENIOR CITIZENS
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment, 180-44
SEN IOR HOUSING, see FAIR
HOUSI NG
SEPTIC SYSTEMS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-24
Zoning, 204-49
SEPTIC TANKS
Sewers and water, 164-2, 164-
108, 164-1 10
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-43, 180-89
SERVICE STATIONS
Zoni ng, 204-18 -204-20, 204-37,
204-49
SETBACKS
Junkyards, 120-4, 120-12
Outdoor wood-fired boilers, 137-
2
Pedd ling and soliciting, 146-8
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 1 80-24, 180-34, 180-
36, 180-59, 180-65, 180-84,
180-89
Zoni ng, 204-17, 204-20, 204-25,
 

Definitions, 164-84
Dumps and dumping, 164-85
Enforcement, 164-96
Fees, 164-89, 164-90, 164-92,
164-95
Grades and gra ding, 164-95
Health hazards, 164-95
Improvement s, 164-95
I ndemn ification  by  owner,
164-89
Inspections , 164-86
Liability, 164-89, 164-92, 164-
93
Licenses and pennits, 164-92,
164-95
Maintenance, 164-88
Maintenance security deposit,
164-90
No tices, 164-90, 164-93
N u isances, 164-9 1, 164-94,
164-95
Owner responsible for collec-
tor, 164-92
Recreational veh icles,  164-85
Reports, 164-86
Retaining tanks permitted,
164-85
Speci fications of retaining tanks, 164-87
Supervision of  installation, const111ction and mainte­ n ance, 164-86
Test s, 164-90
Title, 164-83
Trespassi ng, 164-94
Vehicles, 164-85
 
Findings, 164-99
Groundwater, 164- 108 Hazardous material s and sub-
stances,  164-1 I 0
Holding ta nks,  164- 108 I mprovements,   164-106
Inspections, 164-108, 164-109,
164-1 I1, 164-1 I5
I ntcnt , 164-100
Liabi l ity,  164-115,  164-117 Licenses  and penn its,  164-
104, 164-109, 164-111,
164-1 13
Liens, 164-108, 164-1 16
Lots, 164-100, 164-106
Manholes,  164-108
Markers,  164-109
Natural resources,  164- 100
Notices, 164-111, 164-113
Nu isances, 164-108, 164-1 16
Odors, 164-108
Operation, maintenance, in­ spection, repair and re­ placement , 164-108
P.ennit required, 164-104
Plumbi ng, 164-108
Pollution, 164-99, 164-108
Pri vate sewage treatment facil- ities and alternative sys­ tems, 164-107
Proof of complian ce, 164-109
Records,  164- 1 I 5
Remedies, 164-1 16
Replacement location re- quired, 164-106
Repo11s, 164-1 I5
 


 
204-59
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, INDIVID­
UA L
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-43
SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE
Floodplain management, 112-24 Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-43
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OF­
FICER
Sewers and water, 164-49, 164-50
SEW ERS AND WATER
On-Lot Retaining Tanks, 164-83
- 164-97
Abuse and revocation of privi ­
lege, 164-93
Access to residentia l premi ses,
164-94
Alanns, 164-87
Application and pennit re­
quired, 164-95
Attorney's fees, 164-89, 164-
90, 164-92
Construction , 164-86, 164-87,
164-89, 164-90, 164-93
Costs and expenses, 164-85,
164-89, 164-90, 164-92,
164-97
 
Violations constitute nuisance,
164-9 1
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Sys­
tems, 164-98 - 164-1 17
Addi t iona l definitions, 164-
103
Administratio n fees, 164-1 12
Alanns , 164- 108
Applicab ility,   1 64- 104
A ttorney's fees,  164- 115
Avai lability of regulations,
164- 110
Bnish, grass and weeds, 164-
108
Consliuction, 164-1I4, 164-
1 16
Costs and expenses, 164-108, 164- 112, 164-115, 164-
116
Definit ions, 164-102
Discharges, 164-1I 0
Disposal of seepage by pumpers/haulers,  164- 1 13
Effect on other regulations,
164-1 17
Emergencies,  164-1 11
Enforceme nt, 164-1 12
Fees, 164-112, 164-115
Fina l plans, 164-106



20
 
110
Statu tory authority, 164-99 Stonnwater, 164-108
Testing requireme nts, 164-1OS
Tests, 164-105, 164-106
Tit le, 164-98
Toilet facilit ies, 164-110 Townsh ip Engineer, 164-107
V iolations,  164- 1 14
Violations and penalties, 164-
1 14 - 164-1 17
Waivers , 164-106
Watcrconse1vation, 164-1 10 Water pollution, 164-99 Waterquali ty, 164-100
Word usage, 164-101
On-Lot Sewage System Pennits Admin istration, 164-50 Alterna te system, 164-61 Applica t ion fom1, 164-52
Applica tion for pennit, 164-51
Authorized test procedures,
164-58
Board to cause inspections,
164-62
Compensation, 164-49
Compliance with regulations
and laws, 164-45
Construction,  164-57



01 - 01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Costs and expenses, 164-67 Covering of work only after inspection, 164-63
Definitions,  164-4 1
Expiration ofpennit, 164-57
Fees, 164-49, 164-52, 164-64
Filing of application, 164-53 Hea rings, 164-65
Hold ing tanks, 164-44 Holidays, 164-60, 164-63 I nd ependent  tests, 164-55 Inspection ,  164-60
I  nspections,   l64-60,  164-62,
164-63
Installation of system requires
permit, 164-44
Issuance of permit , 164-47
Judgment of application, 164- 56
Legal authority for regulations,
164-43
Licenses and pem1its , 164-44
- 164-49, 164-51, 164-57,
I  64-65
Notices,  164-59, 164-60, 164-
63, 164-65
Notifica tion of completion ,
164-59
Other remedies, 164-66
Pennits filed with  Depa1tment,
164-48
Processing of application , l64- 54
Records,   I 64-49
Repons,  164-49
Revocation,     I 64-65
Sewage Enforceme nt Officer, 164-49, 164-50
Site plans,  I 64-45
System  must comply w ith of­
ficial plan, 164-46
Tests, 164-49, 164-54, 164-55,
I 64-58,  I 64-62,  164-65
Title, 164-42
Violations and penalties.  I 64-
65, 164-67
On-Lot Small Flow Sewage
Treatment Facilities, 164-68
- 164-82
Abandonme nt, 164-73, 164-80
Abuse and revocation of plivi­ lege, 164-78
A ccess to residentia l premi ses,
164-79
Application and pem1it re­
qu i red,  164-80
Attorney's fees, 164-75, 164-
76, 164-82
Civi l enforcement and inspec­ tion , 164-81
Constru ction, 164-72, 164-73,
164-75, 164-76, 164-78,
164-80
Costs and expenses, I 64-71, 164-75, 164-76, 164-80,
1 64-82
Definitions,   I  64-70
Easements, 164-73
 
fees, 164-75, 164-76, 164-80,
164-82
Grades and grading, 164-80 Holding tan ks, 164-73 Improvements, 164-80 Indemnification by owner.
164-75
In spections ,  164-8l
Liability, 164-75, 164-78, 164-
82
Licen ses and perm its, I 64-69,
164-71, 164-73, 164-80
Lots, 164-73
Maintenance, 164-74
Maintenance security deposit,
164-76
No tices,  I 64-76,  164-78
N ui sances, 164-77, 164-79 Purposes and background.
164-69
Record s, 164-73, 164-80
Safety standards, 164-69 Small flow sewage treatment
facilities  pe1mitted,  I 64-
71
Small flow sewage treatment facility defined and lim­ ited, 164-73
Supervision of installation and
conslmction,   I 64-72
Tests, 164-76
Title, 164-68
Trespassing, 164-79
Violations and penalti es, 164-
75, 164-77,  164-81, 164-
82
Violations constitute a nui ­ sance,  164-77
Zon ing permits, 164-80
Pu bl ic  Sewer  Connections, I 64-1
- 164-6
Abandonment, 164-2 Barricades, 164-4
Building sewers and connec- t ions, l 64-3
Cesspools, 164-2 Constmction , I 64-3 - I 64-5 Costs and expenses, 164-2 -
164-6
Defioition s and int erpretation s,
164- 1
East:ments,    1 64-5
Excavatio ns, 164-4
Fees, 164-3
Fences, 164-5, 164-6
I mprovements,  164-5,   l 64-6
lndust1ial wastes , I 64-2, I 64-4 I nspcctions, 164-4 Landscaping. 164-5, 164-6
Liabili ty, 164-3, 164-6
Licenses and pennits, 164-3
Liens, 164-3, 164-4
No tices, l 64-2 - 164-4
N uisances, 164-2
Obstmctions, 164-5
Obstructions of easements and dghts-ol way prohibited , 164-5



21
 
Pri v ies, 164-2
Privy vau lts, 164-2
Rules and regulations govern­ i ng buildin g sewers and connection s to sewers, 164-4
Safety standard s, 164-4
Search wa rrants, 164-4 Septic tanks, 164-2
Tests, 164-3
Trees, 164-5, 164-6
Use of publi c sewers required,
1 64-2
Violations and penalti es, 164-
2, 164-4 - 164-6
Warrants , 164-4
Public Sewer Syst em Rates and Usage
Access , 164-12
Adoptio n of additiona l iules and regulations.  164-13
Cesspools,  164-1  I
Charges, 164-8 - 164-10
Construction . 164-1 1
Costs and expenses, 164-1 I ,
164- 14
Definitions,  l 64-7
Drainage, 164- 11
Explosives,    1 64-11
Fees,  1 64-8
Fill ing and collection of liens,
164- 10
Flammabl es.  164-11 Fuel, 164- 1 J
Gases,   164- 1 I
Groundwater,  164-1 I
lndusllial wastes, 164- 11
In spections, 164- 11, 164-12
Licenses and pennits, 164- 14
Liens, 164-10
Liens for sewer rentals, 164-10
Manure, 164-11
Prohibited wastes, 164- 1 1
Schools, 164-8
Sewer rental s and charges,
164-8
Stonnwater, I 64- I I Test s, 164- 11, 164-12
Time and method of pay m ent,
164-9
Violations and penalti es, 164- 9, 164- 14
Publ ic Wastewa ter Pretreatment,
164- 1 5 - 164- 18
Authori ty of Director and Bor­ ough of Carl isle, 164- 18
Construction , 164-16
Costs and expenses, 164-16.
164-17
Enactment of program, 164-15
Fees. 164-16
Industria l wast es, 164- 16
Licenses and pennits, 164- 16,
164-17
Manholes, 164-16
Regulations goveming admis­
sion of industrial wastes




O l - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
into the sewer system ,
1 64- 16
Violati ons and penalt ies, 164-
17
Public Water Connections
Appeals, 164-24
Barri cades,  164-22
Building mai ns and connec­
tions, 164-21
Con struction,  164-2 1
Costs and  expen ses,  164-2 1 -
164-23
Declaration of purpose, 164-25
Definitions, 164-19
Emergencies, 164-22
Excavat ions, 164-22
Farms and fanning, 164-20
Fees,  164-2 1
Hard ship, 164-24
Inspections, 164-22
Liabil ity,   164-2 1
Licenses and pem1its, 164-2 1,
164-23
Liens, 164-22
Notices, 164-20 - 164-22
Records, 164-22
Rules and regu lations govern­ ing bui lding ma ins and con nections to mai ns, 164-22
Safety standa rds, 164-25
Tests,  164-2 1
Use of public water system re­ quired, 164-20
Violations and penalti es, 164-
23
Public Water R ates and Charges,
164-26 - 164-30
Add itiona l ru les and regula-
tions, 164-30
Costs and expenses, 164-30
Definitions,  164-26
Fees,  164-29
Licenses and pennits,  164-30
Meter insta llation required,
164-28
Meters, 164-28, 164-29
Notices, 164-30
Payment procedure,  164-27 Violations and pena lties, 164-
27,   1 64-30
Water ra tes, rent and charges,
164-29
Water supply, 164-30
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 180-43, 180-63
Water Meter Regulations , 164-31
- 164-40
Access to meter, 164-34
Additiona l  rules and  regula-
tions authorized,   164-40 An i mal s, 164-34
Charges,  l 64-37
Costs and expenses, 164-32,
1 64-35,  164-39
Definitions,  164-31
 
Installati on of meters and baekflow preventors re­ qui red, 164-32
Licenses and penn its, 164-39 Location of meter, 164-33
Meters, 164-32 - 164-38, 164-
40
Minimum charge, 164-37
Notices,  1 64-34
Obstrnctions, 164-34
Reading and registration of
meters, 164-36
R ecords,  164-32,  164-36
R egistration, 164-36 Safety standard s, 164-34 Seals, 164-35
Security standards, 164-34 Size of meter, 164-38 Tests, 164-35
Violat ion s and penalties, 164-
35, 164-39
Water su pp ly,  1 64-32
See also SEWAGE  DISPOSAL, I N DIVIDUAL; SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRI VATE; WATER
SHADE TR EES
Zoning, 204-35, 204-49, 204-50
See also TREES
SHEDS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment , 180-65
Zoning, 204-42 SHOPPING CENTERS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-38
Zoning, 204-18, 204-35, 204-36,
204-49
SHOTGUNS, see FIR EARMS;
GUNS;  WEAPONS SHR U BS
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-85, 180-89
Zoning, 204-26, 204-30, 204-35
See also TREES SIDEWAL KS
Subd ivision and land develop­
ment, 180-38
See also STREETS AND SIDEW ALKS
SIGNS
Bu ildings, numberi ng of, 86- 1
Nuisances, 134-3
Parks and recreat ion areas, 140-4 Peddling and solicit ing, 146-8 Solid waste and recycling, 170-13 Subdivision and land develop-
ment , 180-30, 180-34, 180-
58, 180-60
Vehicles and traffic, 196-3, 196-
4, 196- 12, 196- 13
Zoning, 204-25, 204-26, 204-35,
204-37, 204-4 1 ,204-48 -
204-50,204-55,204-58,204 -
70, 204-72
SI NGLE-FAM ILY DWELLING S
Zoning, 204-35




22
 
SITE PLAN APPROVA L
Zoning, 204-64, 204-73
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Stonnwater management , 175-17
SITE PLANS
Sewers and water, 164-45 Stonnwater management , 175- 10,
175-11, 175-14 - 175-23,
175-28-175-30
Zoning, 204-25, 204-35 -204-37,
204-49,204-64,204-73
SKATEBOA ROS, see BICYCLES
SK ETCH  PLANS
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-11, 1 80-20 - 180-
23
SLOPES,see STEEP SLOPES SMALL WIND ENERGY SYS­
TEMS, see W IND ENERGY
SYSTEMS, SMALL SMOKE
Su bdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-54
Zoning, 204-49, 204-50 SNOW ANO ICE R EMOVAL
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-34
Zoning, 204-32
SOIL EROSION ANO SEDI­
MENT CONTROL
Stonnwater management, 175-15
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment,  180-55, 180-84
Zoning, 204-47
See also EROSION AND SED­
IMENT CONTROL SOLAR  ENERGY SYSTEMS
Zoning, 204-25
SOLID WASTE ANO R ECY­
CLING
Burnin g,  170-22,  1 70-23
Burning of nonrecyclable waste, 170-23
Burning of recyclable materi­
als prohibited, 170-22
Recyclables , 170-22
Collection Practices and Disposa l
A pa1tments, 170-8
Billing systems, 170-6
Charges, 170-6
Collection by u nau thorized persons,  170-12
Collection practices for apart­ ment buildings, town­ house complexes, condo­ minium complexes, and similar complexes, 170-8
Collect ion practices for com­
mercial, mun icipal and in­ stitutional establishments, 170-9
Collection practices for resi­
dential buildings, 170-7 Composting, 170-17
Costs and expenses, 170-6,
170-15
Donations or sale of recycla­ bles, 170-16



01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Exclusions,  170-17
Farms and fanning, 170-l7
Hazardous  waste  disposal, 170-l l
Hazardous wastes, 170-l l
I ncorporation of bidding doc­ uments and contract,  170- 18
Landlord s, 170-8 Liability, l70-8
License or contract required to
collect, haul or dispose of solid waste and/or recy­ clables, 170- 13
Licenses and permits, 170-8 -
170-10, 170-13,  170-16
Manure, 170-17
Markers, 170-6
Notices,   I 70-13
Nuisances,  170-10
Odors,  I 70-13
Pa1ticipation req uired, 170-6 Points of collection , I 70- 10 Recyc lables, 170-6 - 170- l0,
170-12 - 170-14, 170-16
- 170- 18
Reports,  170-8, 170-9, 170-13
Safety standards, 170-10
Sales, I 70-16
Signs,  I 70- 13
Storage, 170-8, 170-17
Trash, 170-6
U nlawful disposition of recy­ c!ables,   I70-14
Unlawful disposition of solid
waste, 170-15
Vehic les, 170-13
Violations and penalties, 170-
6, 170-8, 170-9, 170-12 -
170-15
Definitions, 170-1 - 170-3 Dumps and dumping, l 70-2 Pu rpose, 170-2
Safety standards, l 70-2
Storage, l 70-2
Title, 170-1
Enforcement,  170-19, 170-20
Attomey's  fees, 1 70-l 9
Code  Enforcement  Officer, l 70-20
Costs and expenses, l 70-19 Fees, 170- 19
Liability ,  170-19
Notices, 170-19
N uisances, 170- 19
Recyclables,  170-19
Violations and pena lties, 170-
19
Zoning  Officer,   l 70-20 Establishment  of  Program,   I 70-4,
170-5
Aluminum, 170-4 Apa rt ments, 170-5 Ashes, 170-5
Charges,   I 70-5
Corrugated cardboard , 170-4, 170-5
Costs and expenses,  170-5
 
Glass, 170-4, 170-5
Grades and grading, 1 70-4
High-grade oftlcc paper, 170-4 Leafwaste, 170-4,  170-5 Licenses and permi ts, 170-4 Magazines, 170-5
Mobile home  parks,  170-5 Mobi le homes,  170-5 Newspaper,  1 70-4, 170-5
Newspapers,  170-4, l70-5
Paper,  1 70-4,  170-5
Plasti cs, 170-4, 170-5 Prepardtion, stordgc and col-
lect ion , 170-5
Recyclable materials, 170-4
Recyclables, 170-4, 170-5
Storage, 170-5
Trash , 170-5
Trees, 170-5
Water, 170-4, 170-5
Preparat ion and Storage, 170-4,
170-5
Aluminum , 170-4
Apa1tments, 170-5
Ashes, 170-5
Charges, 170-5
Corrugated cardboard, 170-4,
170-5
Costs and expenses, 170-5
Glass, 170-4, 170-5
Grades and grading,  170-4 High-grade office paper . 170-4 Leaf waste, 1 70-4, 170-5 Licenses and pcnnits,  170-4 Magazin es,l70-5
Mobil e home parks, 170-5
Mobile homes, 170-5
Newspaper , 170-4, 170-5
Newspapers,   1 70-4,  170-5
Paper, 1 70-4,  170-5
Plasti cs, 170-4, 170-5 Preparati on, storage and col-
lection, 170-5 Recyclable mate1ial s, 170-4 Recyclables, 170-4, 170-5
Trash , 170-5
Trees, 170-5
Water, 170-4, 170-5
Purpose, I 70-1 - I 70-3
Definitions, 170-3
Dumps and dumping, 170-2 Safety sta ndards, 170-2 Storage, 170-2
Title, 170-1
Recycling Awareness Program,
170-2 1
Establishment of program, 170-21
Title, 170-1 - 170-3
Definitions, 170-3
Dumps and dumping, 170-2
Purpose, 170-2
Safety standards, 170-2
Storage, 170-2 Violations and Penalti es
Attorney's fees, 170-19 Code Enforceme n t Officer,
170-20



23
 
Costs and expenses, 170- 19
Enforcement, 170-20
Fees,  170- 19
Liability, 170-19
Notices, 170-19
Nuisa nces, 170-19
Recyclables, 170- 19
Zoning Officer. 170-20
See also GA RBAGE, RUBBISH
AND REFUSE ;TRASH
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment,  180-24
Zonin g, 204- 1 3 -204-20, 204-23,
204-37,204-46,204-55,204-
56, 204-63 -204-65, 204-69,
204-70
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Zoning, 204-23
See also ACCESSO RY US ES ; CONDITIONAL USES; NONCONFORMING USES; PERMlTIED USES; PRO­ HIBITED USES
SPECIAL PERMITS, see BUILD­
I NG PERM ITS; LICENSES AN D PERMITS; ZONING PERMITS
SPECIAL PERMIT USES, see
ACCESSORY USES; CON DI­ TIONAL USES ; LICENSES AN D PERMITS; NONCON­ FORMING USES; PERM IT­ TED USES;  PROHIBITED USES
SPECIAL SALES, see GARAGE
SALES; YARD SALES SPECIAL USE  PERMITS,see
BUILDI NG PERM ITS; LI ­ CENSES AN D PERMITS ; ZONING PERM ITS
SPECIAL  USES, see ACCESSO­
RY USES;CONDITIONAL USES; NONCONFORMING USES ; PERM ITIED USES; PROHlB ITED USES
SPEED LfMITS
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
Subdivision and  land develop­
ment, 180-25, 180-30, 180-
34, 180-45
Vehicles and traffic, 196-8 STEEP  SLOPES
Subdivision and  land develop­
ment, 180-84, 180-89
Zoning, 204-27
STOP   I NTERSECTIONS
Vehicles and traffic, 196-12 STOP-WORK   ORDERS
Building construction, 80-2
STORAGE
Floodplain management, 112-23,
112-24,  1 12-26
Junkyards, 120-12 Nuisances, 134-3
Solid waste and recycling,  170-2, 170-5, 170-8, 1 70-17
Stonnwater management , 175- 10



01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-24, 180-25, 180-
65, 180-68, 180-75
Zoning, 204-17 - 204-20, 204-25,
204-26, 204-29, 204-30, 204-
35 -204-37, 204-42 -204-
44, 204-47, 204-49, 204-50
STORAGE TANKS
Flood plain management , 112-24
Zoning, 204-29
STORM SEW ERS, see STORM ­ W ATER MANAGEMENT
STORM WATER
Floodplain management, 112-24
N uisances,  134-3
Sewers and water, 164-l l , 164-
108
Stonnwater management, 175-1 -
175-5, 175- 10 - l 75- 15, 175-
19,  175-22, 175-24,  1 75-27,
175-33
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-25, 180-28, 180-
30, 180-34, 180-36, 180-39,
180-58, 180-72 - 180-75,
180-78 - 180-80, 180-83,
180-84, 180-93
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-35, 204-36,
204-49, 204-64
STORMWATE R CONTROL
Subd ivision  and  land  develop­ ment,   1 80-74
STORMWATER MANAGE­
MENT, 175-1 - 175-5, 175-13
- 175-15, 175-19, 175-22
Enforcement and Penalties, 175-
27 - 175-32
Appeals, 175-32
Backfi lling, 175-28
Construction, 175-28, 175-29 Costs an d expenses, 175-31 Fees, 175-28
Improvements,  175-28
I nspection,    175-28
Inspections, 175-28, 175-29 Licenses and pennits, 175-30 Notices, 175-30
N u isances, 175-30
Pollut ion, 175-30
Right of ent1y, 1 75-27
Safety  standa rds,   1 75-30
Site plans, 175-28 - 175-30 Suspension and revocat ion,
175-30
Violations and penalties , 175-
30, 175-31
Fees and Expenses, 175-23 Costs and expenses, 175-23 General, 175-23
I nspections,   175-23
 
Construction,175-J-175-5 Costs and expenses, 175-2 Drainage, 175-3
Dliveways, 175-5
Erosion and sediment control,
175-2
Floodplains, 175-2, 175-3 Grades and grading, 175-3 Groundwater, 175-2, 175-3 Licenses and pcnnit s, 175-2,
175-3,  1 75-6
Lots, 175-5
Parking,  1 75-5
Performance standards, 175-3
Poll ution, 175-2
Purpose, 175-3
Safety standards, 175-2, 175-5,
175-7
Short title, 175-1
Statement of findings, 175-2 Statuto1y auth ority, 175-4 Timber ha1vesting, 175-5 Trees, 175-3
Utilities,  175-4
Violat ions and penalties,  1 75-4
Waiverprocedure , 175-7
Wai vers, 175-7
Water quality, 175-2, 175-3,
175-7
Wet lands, 175-3
Nuisa nces, 134-3
Operation and Mainten ance, 175-
22
Charges,  175-22
Fees,  175-22
Inspections, 175-22
Liens, 175-22
Notices, 175-22
Records, 175-22
Responsibilities of developers and landowners, 175-22
Site plan s, 175-22
Prohibition s, 175-24 - 175-26 Air conditioning , 175-24 Alteration ofSWM BMPs,
175-26
Drainage, 175-24
Fill, 175-26
Fuel , 175-24
Gmdes and grading, 175-26 Ground water, 175-24 Hazardous materials and sub-
stances, 175-24
Lawn s, 175-24
Licenses and pennits, 175-24 Pollution, 175-24
Prohibited discharges and
connections, 175-24
Roof drains and sump pumps,
175-25
 
Pollution, 175-33
Stonnwater Management Stand­
ards
Additional SWM and drainage requireme nts, 175-14
Building pennits, 175-11
Conservatio n districts, 175- 10
Construction, 175-10
Drainage,  175-14
Erosion and sedimen t cont rol,
175-10
Exempt ions,  175- 1  I
General requirements, 175-10
Internet , 175-10
Licenses and pc1mits, 175-1 I Rate  controls (see  SECTION
8.3 OF THE MOST CURRENT VERSION OF THE SWM MANU­ A L), 175-13
Site plans, 175- 10, 175- 11,
175-14
Storage, 175- 10
Tests, 175-12
Volume controls, 175-12
Waterquality, 175-10 Storn1water Management (SWM )
Site Plan Req u irements As-built plans, 175-21 Autholiza tion to construct,
175-20
Completion certificate, 175-2 l
Conservat ion districts, 175-15,
1 75-16
Construction, 175-15, 175-21
Drainage, 175-15
Easements, 175-15
Erosion and sediment control, 175-15
Fees,  l 75-19
Final inspec tion, 175-21
I nspect ions,  175-21
Licenses and pennits, 175-20 Modification of plans, 175-18 Notices, 175-17
Plan review, 175-17
Plan submission , 175-16
Resubmission of disapproved stonnwater management site plans , 175-19
Site plan review, 175-17
Site plans , 175-15   175-21
Soil erosion and sediment con- trol, 175-15
Tenn of valid ity, 175-20 Township Engineer, 175-16
Watersupply,  175-15
Wells, 175-15
Subdivision and land devel op­ ment, 180-25, 180-28, 180-
 

 
GeneralProvisions,175-1-175-
7
Applicabil ity, 175-5 Buffers, 175-3 Compatibility with other re-
quirements, 175-6
 
References,  175-33
Erosion and sediment control, 175-33
Internet, 175-33
List of references, 175-33
Natura l resources, 175-33



24
 
180-83' 180-93
Tenninology , 175-8, 175-9
Definitions,  175-9
Word usage, 175-8
Zon ing, 204-25, 204-35, 204-36,
204-49, 204-64



01 -01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
STORMWATER MANAGE­
MENT P LAN
Su bdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-72 - I 80-80
STOR MWATER  QUA LITY
Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-75
STR EAMS, see WATER COU RSES
STREET EXCAVATIONS,see
EXCAVATIONS
STREETLIG HTlNG
Real estate sales, 152-1 - 152-3 Subdi vision and land develop­
men t, 180-24, 180-30, 180-
93
Zoning, 204-37
See also LIG HTING
STREET OPENINGS, see EXCA­
VAT IONS
STR EETS AND SIDEWALKS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, I 80-34,  I 80-60
See also SIDEWALKS
SUBD I VI SION  Al'ID  LAND  DE­
VELOPMENT
Amendments, I 80- 10 I - 180- 103
Administration  and  enforce- m ent, 1 80-101
Appeal s, 180-103
Attorney's fees, I80-103
Board of Supervisors, 180- I 0 I
Constru ction,  I 80- 10I
Costs and expenses, 180-I03
Fees, I80- I03
Hearings, 180-I 02
Improvements, I80-10 I
Liabi lity,   1 80- 103
Licenses and pennit s, 180- I0 l
Notices, I80- 102
Planning Commission . 180-
102
Records, I80-10 I
V iolations and penalties, 180-
10 1, 180-103
Design and Const ruct ion Stand- ards, 180-32 - 180-45
Access,  180-37
Application, 180-32
Bicyc les, 180-44
Blocks, 180-35
Blocks and lots, 180-35
Brush, grass and weeds, 180-
38
Building pe1111its,  1 80-33 Compreh ensive Plan ,  180-33 Costs and expenses,  180-34,
1  80-44
Curbs, 180-34, 180-38, 180-39
Curbs and gu tters, 180-39
Design standards, 180-32 -
180-45
Draina ge. 180-34, 180-36
Driveways, 180-34, 180-37,
180-45
Dumpsters , 180-34
Easements, 180-34, 180-36
Emergencies,  180-34
Emergency vehicles, 180-34
 
Fa 1ms and  fanning, 180-34 Fee requ irements,  I 80-4 l Fees, 180-4 l
Final plans, 180-34, 180-38,
180-39, 180-43
Fire protection , 180-34 Floodplains, 180-4 1
Gas, 180-36
General standards, 180-33
Grades and grading, 180-34,
180-42
Gutters, 180-39
Historic features, 180-33
Improvemen ts, 180-34, 180-
43, 180-44
Interpretatio n , 180-32
Liability, 180-34
Licenses and pennits, 180-33
Lighting, 180-40
Lots,  180-34, 180-35, 180-37
- 180-39, 180-41, 180-42
Markers, 180-42
Minutes,   1 80-38,   180-39
Mobile home parks, 180-41
Mobile homes,  1 80-4 1
Monuments, 180-42
Monu ments and markers, 180-
42
N atural features, 180-45 Not ices, 180-38, 180-39
Obstructions, 180-34
Open space , I 80-4 1
Outdoor lighting , 180-40 Parking, 180-34, 180-35, 180-
44
Parks and recreation areas,
1  80-41
Pedesttians, 180-44
Plarnung Commi ssion, 180-32,
180-34, 180-43, 180-44
Preliminary plans,  180-44
R ecords, 180-34, I 80-38,  180-
39, 180-44
Recreat ional land, 180-41
Recreation areas, 180-38
R eports,  180-44
Road access control , 180-45
Safety standards, 180-32, 180-
34, 1 80-35, 180-37 - 180-
39
Sales, 180-42
Schools, 180-38, 180-44
Screens and screening, 180-35
Senior citizens, 180-44
Septic tanks, 180-43
Setbacks, 180-34, 180-36
Sewage disposal, individual ,
180-43
Sewage disposal, pii vate, 180-
43
Sewers and water, l80-43
Shoppi ng centers, 180-38
Sidewalks, IS0-38
Signs, I 80-34
Snow and ice removal, 180-34 Speed limits, 180-34, 180-45 Standard s for sidewalks, 180-
38



25
 
Stonnwater, 180-34, 180-36,
180-39
Stonnwater management, 180-
39
Streets, 180-34
Tests, 180-34
Through streets, 180-34
Township Engineer, 180-34,
180-41, 180-42
Traffic  impact  studies,  I 80-44 Utilities,  180-34,  180-36,  180-
4 1
Veh icles, 180-34, 180-45
Viola tions and penalties, 1 80-
34
Wai vers, 180-38, 180-39
W ater, 180-39, 180-4 1, 180-43
Watercourses, 180-36
Water supply , 1 80-43
Yards, 180-34, 180-35
En forcement, 180-10 I- I 80- 103
Administration and enforce-
ment, 180- 10 1
Amendments, 180- 102
Appeals,  I 80- 103
Allo mey's fees, 180- 103
Board of Supervi sors, 180-10 I
Const ruct ion,  t 80-10 I
Costs and expenses, 180- I 03
Fees, 180- 103
Hearings, 180-102
Improvements, 180- 10I
Liabi lity,  180-103
Licen ses and pennits, I 80-10 I
Notices, 180-102
Planning Commission, 180-
102
Records, 180- 10I
Violat ions and penalties, 180-
101, 180-103
Fee Schedules,  180- 1 l - 1 80-J 9
Additions to existing lots and lot line adj ustments, 180-
16
Appeals, 180-13
Assess ments, 180-14
Charges,  I 80- 17
Copies ofchapter, 1 80-I I
Costs and expen ses, 180-11,
180- 14, 180-17, 180-18
Disputes over fees, 180- 18
Easemen ts, 180-14
Effect of changes in cha pter,
1 80- 13
Fees, 180- 1 l , 180-17, 180-18
Final plans, 180-13 - 180- 16
General submission requ ire- ments,l80-1 I
Hearings, I80-13, I80-14
Improvements, I80-13 - 180-
15
Licenses and pennits, 180- 13,
180-18
Lots,180-13-180-16
Minor subdivision plans, 180-
15
Minor subdivisions, 180- 15
Notices, 180- 13



01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Official Map, 180-14
Planning Commission,   180-1 l
Preliminary plans,  180-13,
180-15, 180-16
Preparation of plans, 180-12
Recording plans and deeds,
180-14
Records, 180-13, 180-14, 180-
16
Registration,  180- 12
Reports,   1 80- 17
Right lo appear and comment before contiguous munic­ ipalities, 180-19
Sales, 180-13
Sketch plans, 180- 11
Township Engineer, 180-17 Utilities, 180-13
Waivers,  180- 15
Water,  1 80- 1 3
Final Plan Submission, 1 80-27 -
180-3 1
Additions lo existing lots and lot line adjustments, 180- 30
Blocks, 180-27
Conservat ion districts, 180-28,
180-30
Cons11ucti on, 180-28, 180-29 Costs and expenses, 180-28,
180-29
Culve1ts,    1 80-30
Curbs, 180-30
Design standards,  180-30
Easements , 180-27, 180-30 Erosion and sediment control,
180-28, 180-30
Fees, 180-29
Final plans, 180-27 - 180-31
Fire hydrants, 180-30
Floodplains, 180-28, 180-30 Grades and grading, 180-28,
180-30
Groundwater , 180-30
Guarantees, 180-28
Improvements, 180-28 - 180-
31
Inspections, 180-29
Landscaping,  180-30
Licenses and pe1m its,  180-27,
180-28
Lots, 180-27, 180-28, 180-30
Markers, 180-30
Meetings, 180-27, 180-29 Minor subdi visions,  180-28 Nat ural features, 180-30 Notices,  180-28
Planning Commiss ion, 180-27,
180-29
Plan requirements,  180-27 Poll ution, 180-28, 180-30 Preliminary plans, 180-27, 180-29    180-3 1
Records,  180-27
Reports, 180-29, 180-30
Review procedure,  180-29
Signs, 180-30
Speed limits, 180-30
 
Stonnwater, 180-28, 180-30
Stonnwater management, 180-
28, 180-30
Streetlighling, 180-30 Supporting documentatio n,
180-28
Time period for filing final plan , 180-3 I
Township Engineer, 180-28,
180-29
Trees,  1 80-30
Util ities, 180-28,  180-30
Wai vers, 180-27
Water,  180-30
Watercourses, 180-30
Wetlands, 180-27, 180-30
Genera l Procedures, 180-1 1 -
180-19
Additions to existing lots and lot line adjustments,  180- 1 6
Appeals,   1 80-13
Assessments, 180-14
Charges,   1 80-17
Copies of chapter,  180-11 Costs and expenses, 180-1 I ,
180- 14, 180-17, 180-18
Disputes over fees, 180- 18
Easements,  180-14
Effect of changes in chapter,
180-13
Fees,  180- 1 I , 180- 17, 180-18
Final plans , 180-13 - 180-16
General  submission require- ments, 180- 1 l
Hearings, 180-13, 180-14
I mprovemenls , 180-13 - 180-
15
Licenses and pennits,  180-13,
180- 18
Lots, 180-13 - 180- 16
Minor subdi vision plans, 180- 15
Minor subdivisions,  180- 15
Notices, 180-13
Official Map, 180- 14
Planning Comm ission, 180-11
Preliminary plans, 180-13,
180- 15, 180- 16
Preparati on of plans, 180- 12
Recordin g plans and deeds,
180-14
Records, 1 80-13, 180- 14, 180-
16
Registration , 180-12
Reports , 180-17
Right to appear and comment before contiguous munic­ ipalities, 180-19
Sales, 180- 13
Sketch plans, 180-1 1
Township Engineer, 180- 17
Util ities, 180-13
Waivers, 180-15
Water, 180-13
Grading and Sile Planning Re­
quirements, 180-8 1 - 180-87
An ima ls,  1 80-85



26
 
Appeals, 180-87 Comprehensive Plan, 180-85 -
180-87
Conservation districts, 180-82,
180-83
Construction, 180-8 1, 180-82,
180-84
Culverts,  180-81
Drainage, 180-81, 180-84
D1i veways, 180-84
Dust, 180-81
Easements, 180-84 - 180-87
Emergencies, 180-81
Encroac hments, 180-85 - 180-
87
Erosion and sediment control,
180-87
Excavations, 180-82, 180-85 -
180-87
Excavations and fills, 180-82 Fill, 180-82, 180-85 - 180-87
Final plans,  180-83
Grades and grading, 180-81 -
180-87
Grading plans, 180-83
Improvements, 180-84
Investigations , 180-87
Licenses and perm its, 180-82
- 180-87
Lots, 180-81, 180-84, 180-87
Natura l   resources,   180-85,
180-87
Open space, 180-86, I80-87
Pollution, 180-87
Records, 180-83, 180-84
Reports, 180-87
Retaining walls, 180-82
Safety standards,  180-84,  1 80-
87
Sales, 180-81
Setbacks, 180-84
Shrubs, 180-85
Soil erosion and sediment con­
trol , 180-84
Steep slope protection overlay, 180-84
Steep slopes, 180-84
Stonnwater,  180-83, 180-84
Stonnwater managem ent, 180-
83
Stream protect ion overlay, 180-85
Surface water protecti on over­ lay, 180-86
Township Engineer, 180-82, 180-84, 180-87
Trees, 180-8 1, 180-85
Wai vers,  180-87
Walls, 180-82
Water,  180-81, 180-82, 180-84
- 180-87
Watercourses, 180-8 1, 180-82,
180-84, 180-85
Water quality , 180-84, 180-87 Wetland protection overlay,
180-87
Wet lands, 180-86, 180-87




01-01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  fNDEX




 
Wildl i fe, 180-84, 180-86, 180-
87
Improvements and Con st111ction Assu rnnccs, 180-91 - 180-97
As-built plan , 180-93
Bonds, 180-9 l , 180-94, 180-
95
Buffers,  180-91
Costs and expenses, 180-91 ,
1 80-92, 180-95- 180-97
Cul ve1ts, 180-93
Curbs, 180-93
Disputes over  fees,  1 80-97
Easements,   I 80-93
Erosion and sediment control,
180-93
Escrow accounts, 180-9 1
Fees,  l 80-9 1, 180-96, 180-97
Fees for inspection of im- provements, 180-96
Final plans, 180-91 - 180-93,
180-95
Fire hydrants, 180-93 Grades and grading, 180-9 l Guarantee of required im-
provements as prerequi­
site to final plan approva l, 180-91
Guarantees,   180-9 1
Guaranties,  180-94
Inspection du1ing construction,
180-92
Inspections. 180-92, 180-94,
180-96, 180-97
Landscaping, 180-93
Letters of credit,  1 80-91
Liability, 180-94
Licen ses and penn its, 180-9 1,
180-97
Lots, 180-9 1 , 180-92
Manholes,   1 80-93
Monum ents, 180-93
Notices, 180-92, 180-94
Open space, 180-9 1
Records, 180-91
Release from financial secu ri­
ty. 180-94
Remedies to effect completion
of improvements, 180-95
Reports, 180-92, l80-94
Screens and  screening,   1 80-91,
180-93
Stormwatcr, 180-93
Stonnwater ma nagement, 180- 93
Street lighting,    1 80-93
Tests, 180-92
Township Engineer,  180-9 1 -
1 80-94,  180-96, 180-97
U til ities, 180-9 1
Va riances, 180-92
Violations and penalties, 180-
92
Water, 180-9 1, 180-93
Landscaping Requirements, 180-
88 - 180-90
Brush, grass and weeds, 180-
89
 
Construction, 180-89
Curbs, 180-89
D1iveways, 180-89
Erosion and sediment cont rol,
180-88
Floodplains,  180-89
Forest1y, 180-89
Glare, 180-88
Grades and grading, 180-89
Groundwater, 180-88
Heating, 180-88
Height regulations, 180-89
Insects, 180-89
Law ns,  180-89 No ise, I 80-88
Obstruction s, 180-89
Planning Com m ission , 180-89 Pollution, 180-88
Pu1pose and compliance, 180- 88
Recommended plant ma te1ials,
180-90
Screens and screening, 180-89, 180-90
Septi c tanks, 180-89
Setbacks, 180-89
Shrubs, 180-89
Specific requirements, 180-89
Steep slopes, 180-89
Trees, 180-89
Wi ldli fe, 180-89
Zoning dist ricts, 180-88
Minor Plans, 180- 11 - l 80- 19
Add itions to existing lots and lot line adjustments, 180- 16
Appea ls, 180-13
Assessments, 180-14
Charges, 180-17
Copies of chapter, 1 80- 1 I
Costs and expenses,  180- 1 I,
180-14, 180-17, 180-18
Disputes over  fees,  1 80- 18
Easemen ts, 180-14
Effect of changes in chapter,
180-13
Fees, 180- 11, 180- 17, 180-18
Final plans, 1 80-13 - 180-16
G enera l  submission  require- ments, 180-1 1
Hearings, 180- 13, 180-14
Improvemen ts, 180-13- 180-
1 5
Licenses and pcnn its, 180-13,
180- 18
Lots, 180- 13 - 180-16
Minor subdivision plans, 180-
1s
Minor su bdivisions,   180- 1 5
No tices, 180-13
Official Map, 180- 14
Planning Commission , 180-11
Preli mina1y plans, 180- 13,
180- 15, 180-16
Preparation of plans, 180- l 2
Recording plans and deeds.
180- 14




27
 
Records, 180- 13, 180-14, 180-
16
Registration , 180-12
Repo1ts, 180-17
Right to appear and comment before contiguous muni c­ ipalities, 180- 19
Sales, 180-13
Sketch plans, 180- 11
Township Engi neer, 180- 1 7
Utilit ies, 180-13
Wai vers, 1 80- 15
Water, 180-13
Mobile Home Park Regulation s
Accessory  bu ildings and struc­
tures,   180-59,  1 80-65
Action on final plan by Town­
ship Supe1v isors, 180-49
Add itional rules aod regul a­
tions established, 180-46 A ir pollution, 180-68 Application for initial pennit,
180-48
Areas for nomcsidenti al use,
180-56
Buffers, 180-59
Buffer suips, 180-59 Buildin g pennits, 180-52 Burning, 180-69
Compliance of existing mobile
home parks, 180-5 1
Construction, l80-51
Contagious diseases, 180-70
Costs and expenses, 180-60,
180-62
Draina ge, 180-58
Driveways,   180-6 1
Dust, 180-55, 180-60
Elect1ical dishibutfon system ,
180-66
Fees, 180-49, 180-53
Final plans, 180-49
Fire ext inguish ers, 180-69 Fire hydrants,  180-63,  180-69 Fi re preven tion, 180-69
Fire protection , 180-69
Garbage, rubbish and refuse,
180-54 ,  180-68,  1 80-69
General design requirements ,
180-58
Glare, 180-54
Health hazard s, 180-5 1, 180-
68
Hearings,180-7I
Heat ing, 180-54
Height regula tions, 180-58
Improvements, l80-65
Ind ividual mobile homes, 180-
52
I nsects, 180-54, 180-55
In spections, 180-70, 180-71
Licen ses and pe1mits, 180-47
- 180-53,  180-70,  180-7 1
Lighting, 180-58, 180-60
Lots, 180-57, 180-58, 180-70
Mob ile home parks, 180-46 -
180-7 1




01-01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Mobile homes, 180-46 - 180-
55, 180-57 - 180-62, 180-
64, 180-65, 180-68 - 180-
7 1
Noise,  180-54
Notices, 180-71
Nuisances, 180-54, 180-55
Odors, 180-54
Off-street parking, 180-64
Open space, 180-58, 180-62
Open space requirements , 180-
62
Parking , 1 80-58 - 180-61,
1 80-64
Parking requirements, 180-64 Parks and recreation areas,
180-60
Pedestria ns, 180-60, 180-61 Permits required, 180-47 Plumbing, 180-67
Pollution , 180-68
Proposed street system , 180-60 Radiation, 1 80-54
Recyclables, 180-68
R efuse disposal, 180-68
Renewal pcnnits, 180-50
Required setbacks, 180-59 Responsibilities of park man-
agement, 180-70
Revocation of pennit , 180-71 Rodents, 180-54, 180-55, 180-
68
Safety standards, 1 80-51 Sanita ry facilities, 180-67 Setbacks, I 80-59,  180-65 Sewers and water, 180-63 Sheds,  180-65
Signs, 180-58, 180-60
Site location, 180-54
Smoke, 180-54
Soil and ground cover re­ qui rements, 180-55
Soil erosion and sediment con ­
trol , 180-55
Storage, 180-65, 180-68
Storage sheds, extension s and additions, 180-65
Stonnwater,  180-58
Stonnwater management, 180-
58
Streets and sidewa lks, 180-60 Stru ctural requireme nts for
service buildings and oth­ er community service fa­ ci lities, 180-67
Tenn of permit , 180-49 Toilet facilities, 180-67 Township Engineer, 180-60 Utilities, 180-70
Vehicles, 180-60
Vibrations, 180-54, 180-58 Violations and penalties, 180-
7 1
Walks, 180-61
Walls, 180-67
Water,   1 80-57,  180-62,  180-63
Water and sewer service, 180- 63
 
Water and sewer service for lots in mobi le home park s, 180-57
Yards, 180-59, 180-65
Modification of Requirements ,
180-98 - 180- 100
Appl ications for modificati on,
1  80-99
Board of Supervisors, 180- 100 Costs and expenses, 180-100 Heaiings, 180-100
Meetings, 180-100
Minutes, 180-100
Modification action by Board
of Supervisors,    1 80-100
Notices, 180- 100
Planning Commi ssion, 180- 100
Records,   I 80-100
Special conditions, 180-98
Wa ivers, 180-99, 180-100
Preliminary Plan Submission,
I 80-24 - 180-26
Blocks,   I 80-24
Condit ional u ses, I 80-24 Conserva tion distiicts, 180-25 Construction, I 80-24 - 180-26 Costs and expenses, I 80-26 Culverts, I 80-24
Curbs,  I 80-24
Design standards,  180-24
Drainage, 180-25
Driv eways, 180-24
Dust,  1 80-24
Easements,  180-24
Erosion and sediment control, 180-25
Fanns and fanning, 180-24
Fees, 180-26
Final  plans,  1 80-24,  180-25
Fire  Department,  I 80-25
Fire hydrants, I 80-24, 180-25
Flood haza rd areas,  180-24 Floodplains,  180-24
Grades and  grading,  I 80-24,
180-25
Groundwat er, 180-25
Guarantees, 180-25
Improvements , 180-24, 180-26
Inspections, 180-26
Landscap ing, 180-25 Licenses and permits, I 80-24 Lots, 1 80-24, I 80-25
Manure, 180-24
Markers,   1 80-24
Meetings,  180-24,  180-26 Natu ral features, I 80-24 Noise, 180-24
Notices,  180-25
N uisances,   I 80-24
Odors, 180-24
Open space, 180-24
Parking, 180-24
Parks and recreation areas,
180-24
Planning Commission, 180-24,
180-26
Plan requirements, 180-24



28
 
Playgrounds, 180-24
Preliminary plans, 180-24 -
180-26
Records, 180-24
Registration, 180-24
Reports, 180-25, 180-26
Review procedure, 180-26 Right to farm, 180-24 Safety standard s, 180-24
Sales,   1 80-24
Schools, 180-24
Septic systems, 180-24
Setbacks, 180-24
Special except ions, 180-24 Speed l imits, 180-25 Storage,  180-24, 1 80-25
Stormwater, 180-25
Stormwate r management,  180-
25
Streetlighting, 180-24
Supporting documentation,
1 80-25
Tests, 180-24, 180-25
Township Engineer, 180-24 -
180-26
Trees, 180-24
Uti lities, 180-24, 180-25
Variances,  180-24
Waivers,    1 80-24
Water, 1 80-24, 180-25
Watercou rses,   1 80-24
Water quality, 1 80-25 Water supply, I 80-25 Wells, 1 80-24, 180-25
Wetlands, 180-24
Zon ing districts, 180-24 Stormwatcr Management Plan
and Design Criteria, 180-72
- 180-80
Al uminum, 180-75
Basic construction ciiteiia, 180-80
Bicycles, 180-75
Compl iance w ith Department of Env iron mental  Protec­ tion regu lations, 180-76
Computati ons for determining runoff and design facili­
ties, 180-75
Conservat ion distiicts, 180-73,
180-78
Construction, 180-72, 180-74,
180-77, 180-79, 180-80
Content, 180-74
Costs and expenses, 180-79 Cul verts, 180-75, 180-76
Curbs, 180-75
Drai nage,  180-74,   1 80-75
Diiveways, 180-77
Easements, 180-74, 180-79
Emergencies, 180-75
Encroachments, 180-76, 180-
77
Erosion and sedimentation,
180-78
Erosion and sediment control ,
180-72, 180-75, 180-78 -
180-80



01 - 0 1 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON IND EX




 
Fill , 180-77
Fina l plans, 180-72, 180-76,
180-78, 180-79
Floodplain management , 180-
77
Floodplain management in
wetlands, 180-77
Floodplains, 180-77
Grades and grad ing,  180-74, 180-75
Gutt ers, 180-75
Improvements, 180-72, 180-
77, 180-78
Inspections, 180-75, 180-79
Intemet ,  1 80-75
Liabi lity, 180-73
Licenses and permits, 180-74,
1 80-76
Lots, 180-74, 180-75, 180-77
Ma intenance progra m , 180-79 Obstruction s,  180-76
Own ership, 180-79 Parki ng, 180-75
Pollu tion, 180-73, 180-80
Repo1ts, 180-77
Safety standards, 180-75 Scope, 180-72
Storage, 180-75
Stormwatcr cont rol, 180-74 Stonnwater managem ent con-
stru ction  standards,  1 80-
80
Storm wate r quality, 1 80-75 Township Engineer, 180-74 -
180-76, 180-79
Township  l iability,   180-73
Trappi ng, 180-75
Trash , 180-75
Tra sh  racks,  180-75 U t ilities, 1 80-75
Wa ivers,  1 80-76
Walls, 180-75
Watercou rses,  180-77 Wetlands, 180-77
Yards, 180-75
Term inology, 180-9, 180-LO
Definit ions,  180- 10
Watercou rses, 180-9
Word usage, 180-9 Title and Purpose
Applicat ion of regu lations,
180-5
A pproval autho1iry designated,
180-3
Compliance with zoning re- quired, 180-8
Const ruct ion , 180-5
Cow1ty rev iew required, 180-4
Easem ents, 180-7 Fees, 180-4
Final plans, 180-3, 180-6
Height regu lations, 180-7
I mprovemen t s, 180-5, 180-6
Interpretation , 180-7
Liability, 180-6
Licenses and permits, 180-5,
180-7
Open space,  I 80-7
 
Planning Commi ssion, 180-3 Prelimina ry plans, 180-6 Records, 180-5
Report s, 180-4
Safety standards, 180-2, 180-7
Time lim it s on j urisdict ion, 180-6
Utilities, 180-6
Waivers, 180-6
Water,  1 80-5 Violations  and   Penalues
Administration  and  en force- ment , 180- 10 1
Amendments, 180- 102
Appea ls, 180-103
Attorney's fees, 180-103
Board  of Supeivisors,  180-10 I
Constru ct ion, 180- 10I
Costs and expenses, 180- 103
Fees, 180- 103
Hea1ings, 180-102
I mprovements,   180- 10 I
Liability, 180- 103
Lice115es and permits, 180-10I
Notices, I80-102
Planning Commission, 180-
102
Records,  180- 10 I
Voluntary Sketch Plan Submis­ sion, 180-20-  180-23
Costs and expenses, 180-20,
1  80-23
Developer's option to su bmi t
sketch plan, I80-20 Fees, 180-23
Fina l plans, 180-20
Meetings, 180-20, 180-22 Planning Commission , 180-20,
180-22
R equirements,   1 80-20
Site  m eetings,  1 80-22
Sketch plans, 180-20 - 1 80-23 Suggested infonnation Lo be
submitted, 180-2 1
Tow115hip En gineer, 180-22
Trees,  180-2 1
See also M INOR SUBD IV I­
SIONS
SU PERVI SORS,see BOA RD OF SU PERV ISORS
SURCH A R GES, see CHARG ES ;
FEES
SWIMM ING POOL S
N u isances, 134-3
Stonnwater ma nagement, 175-24
Zoning,204-25,204-37, 204-49


-T-
TAXAT ION
A musement Tax, 186-32 - 186-
43
A musemen ts, I86-32, 186-34
- 186-37
Appc-dlS, 186-41, 186-43
A ssessment of tax and penalty,
186-4 1



29
 
A ssessments,  186-4 1
Attorney's fees, 186-43
Authorization  to examine  rec- ords,  1 86-40
Collection, 186-36
Confidentia lity, 186-39 Costs and expenses, 186-35,
186-43
Definitions, 186-33 Failure to file, 186-38
Fees, 186-34, t 86-35, 186-43
Hea1ings, l 86-4 1 Imposition of tax, 186-34 Inspections,  186-39
lnvestigat io11S, 186-39
Liabi l ity, 186-36, 186-41 , 186-
43
Licenses and permits. 186-35
- 186-37' 186-40, 186-4 1,
186-43
N otices,  186-4 I
Pena lty, 186-38
Pe1mits, 186-35
Record or admissions, 186-39
Records, I86-39, 186-40
Recove1y of debts, 186-42 Reporting and payment , 186-
37
Reports, 186-37 - 186-41 ,
186-43
Sho1t title, 186-32
Violations and pena lties, 186- 38, 186-39, 186-41 - 186-
43
Earned Income Tax
Costs and  expenses,  186-7 Definitio11S, 186- 1
Effect ive date, 186-9 Employer w ithholding, remit-
tan ce and tax returns,
1 86-5
I mposition  of  tax,  186-2
I ndiv idual tax retu ms and pay m ents, 1 86-4
I nt erest , pena lties, costs, and fines, 186-7
Liability, I86-8
No exemption from tax, 186-3 Purpose/amendment and re-
statemen t/repeal, 186-8 Tax Collector,  186-6 Violations and penalties, 1 86-
7, 186-8
I ncome Tax Officer,  186-64 Appo intment, 186-64
A ppo intments, 186-64 Local Services Tax
Administra t ion of tax, 186-28
Appeals, I86-28 Const ruction, 1 86-2 I
Costs and expenses, 186-29,
186-30
Dates for determ ining tax l ia­ bi l ity and payment, 186- 24
Defin itions, 186-20
Disability , 186-2 1.1




01- 0 1 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Duty of employers to collect,
186-22
Emergencies,  l 86-21
Exempti on and refunds, 186- 21.1
I ndi vidua ls engaged  in  more
than one occupation or employed in more than one political subdiv ision , 186-26
Inspections, 186-30
Interpretation,    1 86-31
Levy of tax,  186-2 1
Liabilit y, 186-21.1, 186-22,
I  86-24,  I 86-29
No n residents subject to tax,
186-27
No tices, 186-2 1.1
Records,  I 86-24,  I 86-28,  I 86-
30
Returns, 186-23
Salaries and compensation ,
186-22, I86-23
Schools,  1 86-22
Self-empl oyed indiv iduals,
I86-25
Su its for collect ion, I 86-29 Veterans,  186-2 1.1
Violations and penalties, 186-
27, 186-29 - 186-3 1
Per Capita Tax
 
164-62, 164-65, 164-76, 164-
90, 164-105, 164-106
Stormwater  management,  I 75- I 2 Subdivision  and   land  develop­
ment,  180-24,  1 80-25,  180-
34, 180-92
Vehicles and traffic, 196-4
Zoning, 204-25, 204-37, 204-49
TH ROUG H HIGHW AYS
Vehicles and traffic, 196- 1 1
THROUGH STREETS
Subdivisio n and land develop­
ment, 180-34
TIMBER  HARV ESTING
Stonnwater management, 1 75-5
Zoning, 204-30, 204-47
TIR ES
Zoning, 204-37
TOILET FACILITIES
Sewers and  water,  164-1 J O
Subdivision and land develop­ ment , 180-67
Zoning, 204-49
See also SAN ITARY  FAC I LI­
TIES
TOPSOIL PR OTECT ION, see
DIRT; EXCAVATIONS
TOPSOIL R EMOVAL, see DIRT ;
EXCAVATION S
TOW ER S
Zon ing, 204- 1 3, 204- 14, 204-20,
 
TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Vehicles and traffic, 196-9
TRAILERS, see CONSTRUCT ION
TRAI LERS
TRANSI ENT VENDORS, see
PEDDLING  AN D SOLICIT­
ING; SA LES
TRAPPING
Parks and recrea tion areas, 140-4
Subdi v ision and land develop­
ment, 180-75
TRASH
Parks and recreation  areas,   I 40-4
Solid waste and recycling , 170-5, 170-6
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, I80-75
Zoning, 204-26, 204-44,204-49,
204-50
See also GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUS E
TRASH RACKS
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-75
TREASURER ,see TOWN SHIP
TREASURER
TREES
Junkyards, 120-12
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Sew ers and water, 164-5, 164-6 Solid waste and recycling, 1 70-5
 

 
Construction,   I 86- I 5
Costs and expenses, 186-18
Defin itions, 186-15
Duties of Tax Collector, 186-
19
Exemptions,  186-17
I nten t, 186-14
Legislative  authority,  I 86- 14
Notices,  186- 1 9
Purpose,  I 86- I 6
Tax Collector, 186-18, 186-19 Tax rate, I 86-I 6
Township Treasurer,  186-19
Violations and penalti es, 186-
19
Wammts, 186-18
Realty Transfer Tax Administration , 186-46
Imposition of tax , I 86-45
Interest , I 86-47
Liens, 186-47
Sho11 title, 186-44
V iolations and  penalties,  I 86-
46
TAX COLLECTOR
Real estate sales, 152-2
Taxation, 186-6, 186-18, 186- 19
TENANTS
Zoning, 204-48, 204-65, 204-69
TESTS
Drug parapherna lia, 106-3
Sewers and water, I 64-3, 164-1 I ,
164-12, 164-21, 164-35, 164-
49, 164-54, 164-55, 164-58,
 
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
Sewers and water, 164- 107 Stonnwater  managem ent, I 75-16 Subd ivision and land develop-
ment, 180-17,  180-22,  I 80-
24 - 180-26, 180-28, 180-29,
180-34, 180-41,  1 80-42,  180-
60, 1 80-74 - 180-76, 180-79,
180-82, 180-84, 180-87, 180-
91- 180-94, 180-96, 180-97
TOWNSHIP MANAGER,see
MANAGER
TOWNSHIP TREASU RER
Fireworks, 109-4
Manager,21-9
Recreation Advisory Board , 41-6 Taxation, 186-19
TOXIC SUBSTANCES
Zoning, 204-49
See also HA ZARDOUS MATE­
RIALS AN D SUBSTANC­ ES; HAZARDOUS WASTES
TOXIC WASTES, see HAZARD­
OUS MATERIALS AN D SU BSTANCES;  HA ZAR D­ OUS WASTES
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-44
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Vehicles and t raffic, 196-8 - 196- 14
See also VEHICLES A N D
TRAFF IC



30
 
ment, 180-21 , 180-24, 180-
30, 180-81, 180-85, 180-89
Vehicles and  traffic,   I 96-8
Zoni ng, 204-22, 204-25, 204-26,
204-28,204-30,204-35,204-
37, 204-40, 204-41 , 204-47,
204-49,204-50
See also SHAD E TREES;
SHRUBS
TR EES, SHADE, see SHADE
TREES
TRENCH ES, see  EXCAVAT IONS
TR ESPASSING
Sewers and water, 164-79, 164-94
Zoning, 204-37
TRUCK EXCLUSIONS, see V E­
HICLE WEIG HT LIM ITS
TR UCKS
Vehicles and traffic, 196-20, 196-
25 - I96-3 I
TRUSTEES, see BOA RD OF TRUSTEES
TWO-FAM ILY DWELLING S
Construction Codes, Unifonn, 95- 3
Zoning, 204-26, 204-35, 204-48











01 - 01-2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
-U­
UN OERGROUNDSTORAGE TANKS, see STORAGE TANKS
UNIFORM CONSTRUCT ION CODES, see CONSTRUC­ TION CO DES, UN IFORM
UTILITIES
Construction Codes, Unifonn, 95-
3
Floodplain management, 112-7,
112-23, 112-24
Stonnwater mana gement, l 75-4 Subdivision and land develop­
ment,  180-6,  1 80- 13,  180-24,
180-25,  180-28,  180-30,  180-
34, 180-36, 180-41, 180-70,
180-75, 180-91
Zon ing, 204-13 -204-20, 204-25,
204-26, 204-29, 204-35, 204-
37, 204-40, 204-41,204-44,
204-47 -204-49, 204-64,
204-70, 204-73


-V­

VACANT  LOTS
Zoni ng, 204-17, 204-44 VAPORS
Zoning, 204-37
See also FUMES VARIANCES
Building construction, 80-2
Floodplain mana gement, 112-32
Subdiv ision and  land develop- ment , 180-24, 1 80-92
Zon ing, 204-22 , 204-35 -204-37,
204-41 , 204-63 -204-65,
204-69
VECTORS
Zoning, 204-49
See also INSECTS; RODENTS
VEHICLES
Disorderly conduct, l02-2 Floodplain management , 112-23 Junkyards, 120-12
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4 Sewers and water, 164-85
Solid waste and recycling , 170-13 Subdi vision and land develop-
m ent, 180-34, 180-45, 1 80-
60
Vehic les and traffic, 196-1, 196-
3, 196-4, 196- 10- 196-16,
196-20 - 196-24, 196-26,
196-29,  196-3 1
Zoning, 204-2,204-14. 204-19,
204-20,204-25, 204-26, 204-
35 -204-37, 204-41 , 204-43.
204-44. 204-47, 204-49, 204-
50
See also COMM ERCIAL VE­
HICLES; EMERGENC Y VE HICLES; RECREA­ TIONAL VEH ICLES
 
VEHICLES ,  ABANDONED,see A BA N DONMENT
VEHICLES A 0 TRAFFIC
Genernl  Regulati ons
Authoriiy of police officers,
196-5
Chief of Police, 196-3 Construction, 196-6 Construction of tempornry or
pe1manent ramps prohib­ ited on all Township roads, 196-6
Costs and expenses, 196-3,
196-4
Curbs, 196-6
Definitions and interpretation,
196- 1
Dumpsters, I 96-7 Emergencies, 196-3 Experimenta l regulation s, 196-
4
Liability, 196-3, 196-4
Manner of adopting perman ent traffic and parkin g regula­ tions, 196-2
Notices, 196-3
Parades, 196-3
Parkin g, 1 96-2 - 196-4 Placement of dumpsters on all
Townsh ip roads shall be
prohibi ted, 196-7 Police Depa 11111ent , 196-3 Police officers, 196-5
Signs,  1 96-3,   196-4
Tempo1111y and emergency regu lations,  196-3
Tests, l96-4
Violations and penalties, 196-
3, 196-4
Parking Regulations
Boats and boating, 196- 1 7
Buses, 196-20
Chief of Police,  196-2 1
Costs and  expenses,  196-2 1 Creating no parki n g reg ul a- tions at certain  times  in
certa in loca tions, 196- 19
Licen ses and  permits,  196-2 1
Notices,  1 96-2 1
Parking of trucks, bu ses, rec­ reational vehicles and cer­ tain other veh icles prohib­ ited on all Township
roads or 1ights-of-way
thereof, 196-20
Parking prohibited al all times in certain locations, I 96- 17
Parking w ithout lights author- ized, 196-15
Police officers, 196-2 1 Recreational vehicles,  196-20 Reports, 196-2 1
Schools, 196-17
Trucks,  196-20
Vehicles to be parked w ithin marked spaces, 196-16




31
 
Violations and penalties, 196-
21
Traffic Regu lations, 196-8 - 196-
14
Banicades, 196-13
Chief of Police, 196-14
Constn1ction, 196-13
Costs and expenses, 196-8,
1 96-12 - 1 96-14
Emergencies, 196- 14
Left ancl!or right turns at cer­ tain intersections, 196-10
Left ancVor 1ight turns prohib­ ited at certain intersec­ tions, 196-10
Meetings, 196-12
Notices , 196- 13
Parking, 196-10
Play highways authorized,
196-14
Pol ice officers, 196-14
Schools, 196-12
Signs, 196-12, 196-13
Speed lim its, 196-8
Speed limits esta blished, 196-8
Stop intersect ions, 196- 12
Stop intersect ions established ,
196-12
Through highways, 196-1 1
Tlu·ough highways established,
196-11
Traffic signal s, 196-9
Tranic signa ls at certa in inter­ sect ions, 196-9
Trees, 196-8
Un lawful to operate motor ve­ hicles or tractors on highways closed for con­ struction or n:pair, 196- 13
Violations and penalties, 196-
8, 196-12 - 196-14
Water, 196-12
TJ11ck Traffic  Regulations,  196- 25 - 196-3 1
Authoriiy of police officers,
196-31
Chief of Police, 196-28 Continuat ion of pii or regula­
tions,  1 96-27
Costs and   expenses,  1 96-29
Definitions and inte1vretat ions,
196-26
Emergencies, 196-28
Liability,  196-27
Notices , 196-30
Police officers,  196-3 1
Regulation or length of veh i- cles utilizing Meadow­ brook Road, 196-29
Sho1t title, 196-25
Signage, 196-30
Temporary and emergency suspensions, 196-28
Trucks, 196-25 - 196-31
Violations and penalt ies, 196- 27,  196-29
Veh icle Weight Limits, 196-22 -
196-24



01 - 01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  INDEX




Costs and expenses,  196-24	164-82, 164-89' 164-9 1 , 164-	164-27 - 164-30, 164-32,
Title, 196-22	95 - I 64-97, 164- 114 -164-	164-34 - 164-37, 164-69,
Vehicle weight limits estab­	117	164-99, 164-100, 164-108,
 
lished on certa in streets
and b1idges, 196-23 Violations and penalties , 196-
24
See also TRAFFI C REG ULA­
TIONS
VEHICLES, COMMERCIAL, see
COMMERC IAL VE HICLES
VEHICLES, EMERGENCY, s ee
EMERGENCY  VEH ICLES
VEHICLES,   IMPOUNDMENT OF, see IMPO UN DMENT
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL,
 
Solid waste and recycling, 170-6,
170-8, 170-9, 170-12 - 170-
15,  1 70-19
Stonnwater managem ent, 175-4, 175-30, 175-31
Subdi vision and land develop­ ment, 180-34, 180-71, 180-
92, 180-101, 180- 103
Taxation , 186-7, 186-8, 186-19,
186-27, 186-29 - 186-3 1,
186-38, 186-39, 186-41 -
186-43, 186-46
Vehicles and traffic, 196-3, 196-
 
164-110
Sol id waste and recycling, 170-4, 170-5
Sto1mwater management, 175-2 -
175-4, 175-7, 175-10, 175-
12, 175-15, 175-24
Subdivision and land develop­ ment, 180-5, 180-13, 180-24,
180-25, 180-30, 180-39, 180-
4 1, 180-43, 180-57, 180-62,
180-63, 180-75, 180-8 1, 180-
82, 180-84 - 180-87' 180-91,
180-93
 

 
VEHICLE WEICHT LIMITS
Vehicles and traffic , 196-22 - 196-24
YENTi LATJON
Zoning, 204-49
VERM IN
Junkyards, 120- 12
Zoning, 204-25, 204-49
VETERANS
Taxation , 186-21.1
VIBRATIONS
Subdivision and land develop­
ment, 180-54, 180-58
Zon ing, 204-37, 204-49, 204-50 VILLAGE  MlXED-USE  ZONE
(VMU)
Zoning, 204-17
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Alarms, 66-5, 66-7
Animal s, 70-3 -70-5
Brush, grass and weeds, 76-4 -
76-7
Build ing construction , 80-2 Buildings, numbering of, 86-2 Burning, outdoor, 92-6
Cu rfew, 98-3 - 98-6
Disorderly conduct, 102-3, 102-4
Drug paraphernalia, 106-3, 106-4
Fireworks,   I 09-9
Floodplai n management , 112-13,
1 12-15
General provisions, 1-1 - 1-3, 1-5
- 1-8
Insurance,  1 17-1,  117-6
Ju nkyards, 120-1 1 , 120-12, 120-
14
Loitc1ing,  126-2
Nuisa nces, 134-4 - 134-6
Outdoor wood-fired boi lers, 137-
4
Parks and recreation areas, 140-9
Pedd ling and soliciting, 146-8,
146- 10
Real estate sales, 152-3
Rental prope1ty regisuy, 156-6 Sewers and water, 164-2, 164-4 -
164-6, 164-9, 164-14, 164-
1 7,  164-23,  164-27,  164-30,
164-35, 164-39, 164-65, 164-
67, 164-75, 164-77, 164-81,
 
29
Zoning,204-30, 204-40, 204-41,
204-49,204-64,204-69,204-
70,204-73
See also NOT ICES OF V IOLA­
TIONS
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPART­ MENT, see FIR E DEPART­ MENT
VOLUNTEER FIRE FIGHTERS,
see FIRE DEPARTMENT


-W -

WAGES, see COM PENSAT ION WAIVERS
Sewers and water, 164- 106 Stonnwater management , 175-7 Subdivision and land develop-
ment, 180-6, 180-15, 180-24,
180-27, 180-38, 180-39, 180-
76, 180-87, 180-99, 180- 100
Zoning, 204-61 , 204-63, 204-67
WALLS
Floodplain management, 112-23,
112-24
Ju nkyards,  120- 12
Subdivision and  land develop­ ment,  180-67, 180-75, 180-
82
Zon ing, 204-25,204-26, 204-28,
204-29, 204-32,204-35,204-
40, 204-41, 204-48 - 204-50,
204-55
See also RETAINING WALLS
WARRANTS
Sewers and water, 164-4 Taxation, 186-18
See also SEARCH WARRANTS
WATER
Floodplain management, 112-1,
112-6, 112-7, 112-12, 112-24
General provisions, 1-7
Junkyard s, 120-12
Manager, 2 1-8 Nuisances, 134-3
Parks and recreation areas, 140-7
Sewers and water, 164-4, 164-5,
164- 11, 164-20 - 164-22,



32
 
204-16, 204-25,204-29, 204-
36, 204-37, 204-47 -204-50,
204-64,204-70,204-72,204-
73
See also SEWERS AND WA­
TER
WATERCOU RSES
Floodplain  management,   1 12-6,
112-7, 1 12-2 1, 1 12-22, 1 12-
26, 112-27
Junkyards, 120-12
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-9, 180-24, 180-30,
180-36, 180-77' 180-81, 180-
82,   180-84,   1 80-85
Zoning, 204-47, 204-49
WATER POLLUTION
Sewers and water, 164-99 Zonin g, 204-37, 204-50
See also POLLUT ION
WATER QUALITY
Sewers and water, 164-100 Stonnwater management, 175-2,
1 75-3,   175-7, 175-10
Subdi v ision and land develop­ ment,  180-25, 180-84, 180-
87
WATER SUPPLY
Floodplain  management,   1 12-1
Sewers and water, 164-30, 164-32
Stonnwater management, 175-15 Subdivision and land develop-
ment,  180-25, 180-43
Zon ing, 204-49, 204-50
WEAPONS
Parks and recreation areas, 140-4
See also FIREARMS ; GUNS
WEEDS, see BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
WEIG HT LIMITS, see VEHICLE
WE IG HT LIMITS
WELLS
Stom1water management,  175-15 Subdi v ision and land develop­
ment, 180-24, 180-25
Zoning, 204-25, 204-50 WETLANDS
Stonnwater management , 175-3, 175-24




01 -01 -2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Subdivision and land develop­ ment,   180-24,   180-27.180-
30, 180-77' 180-86, 180-87
Zoning, 204-27, 204-47,204-64,
204-72
WILDLIFE
Subdivision and  land develop­ ment , 180-84, 1 80-86, 180-
87, 180-89
Zoning, 204-13, 204- 14, 204-27,
204-35
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
Zoning, 204-25
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS,
SMALL
Zoning, 204-25
WIND TURBINES
Zon ing, 204-25,204-49
WINE, see ALCO HOLIC BEVER­ AGES
WIRELESS   TELECOMMUNI­ CATIONS TOWERS  AND ANTENNAS, see ANTEN­ NAS; TOWERS
WIRELESS TELECOMMlJNl­ CATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES, see TOWERS
WOOD-FIRED  BOILERS, see
OUTDOOR   WOOD-FIRED BOI LER S


-Y-

YAR DS
Outd oor wood -fired boi lers, 137-
2
Subdi vision and land develop­
ment, 180-34,  1 80-35,  180-
59, 180-65, 180-75
Zoning, 204-17 -204-20, 204-25,
204-26,204-28,204-30,204-
32, 204-35- 204-37,204-44,
204-48 -204-5 1, 204-55,
204-59
YARD   ALES
Zoning, 204-25
See also GARAGE SALES;
SALES
YARD WASTE, see LEAF WASTE
YARD WA STE COLLECTION,
see LEAF WASTE


-Z­
ZONE REGULATIONS
Zoning, 204-13
ZONES
Zoning, 204-8, 204-10
ZONING
Administrati on
Abandonm ent,204-73
Administration and enforce-
ment , 204-69
Adve1tising, 204-73
Amendments, 204-72
Americans with Disabil ities
Act, 204-69
 
Animals, 204-70
A ppeals, 204-69, 204-70, 204-
72. 204-73
Attorney's fees.204-69
Board of Supervisors , 204-7 1,
204-72
Building pe1111its, 204-70
Certificates of use, 204-69,
204-70
Certificates of use and occu-
pancy , 204-69, 204-70
Charges, 204-72
Compensation. 204-69, 204-73
Compl ai11ts, 204-69, 204-70 Comprehensive  Plan,204-69,
204-72, 204-73
Conditional uses, 204-69, 204-
73
Construction , 204-69, 204-70,
204-73
Costs and expenses, 204-69,
204-70, 204-72,204-73
Determination  of foes, 204-7 1
Disability , 204-69
Disabled persons, 204-69 Discriminati on, 204-69 Emergencies, 204-70
Excavations, 204-70
Fair housin g, 204-69
Fees, 204-69 -204-73
Floodplains , 204-69, 204-70,
204-72, 204-73
Grades and grading,204-70
Handicap,204-69
Handicapped persons, 204-69
Hearings, 204 -69,204-70,
204-72, 204-73
Impro vements, 204-70
Inspections, 204-70
Insurance, 204-69 Landscaping,204-69 Liability,204-69
Libraries, 204-72
Licenses and pem1its, 204-69, 204-70, 204-72 , 204-73
Lots, 204-69
Meetings, 204-69, 204-7 1 ,
204-72
Mining , 204-70
Natural features, 204-72 Naturn l resources, 204-72 Nonconfom1ing uses, 204-69 Nonconfonnitic s, 204-69
Noliccs , 204-69, 204-70, 204-
72, 204-73
oft:street parking , 204-70
Parking, 204-70
Pennits, 204-70
Planned   residentia l   develop­
ments, 204-72
Planning Commi ssion , 204-72, 204-73
Records, 204-69, 204-70, 204-
72, 204-73
Reports, 204-69, 204-72, 204-
73
Schools, 204-72, 204-73
Signs, 204-70,204-72



33
 
Site plan approval , 204-73 Site plans, 204-73
Special exceptions, 204-69,
204-70
Tenants, 204-69
Utilities, 204-70, 204-73
Va1ianccs, 204-69
Violations and penalti es, 204-
69, 204-70, 204-73
Water,204-70, 204-72, 204-73
Wet lands, 204-72
Zoning Hearing Board , 204-
69, 204-70, 204-72
Zoning Maps, 204-69 , 204-72
Zoning Officer, 204-69,204-
70, 204-73
Zoning penni ts, 204-69,204-
70, 204-72,204-73
Background Provisions Appea ls, 204- 10 Blight,204-2
Community development ob-
jec tives, 204- LI
Comprehensive Plan, 204-11
Conditional uses, 204-6 Conflict with other provi sions,
204-5
Definitions,204- 12
Establishment of zones, 204-8
Floodplains, 204-8
Hearings, 204-10
Height regulations, 204-3.
204-5
Historic resou rces, 204-8 Interpretation, 204-4 Licenses and permit s, 204-5 Municipal  exemption, 204-7
Noti ces, 204-7
Parking, 204-2 Pennitted uses.204-6 Purpose, 204-2
Safety standard s, 204-2, 204-4,
204-6, 204-7
Schools, 204-2
Scope, 204-3
Title, 204-1
Uses not provided for, 204-6 Vehicles, 204-2
Water, 204-2
W ord usage,204-12
Zone boundary lines, 204- 10 Zones, 204-8, 204-10
Zoning Heating Board, 204-10
Zoning Map,204-9
Zoning Ma ps, 204-9, 204-10
Zoning Officer, 204-6, 204- 10 Genera l Prov isions, 204-24 -
204-45
Accessoty buildin gs and struc­
tures, 204-25, 204-44
Accessory uses, 204-25, 204-
35, 204-44
Access01y uses and structures, 204-25
Adult uses, 204-35
Advertising, 204-25, 204-37,
204-41




01 -01 - 20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  INDEX




Air conditioning, 204-37, 204-	Foresuy, 204-26, 204-30, 204-	Mobile homes, 204-34, 204-
40	35	35, 204-43

37	35	26, 204-30, 204-33 -204-
Antenna s, 204-25, 204-29,	Garage sales, 204-25	36
204-35, 204-44	Garbage, rubbish and refu se,	Natural resources, 204-27 Apa1tments, 204-26, 204-30,		204-26,204-44	Noise,204-37
204-33 -204-35	Gas, 204-35, 204-37	No tices, 204-25, 204-4 1
Applicabilit y, 204-24	Glare, 204-25, 204-37, 204-41	Nuisances, 204-25, 204-37,
Bed and breakfast , 204-35	Grades and grading,204-35,	204-44
Bicycles, 204-37	204-37, 204-41	Number of p1incipa l
Blocks, 204-25, 204-37	Grandfathering, 204-44	u se/st111cture per lot, 204-
Boats and boating, 204-35,	Groundwater, 204-45	34
204-37, 204-44	Guaranties, 204-37	Nursing homes, 204-35
B111sh, grass and weeds, 204-	Gutters, 204-36	Obst111ctions, 204-26,204-32,
25, 204-30, 204-35	Handicapped parking, 204-35	204-40
Buffering and screening, 204-	Handicapped persons, 204-35	Odors, 204-25, 204-37
26	Hazardous mate1ials and sub-	Off-street loading, 204-32,
Buffers, 204-26, 204-30, 204-	stances, 204-37	204-36
44	Hearings, 204-41	Off-street loading facilities,
Building pennits, 204-37	Heat ing, 204-37	204-36
Campgrounds, 204-35	Hedges, 204-28, 204-35, 204-	Off-street parking , 204-35,
Cemetelies, 204-35	40	204-36
Charges, 204-37	Height limit exceptions, 204-	Off-street parking require-
Commercial vehicl es, 204-44	29	ments,204-35
Common open space requi re-	Height regulation s, 204-25,	Open space, 204-27
ments,204-27	204-26,204-29,204-32,	Parking,204-25,204-26, 204-
Composting,204-40, 204-44	204-35 - 204-37, 204-44	30, 204-32, 204-35 - 204-
Cond itional uses, 204-25, 204-	Home occupati ons, 204-35,	37, 204-44
37	204-41	Parks and recreation areas,
Const111ction , 204-25, 204-37,	Horses, 204-35	204-27, 204-35
204-40 -204-42	Hospita ls, 204-35, 204-36	Pedestrians, 204-26, 204-30,
Const111ction trailers, 204-42	Hotels, 204-35 - 204-37	204-37
Convenience stores, 204-35	lmpoun dment,204-25, 204-44	Performance standards , 204-37
Corner lots, 204-28	Improvements, 204-26, 204-	Performance standards for all Costs and expenses, 204-25,		27, 204-35, 204-40		uses, 204-37
204-37	Insects, 204-25	Places of worship, 204-35
Curbs, 204-32, 204-35, 204-36	Inspections, 204-37, 204-44	Playgrounds, 204-35
Decks, 204-40	Insurance, 204-25, 204-37	Polluti on, 204-37
Design standards, 204-36	Junkyard s, 204-25	Porches, 204-40
Drainage, 204-32, 204-35,	Kennel s, 204-35	Prohibited uses, 204-35
204-36	Landscaping, 204-25, 204-26,	Radiation, 204-25, 204-37
Driveways, 204-25, 204-26,	204-30, 204-35, 204-37,	Records, 204-32, 204-44
204-30, 204-32, 204-35,	204-40	Recreational vehicles, 204-35,
204-4 1• 204-44	Landscaping and vegetation	204-44
Dumpsters, 204-26, 204-44	preservation , 204-30	Recreation areas, 204-27
Dust, 204-32, 204-37	Lawns, 204-26	Recycli ng, 204-26, 204-44
Easements, 204-26, 204-32,	Librari es, 204-35	Registration, 204-25, 204-44
204-40	Licenses and perm its, 204-25,	Reports, 204-37
Electromagnetic interference,	204-30, 204-32, 204-33,	Required licenses, certificates,
204-25, 204-37	204-35 -204-38, 204-4 1	and pennit s, 204-38
Elevators,204-29	-204-44	Residential disuicts, 204-37
Emergencies, 204-37, 204-43	Lighting, 204-25, 204-35 -	Restaurant s, 204-35
Erosion and sediment control ,	204-37, 204-41	Retaining walls, 204-26, 204-
204-26	Litter, 204-44	40
Explosives, 204-37	Livestock, 204-25,204-35	Retirement, 204-35
Fann s and farming , 204-25,	Lot access, 204-32	Roadside stands, 204-35
204-29,204-35 ,204-44	Lots, 204-25, 204-2 7, 204-28,	Roadway classi fications, 204-
Fees, 204-4 1	204-32, 204-35 - 204-37,	39
Fences, 204-25, 204-26, 204-	204-4 1, 204-42, 204-44	Roofs, 204-25
28, 204-35, 204-40	Material s and waste hand ling	Safety st andards, 204-25, 204-
Financial institutions, 204-36	requirements,204-33	37, 204-38, 204-41
Fire hydrants, 204-32, 204-37	Minimum habitable floor area,	Sales, 204-25 - 204-27, 204-
Fire protection , 204-37	204-31	35,204-37, 204-4 1, 204-
Fishing, 204-44	Mining, 204-37	42, 204-44
Floodplains, 204-4 1	Mobile home parks, 204-34,	Schools, 204-27, 204-35
Fly ash,204-37	204-35



34	01-0 1-20 14
 
NORTH MIDD LETON INDEX




 
Screens and screen ing, 204 -25,
204-26, 204-30, 204-35 -
204-37' 204-44
Sccurily standards, 204-37
Service  siations, 204-37 Setback modi fications and ob-
structions prohibited  in
easements and rights-of­ way,204-40
Setbacks, 204-25, 204-26,
204-29, 204-32, 204-34,
204-35, 204-37, 204-40 ,
204-44
Shade Lrecs, 204-35
Sheds, 204-42
Shopping cenlers, 204-35,
204-36
Shrubs, 204-26, 204-30, 204-
35
Signs, 204-25, 204-26, 204-35,
204-37, 204-4 1
Si ng le-fami ly dwellings, 204- 35
Site plans, 204-25, 204-35 -
204-37
Snow and ice removal,204-32 Solar energy systems, 204-25 Special exception s, 204-37 Sleep slopes, 204-27
Storage, 204-25, 204-26, 204-
29, 204-30, 204-35 - 204-
37, 204-42    204-44
Storage ta nks, 204-29 Stonnwater,  204-25, 204-35,
204-36
Stonnwater management, 204-
25, 204-35, 204-36
S1rcctlighting, 204-37
Swimm ing pools , 204-25, 204-
37
Temporary construction trail­ ers or sheds, 204-42 Temporary person al storage,
204-43
Tests, 204-25, 204-37
Timber harvesling, 204-30
Tires, 204-37
Towers, 204-25,204-29, 204-
35, 204-37
Trash , 204-26, 204-44
Trec.s, 204-25, 204-26, 204-28,
204-30, 204-35, 204-37,
204-40, 204-4 1
Trespassing, 204-37
Two-family dwellings, 204-26, 204-35
Unenc lose.d storage, 204-44
Use of on-loi sewage disposal
systems, 204-45
Utilities, 204-25,204-26, 204-
29, 204-35, 204-37, 204-
40, 204-4 1 , 204-44
Vacant lots, 204-44
Vapors , 204-37
Variances ,204-35 - 204-37,
204-4  1
 
Vehicles, 204-25, 204-26, 204-
35 - 204-37, 204-4 1, 204-
43, 204-44
Vcnnin , 204-25
Vibrations , 204-37
Violations and penalties, 204- 30, 204-40, 204-41
Walls, 204-25, 204-26, 204-
28, 204-29, 204-32 , 204-
35, 204-40, 204-4 1
Waler, 204-25, 204-29, 204-
36, 204-37
Waler po lluiion , 204-37
Wells, 204-25
Wet lands, 204-27
Wildli fe, 204-27, 204-35 Wind energy systems, 204-25 Wind energy systems,sm all,
204-25
Wind tu rbine s, 204-25 Yards, 204-25, 204-26, 204-
28, 204-30, 204-32, 204-
35 -204-37, 204-44
Yard sales, 204-25
Zoning  Hearing  B(Jard, 204-4 1
Zoning Officer, 204-25, 204-
30, 204-33, 204-34, 204-
37, 204-41 -204-43
Zoning penn its, 204-33, 204-
35 - 204-37' 204-4 1, 204-
43
Nonconfotmil ies, 204-52 - 204-
59
Abandonment, 204-53
Accessory uses, 204-55
Buffers, 204-55
Continuation, 204-52
Cosls and expenses, 204-57 Design standards, 204-54 Expansion or alteration , 204-
55
Exten sion of a noncon fomung
use of land , 204-54
Fences, 204-55
Floodplains , 204-55
Hearings, 204-56
Height regulations, 204-55, 204-57
Improvements, 204-55
Landscapi ng, 204-55
1...-0tS, 204-59
Nonconfon ning lotS, 204-59 Nonconfonninguses,204-53-
204-58
Off-street loading. 204-55 Off-street parking, 204-55 Parkin g, 204-55
Permitted uses, 204-55
Previously expanded noncon- fonn ing uses and struc­ tu res, 204-58
Restorat ion, 204-57
Screen s and screening,204-55 Setbacks, 204-59
Signs, 204-55,204-58
Special exceptions, 204-55,
204-56




35
 
Substitu tion or replacement.
204-56
Wa lls, 204-55
Yards, 204-55,204-59
Zoning districts, 204-57 Zoning Hearing Board, 204-56
Specific Criteria and Supple­
mental Regu lations for Spe­ cific Uses, 204-46 -204-51
Abandonm ent , 204-49 Accesso1y bui ldings an d stiuc­
tures, 204-48 -204-50
Accessory uses,204-47 -204-
50
Advertising,204-49, 204-50 Agricu ltural uses, 204-47 Air cond itioning, 204-49
Air pollution, 204-50
Animals, 204-47, 204-49,204-
50
A ntennas, 204-49
Apartments, 204-48, 204-50 Applicabil ity, 204-46 Banicades, 204-49
Batteries , 204-49
Bed and breakfa st,204-48
Blocks, 204-49
Board of Trnstees, 204-48 Boats and boating,204-49 Bonds, 204-47, 204-49
Brnsh, grass and weeds, 204-
49
Buffers, 204-49,204-50
Building pemlits, 204-46, 204-
48
Campgrounds, 204-49
Campi ng, 204-49
Camps, 204-49
Campsites, 204-49
Cemete1ies, 204-49
Ce11ificates of i nsurnnc e, 204-
49
Compensation , 204-48
Composting, 204-49
Conditional uses, 204-46 Conservat ion districts, 204-47 Const ruclion,204-48 -204-50 Costs and expenses, 204-48,
204-49, 204-5 1
Curbs, 204-48
Day -care facilities, 204-48 -
204-50
Demolition, 204-49
Din ing faci li1ies, 204-48, 204-
49
Drainage,204-49,204-50
Drive-1hrough restaurants,
204-49
Driveways, 204-48 - 204-50 Dumps and dump ing, 204-49 Dust, 204-49
Easements , 204-48
Elec1rical disturbances, 204-49
Eleciromagnetic  interference, 204-50
Emergencies, 204-48 - 204-50
Emergency management, 204-
48, 204-49



01 -01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Emergency vehic les, 204-49, 204-50
Erosion and sediment control ,
204-47
Escrow accounts, 204-49 Excavat ion s, 204-49
Explosives, 204-49
Fa m ily  day-care,  204-50
Farms and fanning , 204-4 7,
204-49 -204-51
Fees, 204-49,  204-5 1
Fences,204-47-204-50
Financial instituti ons, 204-48 Fire hazard s, 204-50
Fire lanes, 204-50
Flammables,204-49 Floodplains, 204-49, 204-50
Floodways, 204-50
Forestry, 204-47
Forestry uses, 204-47
Fuel , 204-49
Fumes, 204-49, 204-50
Garages, 204-49
Garage sales, 204-49
Garbage, rubbi sh and refuse,
204-49
Glare, 204-49, 204-50
Grades and grading, 204-48 -
204-50
Groundwa ter, 204-49 Grou p homes, 204-48
Guarantees, 204-4 7, 204-49
Hazardous materials and su b- stances, 204-48, 204-49
Hazardous wastes, 204-49
Hearings, 204-47
Hedges, 204-49
Height regul ations, 204-48 -
204-50
Holding tanks, 204-49
Home occupations , 204-50
Horses, 204-47
Hospita ls, 204-49
Hotels, 204-49
Improvements, 204-47 -204-
49
I nfestation,   204-49
Insurance, 204-49
Junkyard s, 204-49
Kennels , 204-49
Landfills, 204-49
Landscaping, 204-48 -204-50
Lawns, 204-49
Liability,204-49
Libraries, 204-48, 204-49
Licenses and penn its, 204-46
-204-5  1
Lighting, 204-49
Litter, 204-49,204-50
Litter control, 204-49
Livestock, 204-50
Lots, 204-48 -204-50
Manure, 204-47, 204-50
Meet ings, 204-49
Mining, 204-49
Minors, 204-49
Mobile home parks, 204-48 Mobile homes, 204-48, 204-49
 
Motels, 204-49
Mu ltifamil y dwelli ngs, 204-48 Natural   features, 204-49
Noi se, 204-49, 204-50
Nonresiden tial uses, 204-49
Notices, 204-49
Notices of violations, 204-49 Nuisa nces, 204-49
Nursing homes, 204-48
Obstructions, 204-49
Odors, 204-47, 204-49, 204-50
Off-street parking, 204-49,
204-50
Open space, 204-48, 204-49
Paper, 204-49
Parking, 204-48 -204-50
Parks and recreation area s,
204-48, 204-49
Pedesuians, 204-49, 204-50 Perfo1manc e standards, 204-50 Pennitte<l uses, 204-49, 204-
50
Places of worsh ip, 204-48,
204-49
Playground s, 204-49
Pollution, 204-50
Princ ipa l agricul tural/forest1y
uses,204-47
Principal  nonresidential  uses,
204-49
Principal residential uses, 204-
48
Radiation, 204-50
Recreational vehic les, 204-49 Recreation areas, 204-50 Recyc ling, 204-49, 204-50
Registration , 204-49
Reports, 204-49
Residentia l   uses, 204-48
Restaurants, 204-48, 204-49
Retirement, 204-48, 204-49
Roadside stands, 204-50
Rodents, 204-49
Safety standards, 204-47 -
204-50
Sales, 204-49, 204-50
Schools, 204-47, 204-49
Screens and screening, 204-47
- 204-50
Security standards, 204-49
Septic systems, 204-49
Service stations, 204-49
Setbacks, 204-47 -204-5 1
Shade trees, 204-49, 204-50
Shopping centers,204-49
Signs, 204-48 - 204-50
Site plans, 204-49
Smoke, 204-49, 204-50
Soil erosion and sediment con ­
trol , 204-4 7
Special exceptions, 204-46
Storage,204-47,204-49, 204-
50
Stonnwater, 204-49
Stonnwater mana gement, 204- 49
Swi mm ing pools, 204-49
Temporary  u ses, 204-5 1



36
 
Tenants, 204-48
Tests, 204-49
Timber harvesting, 204-47
Toilet facilities, 204-49
Towers, 204-49
Toxic substances, 204-49
Trash , 204-49, 204-50
Trees, 204-47, 204-49, 204-50
Two-fam ily dwelli ngs, 204-48 Utilities, 204-47 -204-49
Vectors, 204-49
Vehicles, 204-47, 204-4 9, 204-
50
Ventilation, 204-49
Venni n,204-49
Vibrations , 204-49 , 204-50
Violations and penalties, 204-
49
Wall s, 204-48 -204-50
Water, 204-47 -204-50
Watercourses, 204-47, 204-49 Water pollut ion , 204-50
Water supply, 204-49, 204-50
Wells, 204-50
Wetlands, 204-47
Wi nd turbines, 204-49
Yards, 204-48 -204-51
Zon ing Officer, 204-47, 204-
49, 204-5 1
Zon ing pennits, 204-46 -204-
50
Zone R egulations, 204- 13 -204-
23
Abandomnent , 204-22
Accessory buildings and struc­
tures, 204- 1 3 - 204-16
Accessory uses, 204- 17 - 204-
20
Accessory uses and structures, 204-13 - 204-16
Adult uses, 204- 19
Agricultural Zon e (AG), 204-
13
Airport Overlay Zone (APO), 204-22
Anima ls, 204- 13, 204- 14, 204-
1 7- 204- 19
Antennas, 204- 13 -204-20
Apartments, 204- 16 -204-18
Blocks,204- 17,204- 18
Building permits, 204-23 Campgrounds, 204- 14
Cemeteries, 204-14 Commercial districts, 204-17 Commercial/Light  Industrial
Zone (C/ Ll), 204-19
Comprehensive Plan, 204-23
Conditional uses, 204- 13 -
204-20, 204-23
Constmction,204-22, 204-23
Convenien ce stores, 204-18,
204- 19
Costs and expenses, 204-22 Demolition ,204-23
Design standards, 204-20
Drainage, 204-13
Driveways , 204-17, 204- 18




01 - 01 - 2014
 
NORTH MIDDLETON INDEX




 
Easemen ts, 204- 17,204- 1 8,
204-23
Emergen cies, 204-23
Encroachments, 204-22 Farms and fanning, 204-13,
204- 14
Financial institutions, 204- 1 7 -
204-19
Floodplain Overlay Zone
(FPO), 204-2 1
Floodplains, 204- 13 -204-2 1
Forest ry, 204- 13 -204-20
Group homes, 204-13 - 204-
1 8
Hearings, 204-13 - 204-20
Height regulations, 204-22
Histotic featu res, 204-23 Historic resources, 204-13 -
204-20, 204-23
Historic Resources Overlay
Zone ( H RO), 204-23
Home occupations, 204-13 -
204-18
Hospital s, 204-13, 204-14.
204-1 7 -204-19
Hotels, 204- 19
Improvements, 204- 19, 204-20 Industrial Zone (IN D), 204-20 Jun kyards,204-20
Kennels, 204-13, 204- 14, 204-
20
Libra1i es. 204-1 7, 204-18 Licenses and penn its, 204-22,
204-23
Lighting, 204-22
Livestock, 204-13,204-14
Lot s, 204-13, 204-17, 204- 18
Low-/ Mcdium-Density Resi- dential Zone (R-1), 204- 15
Medium -/ High -Density Resi­ dential Zone (R-2), 204- 16
Meet ings,204- 14, 204- 17,
204-23
Mixed u se districts, 204-1 8 Mobi le home parks, 204-16 Mobi le h omes, 204-16
Motels, 204-19
Mul tifamily dwelli ngs, 204-16
- 204-18
Naru ral resources, 204-13 Ne ighborhood Commercial Zone (NC), 204-18
Noise. 204- 17, 204- 1 8
Non confonnin g u ses, 204-22 Nonconformit ies, 204-22 Notices, 204-22
Nursing homes. 204- 15 - 204-
17
Obstru ctions, 204-22
Off-street parkin g, 204- 17,
204-18
Parking, 204- 17   204-20
Parks and recreation areas.
204- 14 -204- 18
Pedesllians, 204- 17, 204-1 8
 
Pennitted  u ses, 204-13 -204-
20, 204-23
Places of worship, 204- 13 -
204-20
Planning Commission , 204-17,
204-23
Playground s, 204- 14 -204-18
Porches , 204-17
Records,204-17, 204-18, 204-
23
Recreation al vehicles, 204- 14
R ecycling. 204-1 8 - 204-20
Restau rants, 204-17 -204- 19
Retirement, 204- 16, 204-17
Roadsidestands,204-13-
204- 1 8
Rural Resou rce Zone (RR),
204-14
Safoty standards, 204-22,204-
23
Sales, 204- 17 -204-20, 204-
23
Schools. 204- 13 -204-20
Service stations, 204-1 8 - 204-
20
Setbacks,  204- 1 7, 204-20
Shopping centers, 204- 18 Special except ions, 204-13 -
204-20, 204-23
Special exception uses, 204-23
Storage. 204- 17 -204-20
Towers, 204- 13, 204-14, 204-
20
Trees, 204-22
Utiliti es, 204- 13 -204-20
Vacant lots, 204-17
Va riances, 204-22
Vehicles, 204-14, 204- 19, 204-
20
Village Mixed-Use Zone
(VM U), 204-17
Water, 204- 13, 204- 15, 204-16
Wildlife, 204- 13, 204-14
Yards, 204-17 -204-20
Zoning distticts, 204- 17, 204-
1 8
Zoning  Hearing Board,204- 1 3
- 204-20
Zoning Maps, 204-23
Zoning Olliccr, 204-23
Zoning Hearing Board, 204-60 -
204-68
Abando nment, 204-63
Advertising, 204-63
A ppeal , 204-68
Appeals, 204-63 - 204-68
Appo intments, 204-60
Attorney's fees, 204-67
Bonds, 204-67
Cease and desist ord ers, 204- 64
Compensation,204-62. 204-63
Comprehensive Plan, 204-64
Const ruction,204-63
Costs and expenses, 204-63, 204-67
Erosion and sediment control,
204-64



37
 
Establishment and member­
sh ip, 204-60
Expenditu res for services, 204- 62
Fees,204-63,204-6 7
Floodplains, 204-64
Hea1ing Officer,204-61 , 204-
63
Hearings, 204-60 -204-68
Improvement s, 204-65
Liability, 204-67
Licenses and pennits. 204-63,
204-64
Members hip, 204-60, 204-61 Na tu ra l features, 204-64
Natu ral reso u rces, 204-64 Nonconfonn ing uses, 204-64 Notices, 204-60, 204-63,204-
64, 204-66, 204-67
Organizat ion of Zoning Hear­
ing Board, 204-61
Parties appellant before Zon­ ing Hearing Board, 204- 65
Planned residentia l develop-
ments, 204-64
Plann ing Commission, 204-60 Powers and duties, 204-60 Quonun, 204-6 1
Records, 204-61, 204-63, 204-
64
Regist ration, 204-64
Reports, 204-61, 204-63
Schools, 204-64
Site pla n approval, 204-64 Site pla ns, 204-64
Special exceptions, 204-63 -
204-65
Stay of proceeding, 204-67 Stonnwate r,204-64
Storm water management, 204- 64
Tenants, 204-65
Tenns  of  office,204-60 Time   limitations,204-66 Util it ies, 204-64
Vacanc ies, 204-60
Va 1iances, 204-63 -204-65
V iolations and penalties. 204-
64
Waivers, 204-61, 204-63, 204-
67
Water, 204-64
Wetlands , 204-64
Zoni ng Hearing Board's func­
t ions,  204-64
Zon ing Maps, 204-64, 204-66
Zoning Officer,204-60, 204-
63, 204-64, 204-66, 204-
67
Zon ing pennits, 204-63, 204-
64
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ,
see APPEALS
ZON I NG  DISTRICTS
Subdivision and land develop­
men t, 180-24. 180-88
Zoning, 204- 17, 204-18, 204-57



01-01-20 14
 
NORTH MIDDLETON  INDEX




ZONING ENFORCEMENT OF­ FICER, see CODE EN­ FORCEMENT OFFICER
ZONING HEARING BOARD
Building   con stmction, 80-2 Floodplain management,  I  l 2- 16 Manager,  2 1-8
Zoning, 204- 10, 204- 13 -204-20,
204-41, 204-56, 204-60 -
204-70, 204-72
See also HEA RING OFFICER;
HEARINGS
ZONING MAPS
Zoning, 204-9, 204-10,204-23,
204-64,204-66,204-69 ,204-
72
See also OFFICIAL MAP
ZONING OFFICER
Building construction, 80-2 Bu rning, outdoor, 92-4 Manager, 21-8
Solid waste and recycling, 170-20
Zoning, 204-6, 204- 10, 204-23,
204-25,204-30,204-33,204-
34,  204-37,  204-4 1 - 204-43,
204-47, 204-49,204-51 , 204-
60,204-63, 204-64,204-66 ,
204-67,204-69,204-70 , 204-
73
See also CODE ENFORCE­
MENT OFFICER
ZONING PERMITS
Floodplain managemen t , 1 12-6 Sewers and  water,  164-80
Zoning, 204-33,204-35 -204-37,
204-4 1 , 204-43, 204-46 -
204-50 ,204-63,204-64,204-
69, 204-70, 204-72, 204-73
See also  BUILDING PERMITS; LICENSES AND PERMITS

