Township of North Huntingdon
Zoning Ordinance # 765
Enacted February 20, 1991
TOWN HOUSE •
ROUTE 30
~v.i L. Robert Kimball & Associates
~ Engineers • Architects • Scientists • Planners
[J'
Pittsburgh, PA Ebensburg, PA
Index of Amendments (See Appendix)
Ord.# Date Subject
Inclusion of previous Ord. #490 regarding planned residential developments &
798 2/19/1992 changes in the enforcement remedies for violations & as required by PA Act 170.
867 3/15/1995 Accessory Structures
935 2/18/1998 Enforcement Notices
Modifying provisions to medical clinics & telecommunications facilities &
936 2/18/1998 establishing standards for land use classifications
966 3/17/1999 Regulate Adult-Related Businesses
Requirements of location & hours of operation of Methadone or other drug
977 7/21/1999 facility
1028 1/17/2001 Adult oriented businesses obtaining to license, fees, fines & penalties
Define Shopping Ctrs. as conditional uses in C-1 & PEDD1 Districts; Eliminate
Shopping Ctrs. as conditional uses in C1-A & C-2; Set forth Requirements &
1033 3/21/2001 Standards for conditional uses.
1050 2/20/2002 New Standards & Regs. For PEDD! & to modify exisiting PEDD1 & C-1 & PEDD2
Include Municipal buildings as a permitted use in PEDD 1, PEDD2, & Industrial
2018 5/19/2004 zones
2093 11/15/2006 Amend 503.3, 2 (6) Side Yard width minimum R-1A
2145 4/21/2010 Micro-breweries in C-1A
2151 10/20/2010 Revisions to C-1A Zoning District
2152 11/17/2010 Signs text changes
2163 6/15/2011 Shallow Oil & Gas Wells
0 F F I C I A L
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 1991
ORDINANCE NO. 765
THE PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE NO. 765 IS TO ADOPT A NEW ZONING
ORDINANCE WHICH SAID NEW ZONING ORDINANCE INCLUDES THE ADDITION
OF NUMEROUS DEFINITIONS, THE INCLUSION OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCE
NO. 490 REGARDING PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS, AND CHANGES
Ill THE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS AND AS REQUIRED BY
PENNSYLVANIA ACT NO. 170. THIS ORDINANCE CONSTITUTES AN
ENTIRELY NEW AND DISTINCT ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWNSHIP OF
NORTH HUNTINGDON AND REPEALS ORDINANCE NO. 490 WITH REGARD TO
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND REPEALS ANY AND ALL
AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE NO. 490 AND REPEALS THE PREVIOUS ZONING
ORDINANCE NO. 542 AND REPEALS ANY AND ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO.
THIS NEW ZONING ORDINANCE WILL BE ACCOMPANIED BY A NEW AND
CURRENT ZONING MAP.
This Ordinance No. 765 adopted by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon on Wednesday, February 20 1 1991.
ATTEST:
SEAL
REVIEWED AND APPROVED:
j
Zr1u u,<-C_,> :3 7-:;:...J..-
herine B. Petrosky,
Manager
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
_1 '-- _.., __ '"7---: ___ ,..,._,u.•: __ \
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article 1 - TITLE
101 Title
Article 2 - PURPOSE
201 Purpose
202 community Development Objectives
Article 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
301 Rules
302 Definitions
Article 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
401 Interpretation
402 Separability
403 Scope of Regulations
404 Number of Buildings on a Zoning Lot
405 Bulk Regulations
Article 5 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
501
502
503
504
505
506
Types of Districts
Location of Districts
District Standards
503.1 Open Space, Conservation and
503.2
503.3
503.4
503.5
503.6
503.7
503.8
503.9
503.10
503.11
Recreation District (0)
Residence District 1 (R-1)
Residence District 1-A (R-lA)
Residence District 2 (R-2)
Residence District 3 (R-3)
Residence District 4 (R-4)
Planned Residential Development
(PRD)
Neighborhood BusinessDistrict (C)
Commercial District 1 (C-1)
Commercial District 1-A (C-lA)
Limited Commercial District 2
(C-2)
503.12 Industrial District (I)
503.13 Planned Economic Development
Districts 1 and 2 (PEDD 1 & 2)
summary of District Standards
Table 1: Summary of District Bulk
Standards
Rear and
Table 2:
Table 3:
Building
Side Yard Setback Requirements
Rear Yard Setback Requirements
Side Yard Setback Requirements
Site Requirements
i
1-1
2-1
2-2
3-1
3-1
4-1
4-1
4-2
4-2
4-2
5-1
5-1
5-2
5-2
5-2
5-3
5-5
5-6
5-8
5-9
5-38
5-39
5-41
5-43
5-44
5-45
5-58
5-58-1
5-59
5-59-1
5-59-2
5-59
Article 6 - DISTRICT us~ REGULATIONS
601
602
Use Regulations in Residential Districts
Table 4: Table of Permitted Uses in
Residential Districts
Use Regulations in Commercial and
Industrial Districts
Table 5: Table of Permitted Uses in
Commercial and Industrial
Districts
Article 7 - NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS STRUCTURES AND USES
6-1
6-1-1
6-2
6-2-1
701 statement of Purpose 7-1
702 Registration of Non-Conforming Uses 7-2
703 Non-Conforming Lots of Record 7-2
704 Non-Conforming Structures of Record 7-2
705 Non-Conforming Uses of Structures or 7-3
Land
706 Repairs and Maintenance of 7-4
Non-Conforming Buildings
Article 8 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS
801 Accessory Uses, Buildings and Structures
802 Amusement Centers
803 Attached Multi-Family Dwelling Regulations
804 Boats
805 Canopies
806 Condominiums
807 Day Care
808 Essential Services Height Exception for
structures
809 Exotic Animals
810 Exterior Wall Surfaces
811 Farms and Livestock
812 Floodplain District
813 Group Residence and Group Care Facilities
Table 6: Group Residence and Group
Care Standards and Criteria
814 Home Occupations
815 Location of Deposits of Fluid or Solid
Waste Material
816 Massage Business
817 Mineral and Topsoil Removal
818 Mobile Homes
819 Off-Street Loading Regulations
820 Off-Street Parking Regulations
821 Rear Dwelling Regulations
822 Rear Lot Subdivisions
823 Sign and Billboard Regulations
824 Smoke Detectors
825 Subdivisions
826 Swimming Pools
827 Township Caretaker Residence
828 Transient Business and Sale of Goods
from Parked Trucks
829 Unit Group Development Standards
ii
8-1
8-2
8-2
8-4
8-4
8-5
8-9
8-10
8-10
8-10
8-12
8-13
8-13
8-15
8-17
8-18
8-18
8-18
8-27
8-28
8-29
8-35
8-36
8-36
8-39
8-40
8-40
8-41
8-41
8-42
Article 9 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
901 Statement of Purpose
902 Interpretative Clause
903 Board of Commissioners
904 Zoning Amendments or Rezoning Requests
905 Curative Amendment
906 Conditional Uses
907 The Township Zoning Officer
908 Building Permits and Occupancy Permits
909 The Zoning Hearing Board
910 Variances
911 Special Exceptions
912 The Planning Director
913 The Planning Commission
914 Site Plan Submission
915 Enforcement
916 Fees
917 Public Notice
918 Performance Zoning Option
919 Appeals
Article 10 - ZONING MAP DIAGRAMS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
1001
1002
1003
1004
1005
1006
1007
1008
1009
1010
1011
1012
1013
1014
1015
Zoning Map
Interpretation of District Boundaries
Procedure Diagram for Amending
Zoning Ordinance
Procedure Diagram for Conditional Use
Procedure Diagram for Variance
Procedure Diagram for Special Exception
Illustration: Types of Lots
Illustration: Percentage of Lot Coverage
Illustration: Yards on Rectangular Lots
Illustration: Yards on Non-rectangular
Lots
Illustration: Yard Requirements for
Corner Lots
Illustration: Types of Residential
Buildings
Illustration: Application of Height
Illustration:
Illustration:
Regulations to Different
Types of Roofs
Required Access
Required Access
Case 1
Case 2
Article 11 - REPEALER, NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES,
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
1101 Repealer
1102 Non-conforming Uses and structures
1103 Severability Clause
1104 Effective Date
iii
9-1
9-1
9-1
9-1
9-4
9-6
9-8
9-9
9-11
9-12
9-15
9-16
9-17
9-17
9-19
9-20
9-21
9-22
9-22
10-1
10-1
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-7
10-8
10-8
10-9
10-10
10-10
10-11
10-11
11-1
11-1
11-2
11-2
ARTICLE 1
TITLE
101 Title
101 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the
Township of North Huntingdon Zoning Ordinance.
1-1
ARTICLE 2
PURPOSE
201 Purpose
202 Community Development Objectives
201 PURPOSE
201.1 This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To promote and to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of North Huntingdon
Township, and the public in general.
2. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and
expansion of the municipality;
3. To protect the character and maintain the stability
of residential, business and manufacturing areas
within the Township;
4. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and
convenience of access to property;
5. To divide the Township into zones and districts
restricting and regulating therein the location,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures, and land for residence,
business, manufacturing and other uses;
6. To establish building lines and the location of
buildings designed for uses within such lines;
7. To provide uses, buildings or structures which are
compatible with the character of development or the
permitted uses within specified zoning districts;
8. To regulate such additions to, and alterations or
remodeling of existing buildings or structures as
would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereinafter;
9. To encourage efficient circulation in the public
streets by providing for off-street parking of motor
vehicles and for the loading and unloading of
commercial vehicles and to protect the public
health, safety and the general welfare;
2-1
10. To provide protection against fire, explosion,
noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of
the public health, safety, comfort, and general
welfare;
11. To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses
of land, buildings and structures which do not
conform with the standards of the districts in which
they are located and are adversely affecting the
development of other property in each district;
12. To define and limit the powers and duties of the
administrative office and bodies as provided herein.
202 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Pennsylvania Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988
hereinafter referred to as the Municipalities Planning Code,
and is intended to promote an orderly plan of development
according to established comprehensive plans for the Township
including data on existing conditions, statements concerning
the proposed Long Range Plan as amended, and evaluations of
implementation techniques. The Township intends to use the
Long-Range Comprehensive Plan as amended, as a guideline in
establishing the provisions, regulations and controls
contained in this Zoning Ordinance.
2-2
ARTICLE 3
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
301 Rules
302 Definitions
301 RULES
In construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions
contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular; and the words used
in the present tense shall include the future.
2. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
3. The word "may" is permissive.
4. The word "structure" includes all buildings of any kind
and any part thereof.
5. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and
"parcel".
6. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged
for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for",
and "occupied for".
7. Uses of land, buildings, equipment or structures not
clearly permitted in the various zoning districts are
prohibited.
302 DEFINITIONS
ABANDONED VEHICLE - Any vehicle that does not have both a current
Pennsylvania license plate and a current safety inspection
sticker. This term shall not apply to any vehicle or equipment
used in the normal operation of a farm owned or leased by the
person farming the land.
ACCESS POINT - Any vehicular entrance or exit to a street. The
distance between such access points shail be measured from the
termination of one curb cut to the establishment of an adjacent
curb cut.
3-1
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE - An "accessory building or use" is one
which:
a. is subordinate to and serves a principal building or
principal use; and,
b. is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal
use served; and,
c. is subordinate, clearly incidental and related to that of a
principal use of land;
d. accessory use may be located on an adjacent lot in the same
zoning district or as a special exception for non-adjacent
lots;
e. accessory land use is differentiated from an accessory
building use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A structure detached from a principal building
on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to
.the principal building or use.
ADDITION - An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure. See also "ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL".
ADMINISTRATOR - The Zoning Officer shall be that person as
prescribed in Act #247, as amended, or as set forth by an
ordinance by the Township Commissioners.
ADVERTISING - Any device used to attract public attention for the
promotion of sales or the promotion of meeting places or other
activities where commercial and/or industrial uses are being
carried out. (See also: SIGNS.)
AGRICULTURE - The cultivation of the soil and the raising and
harvesting of products of the soil including, but not limited
to: nurserying, horticulture, forestry (when the planting or
harvesting of trees is considered either as a conservancy or as
an income producing enterprise), and the breeding and raising
of domestic animals.
ALLEY - Those right-of-ways and streets which are substandard in
size as now exist and are called alleys as of the date of the
adoption of this ordinance.
ALTERATIONS, NONSTRUCTURAL - Any alteration which would change the
use of a structure or the land use of one zoning district
classification to the other.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL - Any change other than that set forth under
incidental repairs which would alter or change the bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders. In addition, all modifications
that would alter or change-the overall volume of the
structure including changes in height, area or depth. This
also includes any changes in interior walls that alter
pedestrian walkways and fire fighting access.
3-2
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT - Any building within which are kept, for
use as games, entertainment, amusement, or other public
patronage, jukebox, pinball, and video machines. The use of
these machines shall not be accessory to another primary use,
in which case the building shall be considered an amusement
machine complex.
AMUSEMENT GAME MACHINE - A coin operated machine or device which,
whether mechanical, electrical, or electronic, shall be ready
for play by the insertion of a coin (real money) , chip or
token, and may be operated by the public for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve
either a high or low score, which by comparison to the score of
other players whether playing concurrently or not, demonstrates
relative skill or competence. It shall include devices such as
pinball machines or any device which utilizes a video tube to
reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be
representative of real games or activities.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE COMPLEX - A group of more than two amusement game
machines, in the same place, location or premises.
APARTMENT - A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied
by three or more families or individuals who live independent
of each other. Access to apartments normally shall be by
common halls, doors or stairways, in order to differentiate
between town houses and apartments.
APARTMENT, GARDEN - An apartment building having certain yard spaces
set aside for use of occupants either as a whole or on an
individual tract. This does not include parking spaces. such
apartments shall be provided with a common entrance way.
APARTMENT, HIGH RISE - An apartment building over three (3) stories
high and limited to eight (8) stories.
APPLICANT - A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for development, his heirs, successors or assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT - Every application, whether preliminary
or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan, or for the approval of a development
plan.
AREA, BUILDING - The total horizontal plane area of the building
from outside wall to outside wall. This is exclusive of patios
and stairways.
AREA OF LOT OR PARCEL - See "LOT AREA".
ASSEMBLY HALL - A room, hall or building used for lectures, meetings
or gatherings.
3-3
AUTO LAUNDRY - A structure or portion thereof where automobiles are
washed with the use of cleaning devices.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT - A paved, sewered lot with suitable parking
for the sales or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
trailers and with suitable parking for the sales building.
BASEMENT - The space enclosed by the foundation or ground floor
walls of a building partly below or entirely below the average
level of the adjacent ground. A basement shall be counted as a
story for purposes of height measurement when one-half (1/2) or
more of its volume is above the average level of the adjacent
ground, or when it is designed or used legally for living
quarters.
BILLBOARD - A sign upon which advertising material of any character
is printed, posted or lettered which is free standing and is
used to advertise products, services or businesses at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is placed.
BLOCK - A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
shore lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the
Township of North Huntingdon.
BOARD - Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of North Huntingdon.
BUFFER ZONE - A strip of land which is ten (10) feet in width,
planted and maintained with at least one (1) row of evergreen
trees, providing a visual barrier of not less than three (3)
feet in height at initial planting.
BUILDING - A structure or appendage to a structure intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature,
which is permanently affixed to the land; has one or more
floors or stories; and is bounded by either lot lines or
yards. A building shall not include such structures as
billboards, fences, mobile homes and/or trailers of any kind,
or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible to
human use, such as gas tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers or
similar structures. A building may accommodate more than one
family and have more than one dwelling unit and may be used for
residential, commercial, public, or industrial purposes.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY - See "ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE".
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance between the top of the
basement or foundation, whichever is the base of the first
story, and the top of the highest story. Where a story and a
half building exists, the bottom half story shall be used as
the roof line. (See Article 10, Section 1013, "Application of
Height Regulation to Different Types of Roof" .)
3-4
BUILDING LINE - A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard
required for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
No portion of the front face of any building shall encroach
over the building line except as otherwise permitted in this
ordinance. The front face shall include any enclosed area such
as enclosed porches, sun parlors, etc., but does not include
unenclosed porches, steps and walkways limited to eight (8)
feet heyond the building line.
BUILDING PERMIT - Written permission issued by the Zoning Officer
for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a
building or structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL - Any building which is arranged, designed,
used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or
more families which includes the following types:
a. One-family detached dwellings
b. Two-family detached and attached dwellings
c. Condominiums
d. Multi-family apartment dwellings
e. Town houses
f. Garden apartments
g. High rise apartments.
BUILDING SITE - A lot occupied or intended to be occupied by a
single principal building or structure or use. A "building
site" shall be synonymous with a "lot".
BULK - The term used to indicate the size, setback and location of
buildings with respect to each other, including but not limited
to the following:
a. Size of building
b. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot
line, street, or to other buildings
c. Gross area of buildings in relation to lot area
d. All open spaces allocated to buildings.
BUSINESS SERVICES - Any activity conducted for gain which renders
services primarily to other commercial or industrial
3-5
enterprises, or which services and repairs appliances and
machines used in homes or businesses.
CANOPY - A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building
or is supported by a free-standing structure for the purpose of
shielding an area from the elements.
CARPORT - A partially enclosed accessory structure used for the
purpose of parking an automobile. such structure may be freestanding
but is normally attached to the primary structure on
at least one side.
CARTWAY - That portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular
use.
CELLAR - That part of a building or structure which has 50 percent
or more of its volume below the average level of the adjacent
ground and is not used as living quarters.
CHURCH - A building used as a place of religious worship or
religious worship or religious teaching (except rescue
missions, temporary revival structure, or retreat houses). The
term "church" shall be construed to include synagogue or
temple.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE - An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points which
are at a given distance from the intersection of street center
lines.
CLUB OR PRIVATE LODGE - A non-profit association of persons who are
bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or
leases a building, or portion thereof, the use of such
structures being restricted to members and their guests. It
shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises
providing adequate dining room space and kitchens are
available.
COMMERCIAL - The provision of services or products to another for
business purposes or for personal gain.
COMMERCIAL BOARDING HOME - Any type of living facility which
provides food and shelter, for payment, to adults who are
unrelated to the provider and who require no service beyond
food, shelter and other services usually found in a hotel or
apartment rental.
COMMERCIAL SPA OR HOT TUB - A facility open to the general
population for a fee, which consists of a pool designed for
recreational and therapeutic use and for physiological and
psychological relaxation. The pools include, but are not
limited to these types: hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold
water, mineral baths, air induction system or a combination of
any of these. This term shall not include any
3-6
pool designed to be used for swimming and diving. A spa or hot
tub shall be considered to be commercial in nature if it is
open to the general population for a fee or if it is made
available to customers or guests at any hotel, motel, health
club or other club, or other business.
COMMON OPEN SPACE - A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site,
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of
the site. Common open space does not include streets, offstreet
parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMUNITY CENTER - A building publicly, quasi-publicly, or privately
used and maintained with facilities devoted exclusively to a
variety of group activities - civic, social, recreational,
educational, and/or cultural - provided that it shall not
include living quarters for persons other than those engaged in
the conduct of it, that it shall not be operated for profit,
and that alcoholic beverages shall not be served.
COMPLETION GUARANTEE - A deposit of cash, bond, certified check,
negotiable securities or the submission of an irrevocable
letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan by the owner
or developer as security for the completion of any required
improvements. The deposit is returnable to the depositor or
the letter of credit is terminated upon completion of all
required improvements within the stated period.
CONDITIONAL USE - An authorized used which may be granted only by
the Township Commissioners pursuant to express standards and
criteria prescribed in this ordinance, after review and
recommendations by the Township Planning Commission and a
public hearing conducted by the Township Board of Commissioners
pursuant to public notice.
CONDOMINIUM - A multiple dwelling where each dwelling unit in the
structure is individually owned and the owner of each unit has
an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the
structures and surrounding grounds.
COVERAGE, LAND - See "BULK". See also Article 10, section 1008,
"Percentage of Lot Coverage".
CUL-DE-SAC - A dead-end street terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
DAY CARE CENTERS - A facility licensed and approved, as applicable
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Westmoreland,
North Huntingdon Township. Day care centers shall include the
following and the definitions exclude care provided by
relatives or care furnished in places of worship during
religious services:
3-7
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER - Care provided for twelve or more
children at any one time in a facility that is not being
used as a family residence.
CHILD GROUP DAY CARE HOME - Care provided for more than six but
less than twelve children in a facility not being used as a
family residence, for part of 24 hour day.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - Child care service provided in a family
residence for not more than six children who are not
relatives of the care giver. Hours of operation limited to
6 a.m. to 6 p.m.
GROUP CARE HOME - Provides room and board, personal care,
rehabilitation services and supervision in a family
environment for not more than four developmentally disabled
persons.
A developmental disability shall be considered one that:
a. is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy or autism.
b. is attributable to any other condition found to be
closely related to mental retardation because such
condition results in similar impairment of general
intelligence functioning or adaptive behavior to that
of mentally retarded persons, or requires treatment
and services similar to those required for such
persons.
c. is attributable to dyslexia resulting from a
disability described in a and b above.
d. and has continued, or can be expected to continue
indefinitely.
DECISION - Final adjudication of the Zoning Hearing Board or of the
Board of Commissioners by reason of jurisdiction or of appeals
from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the
Court of Common Pleas.
DENSITY - Dwelling units per acre.
DETERMINATION - Final action by the Zoning Hearing Officer
appealable to the Zoning Hearing Board.
DEVELOPER - Any landowner or agent or tenant of such landowner who,
with the permission of such landowner, makes or causes to be
made a subdivision of land or a land development.
3-8
DEVELOPMENT - See "DEVELOPMENT, LAND".
DEVELOPMENT, LAND - Any of the following activities:
a. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two more residential or non-residential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively,
or a single non-residential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(2) the division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or
more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features.
b. A subdivision of land.
c. The
(1)
(2)
(3)
following shall not be considered a land development:
the conversion of an existing single-family detached
dwelling or single-family semi-detached dwelling not
more than three residential units, unless such units
are intended to be a condominium;
the addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing
principal building; or
the addition or conversion of buildings or rides
within the confines of an enterprise which would be
considered an amusement park. For purposes of this
exemption, an amusement park is defined as a tract or
area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall
not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement
park until the initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for development of a Planned
Residential Development or a Planned Economic Development,
including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space, public facilities, and other
requirements of this ordinance regarding Planned Development,
Article 5 1 Section 504. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DISTRICT, ZONING - A section of the municipality for which uniform
regulations governing the use, height, area and density of use
of buildings and land and open spaces about buildings and
herein established.
DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL USES - Any retail commercial use providing
considerable off-street parking and catering primarily to
3-9
vehicular trade, such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in
theaters, and similar uses.
DUMP - A deposit or site intended to be used for the deposit or
storage of garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials
including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste(s)
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agriculture
and residential activities.
DWELLING - A building or a portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family
dwellings, two-family dwelling, and multi-family dwellings, but
not including camping or recreational trailers, hotels, motels,
rooming houses, tourist courts, or tourist homes. The
following types of dwellings are defined in this ordinance:
DETACHED - A single dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded
by open space and located on one zoning lot.
ONE FAMILY - A building designed or used exclusively for
occupancy by one family on one zoning lot in a residential
district.
DUPLEX - No more than two (2) attached dwelling units on one
zoning lot.
MOBILE HOME - See "MOBILE HOME".
MULTIPLE FAMILY - A "multiple family" dwelling is a building or
portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units on
one zoning lot in an appropriate zoned district.
DWELLING UNIT - One or more rooms in a residential building which
are arranged, designed, used or intended for use as living
quarters for one family. Each dwelling unit shall have
permanent facilities for sleeping, cooking and eating.
EASEMENT - A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited
use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and
within which the owner of the property shall not erect any
permanent structure, but shall have the right to make any other
use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights of
the grantee.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS - See "SCHOOL".
ENLARGEMENT - An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another structure, or an increase in
that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES - Any activity conducted for gain which is
generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion
picture theatres, bowling alleys, roller-skating rinks,
miniature golf, golf driving ranges, commercial swimming pools,
carnivals, and related uses.
3-10
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Any public utility corporation or municipal
authority including those providing natural gas, electricity,
water sewage, telephone or cable to the citizens of North
Huntingdon Township.
FAMILY - A family is:
a. A single person occupying a dwelling unit.
b. Two or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying
a dwelling unit including household help.
c. Not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a
dwelling unit and living together and maintaining a common
household.
FARM - Any parcel of land containing at least two (2) acres which
may be used for gain in the raising of agriculture products or
at least 10 acres or more for livestock, poultry and dairy
products. rt includes necessary farm structures with the
prescribed limits and the storage of farm equipment. It
excludes the raising of fur bearing animals, riding academies,
livery or boarding stables, and dog kennels.
FENCE - A fabricated barrier used to enclose an area of land.
FLEA MARKETS - An occasional or periodic market held in an open area
or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for
sale to the public.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING - The sum of the area of the several floors
of a building or buildings measured from the outer face of the
exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two
buildings. (It is understood that floor area does not
necessarily mean living space.) In particular, floor area
includes, but is not limited to the following:
a. Basement space if it meets the requirements of a building
story.
b. Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic spaces, (whether or
not the floor has been laid) providing structural headroom
of seven (7) feet or more.
c. Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches,
provided that over 50 percent of the perimeter of these are
enclosed.
d. Any other floor space used for dwelling or other, no matter
where located in the building.
e. Floor space or mezzanines and penthouses.
FLOOR AREA RATIO - The floor area of a building and/or
buildings on a lot divided by a lot area.
3-11
FOOD PROCESSING - The preparation of food products for sale.
FLUID OR SOLID WASTE(S) MATERIALS - Any type of waste such as, but
not limited to, slurry, washings, residues, slurry ponds,
settling ponds, etc. which result from mining, processing,
manufacturing, or other types of commercial or industrial
operations.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY - Any structure or a series of structures for the
parking of automobiles of residents of the neighborhood and not
used for the making of repairs.
GARAGE, PRIVATE - A detached accessory building or a portion of a
main building for the parking only of vehicles belonging to the
occupants of a residential structure and located on same lot.
GARAGE, PUBLIC - A commercial building other than a private or
community garage used for maintenance, repairs and parking of
automobiles.
GARAGE SALE - (Also known as "Yard, or House Sale") - A sale held by
an individual property owner or several abutting property
owners on his/her or their own property for the purpose of
offering used goods to the public. Garage, yard or house sales
shall not last longer than three days per year per property
owner(s). Nonprofit corporations or organizations shall be
exempt from the requirements hereof, but an application must be
submitted and approved as to the nonprofit status of the
corporation or organization.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION - An establishment supplying gasoline and
oil, tires, accessories, and service for automobiles at retail
direct to the motorists, including minor repairs in which all
repairs will be done in an enclosed building.
GRADING - The act of changing the natural contour of the land in any
way.
GROUP RESIDENCE AND GROUP CARE FACILITIES - Any facility in which
food, shelter, personal assistance, skilled nursing or other
personal health services· are provided on a regular basis to ·
more than four (4) individuals who are not relatives of the
operator of such facility as regulated in Article 8, Section
813. Such facilities shall include the following:
a. Commercial boarding home
b. Intermediate care facility
c. Personal care boarding home
d. Skilled nursing facility.
3-12
HALF STORY - A story with a cubic content of not more than fifty
(50%) percent of the first story (or ground story) of a
building.
HALFWAY HOUSE - A facility designed to provide residential and
rehabilitative treatment services to persons being treated for
the drug and/or alcohol abuse, or persons under the supervision
of the courts or county, state, or federal parole boards,
either after being charged with a criminal offense or in lieu
of criminal charges.
HEALTH AND FITNESS RELATED ESTABLISHMENT - Any establishment having
a source of income or compensation derived from offering a
service to the public involving health, healing or fitness
related activities and providing or offering to provide
physiological or psychological healing or therapy. This
includes, but is not limited to, a health club, massage
establishment and public spa or public hot tub. This term
shall not include any business or establishment operated for
the practice of a profession which is licensed by the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such as physicians, dentists,
nurses, podiatrists, chiropractors, physical therapists, and
similar occupations.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY - A general or specific hospital, including
tuberculosis and psychiatric hospitals, rehabilitation
facilities, skilled nursing facilities, kidney disease
treatment centers, intermediate care facilities and ambulatory
surgical facilities, both profit and nonprofit and including
those operated by an agency of the state or local government,
but shall not include an office used exclusively for their
private or group practice by physicians, psychologists or
dentists, nor a program which renders treatment solely on the
basis of prayer or spiritual means in accordance with the
tenants of any church or religious denomination, nor a facility
conducted by a religious organization for the purpose of
providing health care services exclusively to clergymen or
other persons in a religious profession who are members of the
religious denominations conducting the facility.
HEALTH CLUB - Any business or nonprofit organization that offers a
service to the public involving exercise equipment or exercise
programs or an indoor sport involving exercise whether or not
the business provides any other service. This includes, but is
not limited to, martial arts schools that have exercise
programs, gyms, and exercise clubs.
HEARING - An administrative proceeding conducted by the Zoning
Hearing Board. See also "Public "Hearing".
HOME OCCUPATIONS - An
contained within
which is clearly
living purposes.
accessory use of a service oriented character
a dwelling and operated by the residents,
secondary to the use of the dwelling for
(See Article VIII Section 814)
3-13
HOTEL - A building containing dwelling units and lodging room in
which at least 50 percent of the gross floor area is devoted to
residential space.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO - The total area of a lot or site occupied
by buildings, roads, parking areas, outdoor storage areas and
other paved surfaces, divided by the lot or site area.
INDUSTRIAL - The production and sale of goods and services usually
associated with making, fabricating, assembling or processing
raw materials into large quantities of finished products.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY - A facility that provides nursing care
and related medical or other personal health services on a
regular basis to individuals who do not require a degree of
care and treatment which a hospital or skilled nursing facility
is designed to provide, but who, because of their mental or
physical disabilities, require the above services within the
context of a planned program of care and administrative
management, supervised on a continuous 24-hour basis in an
institutional setting. This includes intermediate care
facilities for the mentally retarded.
JUNK YARD - Any lot, land, structure or part thereof where any
discarded materials or articles may be stored and which
includes but not limited to: scrap metal, scrapped abandoned
or junked motor vehicles in excess of (1) per lot, machinery,
equipment, paper, glass, containers and structures. It shall
not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper
container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
KENNEL - Any premises on which dogs are kept or bred for commercial
purposes.
LABORATORY - A place devoted to experimental study in any science or
to the testing and analysis of drugs and chemicals.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - See "Development, Land".
LAND USE PERMIT - For purposes of this ordinance a land use permit
shall be deemed an occupancy permit.
LANDOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase
(whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to
exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner
for this purpose.
LOADING BERTH - Any off-street space of berth, abutting a street,
way or other appropriate means of access, intended for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
3-14
LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA - The total area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front,
side and rear lot lines of a lot.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF - That portion of a lot bounded by the
required front, rear and side yard setbacks (See Article 10,
Section 1009 and Section 1010.)
LOT, CORNER - Any lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or
more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than
135 degrees. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be deemed
a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its points of
beginning within the lot or at the point of intersection of the
side lot lines with the street line intersect at the interior
angle of not more than 135 degrees. A corner lot shall
maintain front yard requirements along the street upon which
the principal building fronts. Side yard requirements shall be
the same as front yard requirements along side street(s). Yard
requirements for accessory buildings on corner lots shall not
be less than the front yard requirements for adjoining lots.
(See Article 10, Section 1011, "Yard Requirement for Corner
Lots".)
LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of the lot measured within the lot
boundaries.
LOT LINES - The lines that indicate the boundary of a lot or zoning
lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a lot which extends along an
existing or dedicated public street, or where no public streets
exist, along a public way.
LOT LINE, REAR - That boundary of a lot which is most distant from,
and is most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE - Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear
lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING - A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance,
but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
LOT OF RECORD - A parcel of land described by certain boundaries and
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, Westmoreland
County. Such a lot may or may not meet the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located and may require future
grouping of lots for residential, commercial or industrial
use. Lot descriptions and boundary terms are shown in
Article 10.
3-15
LOT,
LOT
THROUGH - A lot having frontage along two (2) or more or
parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot.
Article 10, Section 1007, "Types of Lots".)
WIDTH - The distance between the side lot lines measured
the front building line of the lot as determined by the
prescribed front yard requirements.
less
(See
along
LOT, ZONING - A lot, unoccupied or occupied by a main structure,
with or without accessory structures, fronting on a public
street or a street in a subdivision approved by the Township
and having thereon such open areas as are required by this
ordinance for one (1) of the uses permitted in the District in
which it is located.
MASSAGE BUSINESS - An activity conducted for gain in which any
method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for
medical, hygienic, exercise, or relaxation purposes of rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating
with the hands or any instrument, or by the application of air,
liquid, or vapor baths of any kind whatever and which is
regulated by Township Ordinance No. 481. The following words
are specifically defined by Ordinance No. 481:
EMPLOYEE - Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, other
than a masseur, who renders any service in connection with the
operation of a massage business and receives compensation from
the operator of the business or patrons.
MASSEUR - Any person who engages in the practice of a massage
business.
PATRON - Any person over eighteen (18) years of age who
receives a massage under circumstances that it is reasonably
expected that he or she will pay money or give any other
consideration therefor.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE - Any school or institution of
learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory,
method, profession, or work of massage, which school requires a
resident course of study of not less than seventy (70) hours
before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or
certificate of graduation from such school following the
successful completion of such course of study or learning.
MEDIATION - A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a
dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in
jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating
in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and
consider acceptable.
MEDICAL FACILITIES - A facility for the examination and treatment of
ill and afflicted human outpatients provided, however, that
3-16
patients are not kept overnight except under emergency
conditions and includes doctors' and dental offices and
clinics.
MINERALS - A geological term including, but not limited to,
anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, limestone, and
dolomite, sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth, slag, ore,
vermiculite, clay and other mineral resources.
MOBILE HOME - A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more
units designed to be jointed into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a
site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. Mobile
homes, double wide (mobile homes} and modular housing shall be
considered single family dwellings for building permit
purposes.
MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances
necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes. A
mobile home park shall be 10 acres or more under a single
ownership.
MOTEL - A group of attached or detached buildings located on a
single zoning lot and containing transient individuals sleeping
or living units, designed for or used by transient automobile
tourists.
NONCONFORMING USE - Any use of land, buildings or structures
lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance or
amendment thereto, which does not comply with all of the
regulations of this ordinance governing use for the zoning
districts in which such use is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - Any building or other structure lawfully
existing on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment
thereto, which does not comply with all of the regulations of
this ordinance governing use for the zoning district in which
such use is located.
NOTICE, PUBLIC - See Public Notice.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT - A permit allowing occupancy or use of a building,
structure or vacant land after it has been determined that all
applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance have been
complied with.
3-17
OCCUPANT - Any permanent resident including administrative and
supervisory personnel who reside on the premises of a group
residence or group care home as defined in this ordinance.
OFF SITE SEWER SERVICE - The disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary
sewer system served by a central sewage treatment plant
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
OFF SITE WATER SERVICE - A safe, adequate and healthful supply of
water to more than one user from a common service and approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
OFFICE BUILDINGS, HIGH RISE - Those buildings constructed for office
and commercial use and over three (3) stories high and a
maximum of eight (8) stories.
ON LOT SEWER SERVICE - The disposal of sewage by use of septic tanks
or other safe and healthful means within the confines of the
lot in which the use is located and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
ON SITE WATER SERVICE - A safe, adequate and healthful supply of
water to a single user from a private well, spring or cistern.
Adequate is to be decided by the user. Safe is to be decided
by Public Health Service water tests or any similar assurance
of healthful water.
OPEN SPACE - Land set aside for public use as recreational sites,
flood plain areas, nature trails, historical sites plus other
areas where building is hazardous such as slide areas,
mined-out areas and other areas as designated by the federal,
state or township agencies. Also common greens, yards, or
other open areas intended for the sole use of the residents and
their guests provided in connection with Planned Residential
Developments or with residential buildings occupied by more
than two (2) families per lot. See also "COMMON OPEN SPACE".
OVERBURDEN - Material of any nature, consolidated or unconsolidated,
that overlies a deposit of useful materials, ores, or coal.
PARKING SPACE - A paved area of at least 9 x 20 feet in size used
for storage of one vehicle and accessible from the street.
Parking spaces for trucks shall be such that the entire truck
and its components are removed from any public right-of-way.
PAVING - Concrete or bituminous wearing surfaces with appropriate
base consistent with sound engineering practices. "Paving"
shall not include tar and chip and other similar practices.
PERMITTED USE BY RIGHT - An authorized use which, upon an
application for development, may be granted by the zoning
administrator in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
3-18
PERSON - An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporators,
association or any similar entity.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME FOR ADULTS - Any premises in which food,
shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for
a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for more than three
adults who are not relatives of the operator and who require
assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing,
diet, or medication prescribed for self-administration but do
not require hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing or
intermediate care facility.
PETS - Animals or fowl normally permitted in a house and kept for
company or pleasure such as dogs, cats, hamsters or canaries.
PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - (PEDD 1 AND FEDD 2) - An area of
land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single
entity for commercial or industrial uses or for a combination
thereof, the development plan for which does not necessarily
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use,
density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open space to
the regulations established in any one district under the
provisions of this zoning ordinance. Planned Economic
Developments shall be regulated as set forth in Article 5,
Section 503.13. ·
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - (PRD) - An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity
for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential
and non-residential uses, the development plan for which does
not necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling,
or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open
space to the regulations established in any one district under
the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Planned Residential
Developments shall be regulated as set forth in Article 5,
Section 503.7.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of North Huntingdon
Township.
PLAT - A map, plan, or layout of a city, village, town, or
subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of
individual properties.
PLAT, FINAL - The final map of a subdivision which is filed for
Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners' final approval
and which, if approved, shall be filed with the County Recorder
of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY - A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is filed for Planning Commission
consideration and preliminary approval by the Board of
Commissioners.
POOL - See "Swimming Pools".
3-19
POOL ROOMS - Pool hall areas as set aside for billiards and games
using a pool or billiard table.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - See "Building, Principal".
PRINCIPAL USE - See "Use, Principal".
PRIVATE - Any facility or establishment limited to members of an
organization or to other persons specifically invited or
permitted where no advertisement or inducement has been made to
the general public.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - An office maintained for professional services
such as medical doctors, dentists and all other services
requiring a degree from an accredited school.
PUBLIC - Of or pertaining to land, buildings, structures, uses, or
activities owned, operated or controlled by the Township of
North Huntingdon, the Norwin School District, or other agencies
of government other than a detention facility.
PUBLIC GROUNDS - Includes:
a. parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreational
areas and other public areas;
b. sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal, and
other publicly owned or operated facilities; and
c. publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the governing body, intended to inform and obtain public
comment prior to taking action in accordance with Act 247 as
amended.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS - All streets, walkways, gutters, curbs, sewers,
water lines and other utilities or related facilities to be
dedicated to or maintained by the public; and, if dedicated to
and maintained by the township, must comply with the township
code.
PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act".
PUBLIC NOTICE - Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SPA OR HOT TUB - See "Commercial Spa or Hot Tub".
3-20
PUBLIC STREET - A paved thoroughfare or highway which has been
dedicated and accepted by the appropriate governmental body. A
public street can be of the following types:
ARTERIAL STREET - A street serving large volumes of high speed
and long-distance traffic.
COLLECTOR STREET - A street which in addition to giving access
to abutting properties intercepts minor streets and provides
routes carrying considerable volumes of local traffic to
community facilities and to arterial streets.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET - A street, generally parallel and
adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way than
normally required for satisfactory improvement and use of the
street.
LOCAL STREET - A street which is used primarily for access to
the abutting properties.
MAJOR STREET - A streGt which is used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic of an inter-community nature and including state
highways and turnpikes.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET - A local street which is adjacent to a
major street and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET - A local street used primarily to provide access
to abutting properties.
PUBLIC WAY - Any street, alley, or other parcel of land open to the
outside air leading to a public street; deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use
and having a clear paved width of not less than 10 feet.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL - Facilities for commercial
recreational activities including, but not limited to, golf
courses, boat docks, and fishing piers, boat launching,
maintenance, repair and fueling facilities, and ski lodges.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, OUTDOOR - Facilities for active and
passive outdoor recreation including, but not limited to,
country clubs, riding stables, private golf courses, and other
private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities or
recreation centers including private community swimming pools.
REPORT - Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant other
than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or
consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such
report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
RESTAURANT - Any building or use which serves food to the general
public and which provides tables, chairs, and/or counters for
the consumption of food entirely within the walls of such
3-21
building or use.
in establishments
motor vehicles.
The word "restaurant" does not include drivewhich
permit the consumption of food within
RETAIL - The sale of relatively small quantities of commodities and
services directly to consumers.
ROAD - The entire right-of-way of the public street or highway.
SCHOOL - A place for instruction in a branch or branches of
knowledge, an establishment for the imparting of education; a
group of classes imparting knowledge as required by the
Pennsylvania Board of Education; a faculty of institution for
specialized higher education. All schools shall require a
special education where, in accordance with state and federal
law, they are permitted in residential districts. In no case
will educational facilities be allowed to locate in residential
districts where living quarters for overnight permanent or
semi-permanent residence is provided.
SETBACK - That line which is the required minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes
the front yard, rear yard and side yards of a lot. The term
"setbacks" shall include front setback, rear setback and side
setbacks.
SHED - Any building 100 square feet in area or less and not higher
than ten (10) feet at the highest point from ground level.
SIGN - Any name, identification, description, display, or
illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented
directly or indicated upon a building, structure or piece of
land which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business. A
sign can be of the following types:
ADVERTISING - Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where such a sign is located
or to which it is affixed.
BUSINESS - Any sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a commodity service sold or offered
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
DIRECTIONAL - Any sign used for directional purposes only and
not larger than two (2) square feet.
FLASHING - Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and
color at all times.
3-22
IDENTIFICATION - A sign used to identify only the name of the
individual or organization occupying the premises, the
profession of the occupant or the name of the building on which
the sign is attached.
REAL ESTATE SALE SIGN - A sign located on real estate property
for sale, which shall not be larger than ten (10) square feet.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF - The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign
and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements
of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any
structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and
not forming an integral part of the display.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY - Any premises in which nursing care and
related medical or other health services are provided, for a
period exceeding 24 hours, for two or more individuals, who are
not relatives of the operator and not in need of
hospitalization, but who, because of age, illness, disease,
injury, convalescence or physical or mental infirmity need such
care.
SOLICITOR - The Solicitor of the Township of North Huntingdon.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION - An authorized use which may be granted only by
the Zoning Hearing Board after public hearing and in accordance
with express standards and criteria specified in this
ordinance.
STORY - That part of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if there is
no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above. A basement shall be counted as a story when more
than fifty (50) percent of such basement height is above the
finished lot grade level. For residential structures a story
shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. For commercial and
industrial structures, a story shall not exceed fifteen (15)
feet.
STREET CENTER LINE - A line which is usually at an equal distance
from both street lines, or right-of-way lines.
STREET, PRIVATE - A street, including the entire private
right-of-way, which is intended for private use and is a
private improvement.
STREET, PUBLIC - See "Public Street".
STRUCTURE - A combination of materials to form a construction for
use, occupancy or ornamentation whether installed on, above or
below the surface of land or water.
3-23
STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF (other than building) - The vertical distance
measured from the finished grade level to the highest point of
the structure, not to exceed thirty (30) feet.
STRUCTURE, HEIGHT EXCEPTION - (For all Essential Services)
A. The height requirements of the district wherein the use is
located may be exceeded when the necessity has been
demonstrated. However, no structure shall exceed one
hundred fifty (150) feet in height.
B. When in an "R" District, that for every two (2) feet above
the height limit, every portion of the structure be one (1)
foot from bordering or opposite properties.
c. Fences and/or enclosures shall be erected to insure the
safety of the facility.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY - Any structure which by the type of materials
of its construction is erected for not more than three (3)
months. Such structures shall include tents, portable
bandstands, bleachers not erected in conjunction with athletic
fields, reviewing stands, or other structures of similar
character.
SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development.
Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access to any
residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWIMMING POOL - An artificially created body of water used for
· recreation and including apparatus and equipment necessary to
maintain the premises and the healthful condition of the
water. Such facility may be publicly, privately (non-profit)
or commercially owned and operated.
TERRACE - A natural or artificial embankment between a building and
its lot lines, the height of which is the difference in
elevation between the curb level and the top of the terrace at
the center of the building wall.
TOWNHOUSE - Three (3) or more dwelling units attached to each other
by party walls. Each unit with separate entrance.
TOWNSHIP - North Huntingdon Township.
3-24
TOWNSHIP CARETAKER RESIDENCE - A structure, including dwelling or
mobile home, located in a township park for use as a permanent
residence by an individual and his family subject to the
express conditions of use established by the Board of
Commissioners.
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS - North Huntingdon Township Board of
Commissioners.
TOURIST COURT - See "MOTEL".
TRAILER, CAMPING OR RECREATIONAL - Any trailer, including motor
homes, drawn by or assembled on a passenger carrying vehicle
not designed or intended to be used for regular living
purposes, but which is designed or intended to be used for
recreational trips or camping purposes.
TRAILER, SMALL UTILITY - Any trailer drawn by a passenger
automobile, used for the occasional transport of personal
effects.
TRANSIENT - A person, family, or group of persons residing in North
Huntingdon Township for a period of time not exceeding sixty
(60) days.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT - Any person, persons, partnership or joint stock
company, company, corporation, firm, association, society or
individual who engages or proposes to engage in a transient
retail business as regulated by Article 8, Section 828 of this
ordinance and by Ordinance Number 596, "Transient Retail
Business Ordinance", as amended. The following definitions are
specifically related to such activity:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT AGENT - The owner or representative thereof
of the site where a transient retail business is to be
conducted.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS - A business intended to be conducted
for a temporary period of time and not permanently, and
conducted in a fixed location such as, but not limited to, a
store, hotel, motel, building, tent, lot, truck, tractortrailer,
or structure for the retail or discount sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, food products, etc. If the place in which
a business is conducted is rented or leased for a period of
ninety (90) days or less, such fact shall be evidence that the
business named or carried on therein is a ''transient business''·
UNIT GROUP DEVELOPMENT - A group of two (2) or more one-family,
two-family, or multiple-family dwellings occupying a lot in one
ownership and having a yard in common as regulated by Article
8, Section 829.
3-25
USE - Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract
of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or
occupied, or any activity, occupation, business, or operation
carried on in a building or other structure on a tract of land.
USE, ACCESSORY - See "ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE".
USE, PRINCIPAL - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.
VARIANCE - A relief granted from the zoning regulations where it is
shown that the provisions of the zoning ordinance inflicts
necessary hardship upon the applicant. Hardships must be
unique, physical or conditions such as irregularity,
narrowness, shallowness of lot size or shape and because of
such physical circumstances or conditions, the property cannot
be used in conformity with the zoning ordinance.
WAREHOUSE, FREIGHT TERMINALS, AND TRUCKING TERMINALS - An enclosed
building, or portion thereof, where the principal use is
temporary storage of goods to be later moved to another
location.
YARD - An area on a zoning lot which is regulated so as to be
unoccupied and unobstructed from its from its lowest level to
the sky except as otherwise permitted.
YARD, FRONT - A yard established by the front setback extending
along the full length of the front lot line between the side
yards. See Article 10, Section 1009 and Section 1010.
YARD, REAR - A yard established by the rear setback extending along
the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot
lines. See Article 10, Section 1009 and Section 1010.
YARD, SIDE - A yard established by the side setbacks extending
the side lot lines from the front yard to the rear yard.
Article 10, Section 1009 and Section 1010.
ZONING CERTIFICATE - For purposes of this ordinance, a Zoning
Certificate shall be deemed a building permit. See also
"BUILDING PERMIT"
along
See
ZONING HEARING BOARD - The Zoning Hearing Board of North Huntingdon
Township.
ZONING OFFICER - The person delegated by the Board of Commissioners
to administer the zoning ordinance.
3-26
401 Interpretation
ARTICLE 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
404 Number of Buildings
on a Zoning Lot
402 Separability
403 Scope of Regulations 405 Bulk Regulations
401 INTERPRETATION
401.1 In their interpretation and applications, the
provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
401.2 Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this
zoning ordinance upon the use of land or buildings or
upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive
or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other provisions of this ordinance or of
another law, ordinance rule or regulation of any kind,
the regulations which are more restrictive shall
govern.
401.3 This ordinance is not intended to annul any permits
issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance
nor to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement provided that where the regulations
of this ordinance are more restrictive than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the
requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Private
agreements are the responsibility of the parties
involved other than those agreements which do not
comply with the zoning ordinance.
402 SEPARABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon that the
several provisions of this zoning ordinance are separable.
If any C?urt of competent jurisdiction shall declare any
provision of this zoning ordinance to be invalid, such ruling
shall not affect any other provisions of this zoning
ordinance not specifically included in said ruling.
4-1
403 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
Except as may otherwise be provided in Article 7,
Non-Conforming Uses, any buildings erected hereafter, any
uses of land or buildings established hereafter, any
structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings
occurring hereafter and any enlargements of or additions to
existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all
regulations of this ordinance which are applicable to the
zoning districts in which said buildings, uses or land shall
be located.
404 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT
Except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance no more than
one principal detached residential building shall be located
on a zoning lot, nor shall a principal detached residential
building be located on the same zoning lot with any other
principal buildings.
405 BULK REGULATIONS
405.l Continued Conformity with Bulk Regulations:
The maintenance of yards, courts, buffers, other open
space and minimum lot area legally required for a
building shall be the continuing obligation of the
owner of such building or of the property on which it
is located, as long as the building is in existence.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts,
buffers, other open space or minimum lot area
allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change
or ownership or for any other reason, be used to
satisfy yard, court, other open space of minimum lot
area requirements for any other building.
405.2 Division of Zoning Lots:
No improved zoning lot sha·ll hereafter be divided into
two or more zoning lots and no portion of any improved
zoning lot shall be sold unless all improved zoning
lots resulting from each subdivision or sale shall
conform with all the bulk regulations of the zoning
district in which the property is located.
405.3 Location of Required Open Space:
All yards, courts, and other open space allocated to a
building or group of buildings shall be located on the
same zoning lot or on an adjacent or contiguous zoning
lot as such building or unit group development,
Planned Residential Development, or Planned Economic
Development. This open space shall remain as such
4-2
until either dedicated to the Township of North
Huntingdon or deeded to a public or civic association.
405.4 Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards:
1. Front yards:
(1) overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and like
architectural elements projecting 24 inches
or less into the yard;
(2) Open balconies above first floor level
projecting 24 inches or less into yard;
(3) Removable operating awnings not including
awnings permanently affixed to the building;
(4) steps of a height above grade of less than
four (4) feet;
(5) Arbors, trellises, fences, walls, terraces
and porches open to the sky not exceeding
four (4) feet in height above grade.
2. Front Yards on corner Lots:
(1) The fence height for front yards shall not be
greater than 48 inches above grade and the
fence height of a side yard shall not exceed
six (6) feet, six (6) inches. Height of
fence in front yard is determined such that
full view of oncoming traffic is not blocked
whereas side yard fence height is determined
such that a minimum of sun light blockage is
involved yet privacy is provided.
3. Front and Rear Yards:
4.
5.
Rear
( 1)
(2)
Rear
( l}
(2)
One story bay windows projecting three (3)
feet or less into the yard.
Yards.:
Domestic laundry, drying equipment, clothes
lines, and accessory buildings (See
Article 8, Section 801, "Accessory Uses,
Buildings and structures").
Open off-street parking stalls for use of
same zoning lot.
and Side Yards:
Eaves, trellises, fences and walls not
exceeding six (6) feet, six (6) inches in
height above grade;
overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and like
architectural elements projecting 24 inches
or less into the yard.
6. No electric or barbed wire fence shall be
permitted in Residential areas.
7. No mobile homes, vacation homes or boats may be
parked in the front yard other than in the
driveway.
4-3
l~ll1ltflllllf&lliiiliillllJli\1'!i\1*ii
SPECIFIC CRITERIA
Zoning District Permitted
by Special Exception
Minimum Lot Area
Parking Requirements
(Section 820)
Building Setbacks
Sign Requirements
(Section 823)
Architectural
Requirements
CLASSIFICATION "A"
Skilled Nursing and/or
Intermediate Care Facility
ALL RESIDENTIAL &
COMMERCIAL ZONES
None
As Per Section 820.5 -
"Hospitals". Parking space
locations to be compatible with
area.
As per Commercial districts.
Buffers required.
Commercial regulations will
apply (Section 823.4).
Must be compatible with
adjacent residential structures.
CLASSIFICATION "B''
Personal Care Boarding
Home
ALL RESIDENTIAL &
COMMERCIAL ZONES
1 acre
As per Section 820.5 -
"Hospitals".
As per zoning district
where site is located.
(Buffer required in
residential zones).
In Residential districts
Section 823.2 will apply.
Commercial districts -
Section 823.4 will apply.
Must be compatible with
adjacent residential
structures.
CLASSIFICATION "C"
Commercial Boarding
Home
ALL COMMERCIAL
ZONES
7,500 square feet
As per Section 820.5.
As per Commercial
districts. Buffers required.
Commercial regulations
will apply (Section 823.4).
SPECIFIC CRITERIA CLASSIFICATION "A" CLASSIFICATION "B" CLASSIFICATION "C"
Landscaping Requirements In Commercial areas a In Commercial areas a In Commercial areas a
landscaped outside sitting area landscaped outside sitting landscaped outside sitting
must be provided. area must be provided. area must be provided.
Public Water Service Required Required Required
Public Sewage Service Required Required Required
Location of similar No closer than 1,500 ft. in No closer than 1,000 ft.
facilities of the same Residential districts.
classification
Site Plan Submission Required Required if new construe- Required if new construe-
(Section 914) tion or major alteration. tion or major alteration.
Permitted number of Not specified The appropriate zoning Not specified
occupants district dwelling unit
density/acre multiplied by
Additional information three (3).
required:
a. Name of owner Required Required Required
b. Address of owner Required Required Required
c. Number of beds Required Required Required
d. Number of staff Required Required Not required
e. Other information As determined by Zoning As determined by Zoning As determined by Zoning
Hearing Board. Hearing Board. Hearing Board.
Licensing approval Letter of registration from Letter of registration from None required
documentation Department of Health. Department of Health.
ARTICLE 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
501 Types of Districts
502 Location of Districts
503 District Standards
504 Planned Development Districts
505 summary of District Standards
506 Rear Yard and Side Yard Setbacks
501 TYPES OF DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance,
Township of North Huntingdon is hereby divided into the
following use districts:
1. open Space, Recreation and Conservation District
2. Residence District 1
3. Residence District lA
4. Residence District 2
5. Residence District 3
6. Residence District 4
7. Planned Residential Development
8. Neighborhood Business District
9. Commercial District 1
10. Commercial District lA
11. Limited Commercial District 2
12. Industrial District
13. Planned Economic Development Districts:
(1) Planned Economic Development District 1
(2) Planned Economic Development District 2
502 LOCATION OF DISTRICTS
the
0
R-1
R-lA
R-2
R-3
R-4
PRD
c
C-1
C-lA
C-2
I
PEDD
PEDD
Zoning districts shall be as established in Article 10,
Section 1001 and interpreted as defined in Section 1002.
5-1
1
2
503 DISTRICT STANDARDS
503.1
503.2
Open Space, Conservation and Recreation District (0) :
The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Districts on
the Zoning Map have been designated to perpetuate open
space in North Huntingdon Township. The areas so
designated are limited to recreational, conservational,
or open space development.
Residence District 1 (R-1)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this district is to provide
for single family and two-family (duplex)
development in the older sections of the Township
which have been developed on smaller zoning lots.
2. R-1 Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of
uses within the District.
(1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
6 dwelling units per
gross acre
7,500 square feet
(3) Lot Width at Building 60 feet
Setback Minimum
(4) Front Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet minimum.
If both. adjacent
dwellings have a front
yard less than 30 feet
deep, the minimum
front yard depth is
then the greater of
the two adjacent yard
depths.
(5) Rear Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet
(6) Side Yard Width Minimum
One Story Dwelling 10 feet minimum
Two Story Dwelling 10 feet minimum
Abutting a Street 30 feet
( 7) Unenclosed Porch Setback 22 feet minimum
(8) Coverage Maximum 30%
(9) Road Frontage Minimum 60 feet
5-2
503.3
(10) Road Frontage on
cul-de-sac
(11) Minimum First Floor Area
One Story Dwelling
One and A Half story
Dwelling
Two and A Half Story
Dwelling
(12) Building Height Maximum
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
950 square feet
840 square feet
616 square feet
2 stories
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
4. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses in
Residential Districts: See Article 8, Section 801.
5. Off-Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820.
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. Unit Group Development: There will be no unit group
development allowed in any R-1 district and there
will be only one principal building permitted per
lot.
Residence District 1-A (R-lA)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of the R-lA multiple family residence
districts is to act as transitional zones between
lower density single family detached developments
and higher density multiple-family, commercial and
industrial uses in the municipality. The R-lA
district is composed of certain low density, low
rise multiple-family residential areas which
recognize the need for an alternative to single
family detached houses as the pref erred housing
type.
2. R-lA Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of
uses within the District.
(1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
(3) Lot Width at Building
Setback Minimum
5-3
6 dwelling units per
gross acre
7,500 square feet
70 feet
(4) Front Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet minimum.
(5) Rear Yard Depth Minimum
(6) Side Yard Width Minimum
One Story Dwelling
Two story Dwelling
Abutting a Street
(7) Unenclosed Porch Setback
(8) Coverage Maximum
(9) Road Frontage Minimum
(10} Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
(11} Minimum First Floor Area
One story Dwelling
One and A Half Story
Dwelling
Two and A Half story
Dwelling
(12) Building Height Maximum
If both adjacent
dwellings have a front
yard less than 30 feet
deep, the minimum
front yard depth is
then the greater of
the two adjacent yard
depths.
30 feet
20 feet minimum
20 feet minimum
30 feet
22 feet minimum
30%
70 feet
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
950 square feet
840 square feet
616 square feet
2 stories
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
4. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses in
Residential Districts: See Article 8, Section 801.
5. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820.
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. Unit Group Development: Unit group development shall
be allowed in any R-lA district subject the
following conditions:
(1) There shall not be more than one (1) dwelling
unit or building on a lot in an R-lA District
without a Site Plan approval granted as per
Article 9, Section 914.
5-4
(2) Proposed uses shall comply with the provisions
of Article 8, Section 829, "Unit Group
Development Standards".
(3) All unit group developments shall meet the
requirements of Section 803 for attached
multi-family dwelling units.
(4) Structure Walls - Not more than two (2)
sides of a single family attached unit shall be
party walls or common walls with other units.
503.4 Residence District 2 (R-2)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this district is to provide a
residential area for single family homes which have
accessibility to public sewer and water facilities.
These districts would be located in areas of the
Township where environmental limitations such as
topography and soil conditions were at a minimum.
2. R-2 Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of
uses within the District.
(1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
4 dwelling units per
gross acre
10,000 square feet
(3) Lot Width at Building 65 feet
Setback Minimum
(4) Front Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet minimum. If
both adjacent dwellings
have a front yard
less than 30 feet
deep, the minimum
front yard depth is
then the greater of
the two adjacent yard
depths.
5-5
503.5
(5) Rear Yard Depth Minimum
(6) Side Yard Width Minimum
One Story Dwelling
Two Story Dwelling
Abutting a Street
(7) Unenclosed Porch Setback
(8) Coverage Maximum
(9) Road Frontage Minimum
(10) Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
(11) Minimum First Floor Area
One Story Dwelling
One and A Half Story
Dwelling
Two and A Half story
Dwelling
(12) Building Height Maximum
30 feet
10 feet minimum
10 feet minimum
30 feet
22 feet minimum
25%
65 feet
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
950 square feet
840 square feet
616 square feet
2 stories
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
4. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses in
Residential Districts: See Article 8, Section 801.
5. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820.
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. Unit Group Development: There will be no unit group
development allowed in any R-2 district and there
will be only one principal building permitted per
lot.
Residence District 3 (R-3)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this district is to provide for
development of residential uses at a relatively low
density. It is limited to single family homes which
would be provided with or have accessibility to
public sewers or water facilities.
2. R-3 Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
5-6
are the minimum requirements for the approval of
uses within the District.
{1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
2 dwelling units per
gross acre
20,000 square feet
(3) Lot Width at Building 100 feet
Setback Minimum
(4) Front Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet minimum. If
both adjacent dwellings
have a front yard
less than 30 feet
deep, the minimum
front yard depth is
then the greater of
the two adjacent yard
depths.
(5) Rear Yard Depth Minimum 30 feet
(6) Side Yard Width Minimum
One story Dwelling
Two story Dwelling
Abutting a Street
(7) Unenclosed Porch Setback
(8) coverage Maximum
{9) Road Frontage Minimum
(10) Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
{11) Minimum First Floor Area
one Story Dwelling
One and A Half Story
Dwelling
Two and A Half Story
Dwelling
10 feet minimum
10 feet minimum
30 feet
22 feet minimum
25%
100 feet
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
950 square feet
840 square feet
616 square feet
(12) Building Height Maximum 2 stories
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
4. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses in
Residential Districts: See Article 8, Section 801.
5. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820.
5-7
503.6
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. Unit Group Development: There will be no unit group
development allowed in any R-3 district and there
will be only one principal building permitted per
lot.
Residence District 4 (R-4)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of this district is to provide for the
development of single family homes in areas of the
Township having limited accessibility to public
sewer and public water service. Most of these areas
have the further developmental limitations of steep
topography and poor soil conditions.
2. R-4 Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of
uses within the District.
(1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
1 dwelling unit per
gross acre
40,000 square feet
(3) Lot Width at Building 150 feet
Setback Minimum
(4) Front Yard Depth Minimum 40 feet minimum.
If both adjacent
dwellings have a front
yard less than 40 feet
deep, the minimum
front yard depth is
then the greater of
the two adjacent yard
depths.
(5) Rear Yard Depth Minimum 60 feet
(6) Side Yard Width Minimum
One Story Dwelling
Two Story Dwelling
Abutting a Street
(7) Unenclosed Porch Setback
(8) Coverage Maximum
(9) Road Frontage Minimum
5-8
20 feet minimum
20 feet minimum
40 feet
32 feet minimum
20%
150 feet
503.7
(10) Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
(11) Minimum First Floor Area
One Story Dwelling
One and A Half story
Dwelling
Two and A Half story
Dwelling
(12) Building Height Maximum
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
950 square feet
840 square feet
616 square feet
2 stories
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
4. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses in
Residential Districts: See Article 8, Section 801.
5. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820.
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. Unit Group Development: There will be no unit group
development allowed in any R-4 district and there
will be only one principal building permitted per
lot.
Planned Residential Development District (PRD)
1. Purpose:
It is the purpose of this section to establish
regulations and controls for the use of land and
structures, areas of lots, bulk of buildings, amount
and kind of open space, land, the provision of offstreet
parking and other similar accessory
regulations in a Planned Residential Development in
accordance with guidelines set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,
as amended. The Planned Residential Development
Ordinance is designed to provide for large scale
developments incorporating a single type or a
variety of residential and related uses which are
planned and developed as a unit. Such development
may consist of individual lots or it may have common
building sites. Common open space for recreational
purposes shall be an essential and major element
within the Planned Residential Development District
which is related to and affects the long-term value
of the homes and other development. Further,
Planned Residential Development is intended:
(1) To encourage innovations in residential
development and renewal so that the growing
demand for housing may be met by greater
variety in type, design and layout of dwellings
5-9
and by the conservation and more efficient use
of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
(2) To encourage a more efficient use of land and
of public service.
(3) To reflect changes in the technology of land
development so that economies secured may
ensure to the benefit of those who need homes.
(4) To provide a procedure which can related the
type, design and layout of residential
development to the particular site.
(5) To encourage a pattern of development which
preserves ground cover, trees, natural
topography and prevents soil erosion.
(6) To provide an environment of stable character
in harmony with surrounding development.
2. Compliance:
No proposed Planned Residential Development may be
approved or recorded, and no lot of the proposed
Planned Residential Development may be sold or any
structure built, altered, moved or enlarged in any
proposed Planned Residential Development unless and
until the proposed Planned Residential Development
plan has been shown to meet all requirements and all
other necessary and applicable requirements of this
section as set forth in the North Huntingdon
Township Subdivision Ordinance and the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance.
3. Types of Planned Residential Development:
Planned Residential Developments in North Huntingdon
Township shall be categorized into two (2) separate
types of classes.
(1) Type I - Those Planned Residential Developments
that are of sufficient size, more than thirty
(30) acres, with no Commercial, and being
located in any residential district and
developed as a separate entity including a
responsible governing agent that shall insure
that all open space and recreational sites are
properly maintained and that all buffer strips
are planted and properly policed to prevent
noise or dirt or any interference with adjacent
residential land use. Any accessory use
permitted by this ordinance shall be located in
the center of the Planned Residential
Development and not on the perimeter so as to
interfere with the residential usage of
adjacent property unless it border equivalent
area.
(2) Type II - Those Planned Residential
Developments that are of sufficient size - more
5-10
than sixty (60) acres, and being located in any
residential district and developed as a
separate entity including a responsible
governing agent that shall insure that all open
space and recreational sites are properly
maintained and that all buffer strips are
planted and properly policed to prevent noise
or dirt or any interference with adjacent
residential land use. Any accessory use as
permitted by this ordinance shall be located in
the center of the Planned Residential
Development and not on the perimeter so as to
interfere with the residential usage of
adjacent properly unless it borders equivalent
area.
4. Site Requirements:
The site for any Development Plan shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Applicant - The entire site for the Development
Plan shall be owned or controlled by the
Developer.
(2) Minimum Size - The site shall not be less than
thirty (30) acres for Type I or not less than
sixty (60) acres for Type II.
(3) Access - The site must provide for direct
access from existing streets per official North
Huntingdon Township Road Map to assure
convenient and safe access which will not cause
undue congestion or hazard on local streets.
(4) The site shall be of such a character so as to
avoid danger to health or peril from fire,
flood, or the hazard.
5. Natural Features:
Existing natural features, such as trees, steep
slopes, watercourses, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved insofar as
possible through harmonious design of the
Development Plan. The following provisions shall
apply to all private and public improvements in
Planned Residential Developments.
(1) No cut or fill grade shall exceed a slope of
3/1 or 33 1/3 percent. This provision shall
apply to all cuts and fills exceeding 100
square feet in exposed surface area including
cuts or fills on land naturally exceeding 3/1
in slope.
(2) All lands, regardless of their slope, from
which structures or natural cover has been
removed or otherwise destroyed, shall be
appropriately graded and seeded within a
reasonable time of such clearance activity.
5-11
( 3)
( 4)
The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be
interpreted to be within two (2) weeks during
the growing season and shall be rigidly applied
to construction activities in order to
accomplish the intent of keeping erosion and
siltation to an absolute minimum.
on hillsides exceeding 25 percent in slope, no
more than 10 percent by area of the natural
vegetative cover may be removed for
construction purposes or any other activity.
No cutting, filling or other disturbing of land
and natural vegetation is permissible within 50
feet of the edge of natural drainage courses
except as permitted by action of the governing
body. In such cases, permission may be granted
provided special precautions are taken to
insure against continuing erosion and siltation
or other circumstances which may be harmful to
the immediate watercourse or in any way pollute
the stream.
6. Permitted Uses:
The following uses may be permitted in a development
plan provided their design, arrangement landscaping,
and construction meet the requirements set forth in
this ordinance.
(1) In each of the residential districts, except
Agriculture, the following: single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouses/
multi-family dwellings, and like structures,
recreation facilities and accessory uses.
(2) Ancillary Commercial Uses - Certain limited
uses which are ancillary functions of large
residential developments and which are neither
intended nor designed to serve the general
public residing outside the residential
development in which such uses are located.
Permitted ancillary uses may include personal
services and convenience retail store. These
facilities must be located in the center of the
constructed housing and shall not be placed on
the perimeter of the Planned Residential
Development land. All noise producing uses,
light, and parking for ancillary uses shall be
confin~d to the center areas of the Planned
Residential as to protect any adjacent
residential land, unless it border equivalent
area. Where a Planned Residential Development
abuts a commercial area, all ancillary uses
shall abut the area.
5-12
7. Permitted Density:
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall
be as follows:
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PERMITTED PER ACRE
Type of
Residential
Unit R-4 R-3 R-2 R-1
Single-family house 1 2 4 6
Two-family dwelling 1 2 4 6
Townhouse 1 2 4 6
Garden apartment 1 2 4 6
8. Yard and Open Space Requirements:
No development plan shall be approved unless the
following requirements for yards and open space are
met:
(1) Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
total site area shall be set aside for open
space, and not less than fifty percent (50%) of
the identified open space shall be developed as
a distinct and usable recreation area(s).
(2) Minimum Building Setback: No structure used
for dwelling purposes shall be located closer
to any boundary of the site than seventy-five
(75) feet. No accessory structure and no
facility for off-street parking shall be
located in this required setback area.
(3) The total building coverage shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) percent of the total site
area.
(4) Building Spacing: The requirements determining
the spacing of buildings shall be as flexible
as possible so as to encourage imaginative site
design. The spaces between buildings shall
guarantee adequate light, air and emergency
access with the following requirements as
minimums:
(a) The minimum distance between the nearest
points of any interior building walls
shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
9. Maximum Size of Structure:
No structure shall have a maximum dimension greater
than 250 lineal feet. No structure shall have a
height greater than two (2) stories.
5-13
10. Building Groupings:
Structures used for dwelling units shall be oriented
so as to ensure adequate light and air exposures for
walls containing main window exposures or main
entrances. Each structure shall be so arranged so
as to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading
or parking facilities.
11. Off Street Parking:
12.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the specifications of Article 8,
Section 820 in any district whenever any new use is
established or existing use is enlarged.
(1) No off-street parking space shall have an area
less than 180 square feet.
(2) Any off-street parking space shall be graded
for proper drainage and surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface.
(3) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street
parking space shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining premises.
(4) Screening shall be used where there are five
(5) or more parking spaces.
Bus Shelters:
Areas shall be provided for bus loading.
loading areas shall be large enough for a
pull out of the flow of traffic.
The bus
bus to
13. Screening:
If topographical or other barriers are not
sufficient to guarantee the privacy of the
development, the following requirements shall be
imposed:
(1) Evergreen tree screening shall be accomplished
through the use of rows of evergreen trees that
provide a visual barrier of not less than three
(3) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in
width at the initial planting.
14. Fire Hydrants:
Fire hydrants shall be provided by the developer in
locations specified by the commissioners. The
location of the fire hydrants shall be based on
guaranteeing sufficient fire protection to the
residents of the Planned Residential Development.
15. Land Requirements:
Land containing or providin~ hazards to life, health
and property, such as quarries, open ditches, land
subject to flooding, subsidence, or underground
5-14
fires shall not be developed for residential
purposes until such hazards have been eliminated or
adequate safeguards are provided under the
development plan.
16. Streets:
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to
such street plans or parts thereof as have been
officially prepared and adopted by the
Township.
(a) Proposed streets shall conform to the
requirements herein as well as to any
other plan, statute, ordinance, law, or
regulation applicable hereto. If any of
the regulations are at variance, the more
strict regulation shall prevail.
(b) Marginal access streets shall be so laid
out as to discourage through traffic, but
provisions will be required for street
connections into and from adjacent areas.
(c) Where a Planned Residential Development
abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major traffic street, the commissioners
may require marginal access streets, rear
service streets, reverse frontage lots of
such other treatment as will provide
protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections
with major streets, and separation of
local and through traffic.
(d) Wherever a tract to be developed borders
an existing half or partial street, the
other part of the street shall be plotted
within such tract.
(e) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited,
except for stubs to permit further street
extension into adjoining tracts, or when
designed as cul-de-sacs.
(f) New reserve strips, including those
controlling access to streets, shall be
avoided.
(2) Cul-de-sac Streets:
Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end
with a paved turnaround having a minimum radius
of fifty (50) feet to the outside pavement edge
or curbline.
(a) Unless future extension is clearly
impractical or undesirable, the turnaround
right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a
property line and a right-of-way of the
same width as the street shall be carried
to the property line in such a way as to
permit future extension of the street into
the adjoining tract.
5-15
(3) Streets Standards:
The streets shall be graded to the grades and
dimensions shown on plans and profiles and
approved by the governing body and shall
conform to the Township Paving Ordinance No.
299, as amended.
(a) suitable drainage structures, culverts,
storm sewers, ditches and related
installations shall be provided to insure
adequate drainage of all points along the
streets.
(b) curbs shall be required on all streets as
per Ordinance No. 299 as amended.
(c) Concrete or asphalt pavement shall be
required on all streets.
(d) Street shoulders shall be uniformly and
thoroughly compacted by rolling, and level
with the tops of curbs.
(e) Additional right-of-way and cartway width
may be required by the governing body to
promote public safety and convenience or
to provide parking space in commercial
districts and in areas of high density
residential development.
(f) Short extensions of existing streets with
lesser right-of-way and/or cartway widths
than prescribed herein may be permitted
provided, however, that no section of new
right-of-way less than 50 feet width shall
be permitted.
(g) Where a development abuts or contains an
existing street, additional right-of-way
in conformance with the above standards
shall be required.
(h) Street alignment shall comply with
Ordinance No. 299 as amended.
(i) Street Intersections - streets shall be
laid out to intersect at right angles as
nearly as possible and no street shall
intersect another at an angle of less than
60 degrees.
a. Multiple intersections involving the
junction of more than two (2) streets
shall be prohibited.
b. Intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than
800 feet apart measured from center
line to center line, wherever
possible.
c. Streets entering opposite sides of
another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite to one
5-16
another or with a minimum offset of
150 feet between their center lines.
d. Street signs shall comply with
Ordinance No. 81.
e. Minimum right-of-way widths, paving
widths, angle of intersection, curb
radius, distances along sides of right
triangles, horizontal alignments,
vertical alignments, as well as
maximum grades shall be in accordance
with the following table:
STREET STANDARDS
Marginal
Access
streets
Collector
Streets
Local
streets
Walk
Way
Right-of-way width 90 60 50 12
Paving width
Maximum grade
Minim~m angle for intersection
(in degrees)
Minimum curb radius
Grades for 25' before
intersection
site triangles
(Distance along sides of
Thru Street/Stop Street)
Horizontal alignment (min.
radii of center line)
Vertical curves (minimum
sight distance
36
7%
90
35'
3%
550/30
650
500
17. Monuments and Markers:
26 24 10
10% 12%
80 70
25' 15'
3% 3%
500/30 250/25
400 100
350 100
Concrete monuments shall be set at the intersection
of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the
Planned Residential Development.
(1) Iron or steel markers shall be set at the
beginning and ending of all curves along
property lines, at all points where lot lines
intersect curves, either front or rear, and at
all angles and property lines of lots and at all
lot corners.
5-17
(2) In all respects the provisions of the Township
Subdivision Ordinance land development shall
apply to this subarticle.
18. Storm Drainage:
The construction of a storm drainage system shall
conform to the following requirements:
(1) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide
positive drainage away from new and existing
buildings.
(2) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations
shall be provided for the following purposes:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural
watercourse.
(b) To insure adequate drainage of streets.
(c) To intercept storm water runoff along
streets at intervals reasonably related to
the extent and grade of the area drained.
(3) Drainage ditches or channels shall have a
minimum gradient of one {1) percent.
(4) Open watercourses shall have adequate capacity
and erosion control to insure safe and healthful
disposal of storm water.
(5) When topsoil has been removed from the surface
of a lot on a slope where erosion will cause a
displacement of loose material, the developer
shall be required to seed or provide other means
to prevent the wash from damaging adjacent
property or accumulating on street surfaces.
(6) In the design of storm water facilities (catch
basins, storm sewers, retention/detention
basins, swales, etc.), special consideration
shall be given to the avoidance of problems
which may arise from the concentration of storm
water runoff over adjacent properties. Such
facilities shall be designed to assure that the
rate of storm water runoff is no greater after
development than prior to development.
19. Blocks:
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to provision of adequate
sites for buildings of the type proposed, topography
and safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(1) Blocks shall have a maximum length of sixteen
hundred {l,600) feet and, so far as practicable,
a minimum length of five hundred (500) feet. In
the design of blocks longer than eleven hundred
(1,100) feet, special consideration shall be
given to the requirements of satisfactory fire
protection.
5-18
(2) Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth
to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots, except
where reverse frontage lots bordering a major
traffic street are used.
(3) Pedestrian interior walks may be required where
necessary to assist circulation or provide
access to community facilities. Such walkway
shall have a width of not less than twelve (12)
feet and a paved walk of not less than ten (10)
feet.
20. Water Supply:
The developer shall connect to such public water
supply and construct a system of water mains with a
connection for each lot.
21. Sewers:
Where municipal sewerage is not available, a single
sewerage disposal plant shall be constructed and the
entire plant equipped with sewerage trunk lines and
individual tap-ins as required. No singular septic
tanks shall be permitted.
22. Utilities:
All utilities located within the Planned Residential
Development shall be located underground.
23. Trees:
(1) Trees shall be planted along the streets. The
location and types must meet the approval of the
Planning Commission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall assist the
developer in the selection and distribution of
roadside tree planting. The following general
selections shall apply:
(a) The roadside planting shall in no way
interfere with the planting of specimen
trees in the property area and the
landscaping of the structures themselves.
Thes.e selections are at the discretion of
the developer.
(b) Roadside planting shall not include the
following:
sycamore (Platanus)
American Elm (Ulmus)
Chestnut (Castanea)
Poplar (Poplus)
Willow (Salix)
Oak ( Quercus)
Tulip Trees
Beech (Fagus)
5-19
(c) The above will not bar the
Developer from allowing specimen
trees to remain in place during
the site construction. None of
the conifers shall be used as
roadside planting because of their
tendency to branch to the ground
and thus obstruct the access view.
(d) Recommended roadside plantings are
as follows:
24. Brick to Grade:
a. All of the flowering crab,
Kwanzan cherry and mountain
ash are suitable.
b. Flowering peach is
susceptible to border and
should be avoided.
c. Maple (Acer) is an excellent
tree for streets running
north and south where shade
is a major concern.
d. The sugar maple and the
Norway maple are large and
rounded whereas the silver
and red maple are smaller and
more colorful.
(1) Exterior Wall Surfaces: No building shall be
erected in Districts R-1, R-lA, R-2, R-3, and R-
4 that has any part of its exterior surfaces
composed of the following materials, unless an
additional material is approved by the North
Huntingdon Township Planning Commission, to be
of equal or superior quality and character when
used under the circumstances proposed:
(a) Brick
(b) Stone
( c) Glass
(d) Metal, only as approved by the North
Huntingdon Township Planning Commission.
(e) Wood
(f) Plastic
(g) Concrete block as provided for in this
ordinance.
(2) "Brick" shall be the quality standard for
exterior wall purposes and all other materials
hereinabove listed may be used only in such a
way as will be of equal or superior quality and
character to "brick".
(3) Standard Concrete Block Wall Surfaces: Standard
concrete block may be used in any district on
walls that shall not at any time be viewable to
5-20
passersby or any part of the general public and
in a manner so as not to jeopardize the general
welfare and character of the adjacent
properties. If the Planning Commission
determines that standard concrete block will
present a deleterious effect on adjacent
properties by virtue of the intrinsic nature of
concrete block, then the Planning Commission may
recommend a substitute material which is
substantially similar, but will be effectually
compatible to the immediate vicinity. Materials
which will be considered as acceptable shall be:
(a) concrete shadow block
(b) concrete grid or scored block
(c) concrete split faced ribbed block
(d) concrete split faced block
(e) utility brick
25. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
(1) Signs for ancillary use shall be limited to
1' x 2' for identification only.
26. common Open Space:
(1) Common Open Space Reservation: Common open
space generated by the application of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be developed
to a degree commensurate with its location and
probable usage. The common open space shall be
so dedicated or otherwise preserved and
maintained so as to always remain open and
available for use by the occupants of the
development area. The land and facilities to be
used for common open space may be acceptable if
either of the following conditions are met.
(2) ownership: Any of the following methods may be
used, either individually or together, to
preserve, own, and maintain common open space:
condominium, homeowners' association, dedication
in fee simple, dedication of easements, and
transfer of fee simple title and easements to a
private conservation organization. Such land
shall not be eligible for transfer to another
party except for transfer to another method of
ownership permitted under this Section, and then
only where there is no change in the open space
ratio. The following specific requirements are
associated with each of the various methods.
(a) Homeowners' Association - The common open
space may be held in common ownership by a
homeowners' association. This method shall
be subject to all of the provisions for
homeowners' associations set forth in
Section 504.18.2 and, below, and the
5-21
Homeowner's Association Agreement shall be
recorded.
(b) Fee simple Dedication - The Township may,
but shall not be required to, accept any
portion of the common open space, provided
(1) such land is accessible to the
residents of the Township; (2) there is no
cost of acquisition (other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership,
such as title insurance); and (3) the
Township agrees to and has access to
maintain such lands.
(c) Transfer to a Private Conservation
Organization - With permission of the
Township, an owner may transfer either the
fee simple title, with appropriate deed
restrictions running in favor of the
Township, or restrictive easement to a
private non-profit organization, among
whose purposes is to conserve open space
land and/or natural resources, provided (1)
the organization is acceptable to the
Township and is a bona fide conservation
organization with perpetual existence; (2)
the conveyance contains appropriate
provision for proper reverter or
re-transfer in event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue
carrying our its functions; and (3) a
maintenance agreement acceptable to the
Township is reached.
(d) Dedication of Easements - The Township may,
but shall not be required to, accept
easements for public use of any portion or
portions of open space land, title to which
is to remain in ownership by condominium or
homeowners' association, provided (1) such
land is accessible to the residents of the
Township; (2) there is no cost of
acquisition (other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership,
such as title insurance); and (3) a
maintenance agreement acceptable to the
Township is reached.
(e) Condominium - The common open space may be
controlled through the use of condominium
agreements. Such agreements shall be in
conformance with the Uniform Condominium
Act of 1980. All open space land shall be
held a "common element".
(3) Specific Requirements for Homeowners'
Associations: If a homeowners' association is
5-22
formed, it shall be governed according to the
following regulations:
(a) The developer shall provide to the Township
a description of the organization,
including its by-laws and documents
governing open space maintenance and use
restrictions.
(b) The organization shall be established by
the developers and shall be operating (with
financial subsidization by the developers,
if necessary) before the sale of any lots
within the development.
(c) Membership in the organization is mandatory
for all purchasers of homes therein and
their successors.
(d) The organization shall be responsible for
maintenance of and insurance on common open
space. The organization also shall be
responsible for real estate taxes on common
open space.
(e) The members of the organization shall share
equitably the costs of maintaining and
developing common open space, in accordance
with the procedures established by them.
(f) In the event of any proposed transfer of
common open space land by the homeowners'
association within the methods here
permitted, or of the assumption of
maintenance of common open space land by
the Township as hereinafter provided,
notice of such action shall be given to all
property owners within the Planned
Residential Development by the homeowners'
association.
(g) The organization shall have or hire
adequate staff to administer common
facilities and maintain common open space.
(h) The homeowners' association may lease back
open space lands to the developer, his
heirs and assigns, or to any other person
or corporation qualified to manage open
space for operation and maintenanceof open
space lands, but such a lease agreement
shall provide (1) that the residents of the
Planned Residential Development shall at
all times have access to the open space
lands contained therein; (2) that the
common open space to be leased shall be
maintained for the purposes set forth in
this ordinance; and (3) that the operation
of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents of Planned
Residential Development only or may be open
to the residents of the Township.
5-23
(i) The lease shall be subject to the approval
of the Township, as shall any transfer or
assignment of the lease. Lease agreements
so entered upon shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County
within thirty (30) days of their execution
and a copy of the recorded lease shall be
filed with the Township.
(4) common Open Space Maintenance: The regulations
for the maintenance of any Common Open Space
shall be in accordance with Act 247 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
(a) In the event that the organization
established to own and maintain a common
open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of
the Planned Residential Development fail to
maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the
Township may serve written notice upon such
organization or upon the residents and
owners of the Planned Residential
Development, setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to
maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within thirty (30)
days thereof, and shall state the date and
place of a hearing thereon which shall be
held within fourteen (14) days of this
notice. At such hearing, the Township may
modify the terms of the original notice as
to the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they shall
be corrected. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be
corrected within said thirty (30) days or
any extension thereof, the Township, in
order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the Planned Residential
Development and to prevent the common open
space from becoming a public nuisance, may
enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one
year. Said entry and maintenance shall not
constitute a taking of said common open
space, and shall not vest in the public any
rights to use the common open space except
5-24
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the residents and owners and
such dedication is acceptable to the
Township. Before the expiration of said
year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for
the maintenance of the common open space,
call a public hearing upon notice to such
organization, or to the residents and
owners of the Planned Residential
Development, to be held by the Township, at
which hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the Planned
Residential Development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the Township shall
not, at the election of the Township,
continue for a succeeding year. If the
Township shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain
said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to
maintain said common open space at the end
of said year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said common open space
during the next succeeding year and subject
to a similar hearing and determination in
each year thereafter. The decision of the
Township in any case.shall constitute a
final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
(b) The cost of such maintenance and
enforcement proceedings by the Township
shall be assessed ratably against
theproperties within the Planned
Residential Development that have a right
of enjoyment of the common open space and
shall become a lien on said properties.
Said assessments or charges shall be
subordinate in lien to the lien which is
subject to such assessments of charges.
The Township, at the time of entering upon
such said common open space for the purpose
of maintenance, shall file a notice of such
lien, in the office of the Prothonotary of
the County, upon the properties affected by
such lien within the Planned Residential
Development.
27. Staging and Phasing
(1) staging Development: The density of development
within various portions of the Planned
Residential Development may vary, provided each
5-25
such area or portion of the Development Plan
meets all requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Phasing Non-residential Development: At least
seventy-five (75) percent of the proposed
residential dwelling units shall be constructed
and occupied prior to the construction of any of
the proposed ancillary commercial uses and all
occupants shall be advised by construction plots
of the future instance of commercial
construction.
28. Application for Tentative Approval Procedure:
(1) The application for tentative approval shall
include a location map, site map, proposed
development plan, and engineering report. The
application shall be submitted to the governing
body at least five (5) working days prior to the
regular monthly meeting with not less than eight
(8) copies, and shall be accomplished by a fee
of $200.
(a) The location map shall clearly show the
location, area and zoning of the tract
proposed for development with relation to
the area and zoning of adjacent properties
and the location and relative distance to
existing related and/or adjacent streets.
(b) The site map shall cover the entire tract
and all lands within 500 feet of its
boundaries and shall clearly and accurately
show the following data:
1. The topography with vertical contour
intervals of five (5) feet.
2. The natural features and existing
culture such as woods, streams,
embankments, retaining walls,
structures, and existing land use.
3. The names of owner or properties
adjacent to the tract.
4. Existing and proposed streets and
rights-of-way included dedicated
widths, roadway widths, approximate
gradients, types and widths of
pavements, and curbs and sidewalks.
5. Existing and proposed easements,
including widths, and purposes.
6. Utilities, availability and location of
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage
facilities, water lines, gas mains,
power lines, and street lights.
7. Areas subject to periodic overflow of
flood or storm waters.
8. Sub-surface conditions, including data
on past or possible future mining
5-26
activity. If mineral righLs are
severed from the land ownership, such
data must be clearly indicated.
9. Tract boundary lines by calculated
distances and bearings.
10. Title, graphic scale, north point, and
date.
(c) The proposed development plan shall
comprise such maps, at a scale no smaller
than 1" = 100 feet, and text needed to
clearly show the following:
1. The name of the proposed development
and names and addresses of the
developer and the persons who prepared
the plan;
2. The proposed street pattern paving
widths, and rights-of-way of all
streets, the widths and locations of
easements, and a traffic flow diagram;
3. The layout of lots or parcels,
including dimensions, number, and
building lines; ·
4. The location, use, height, bulk, and
number of families to be housed for
every structure proposed;
5. The location of all off-street parking
spaces and the total number of spaces
to be provided;
6. The location, size, and kind of
improvements proposed for all common
open space, together with proposed
ownership and maintenance arrangements
for such open space;
7. The location and design for all
grading, landscaping and screening
proposed showing the height and type of
screening;
8. The location and width of walks,
sidewalks and trails, and the use of
trails where they are not limited to
pedestrian use;
9. The extent to which the proposed
development plan varies from land use
and other regulations otherwise
applicable to the subject property.
10. The extent to which the proposed
development plan varies from land use
and other regulations otherwise
applicable to the subject property.
11. A schedule, where development is to be
phased over a period of years, showing
proposed times for the filing of
5-27
applications for final approval for
each phase of the proposed development
plan; and estimate of construction
times for each phase;
12. A statement of public interest
submitted in writing by the developer
setting forth the reasons why the
proposed development plan is in the
public interest and the impact on the
community;
13. An environmental impact statement
stating the impact of the Planned
Residential Development on Township
roads, utilities, schools, recreation
and other township facilities.
(d) A statement explaining the landowner's
interest in the proposed development.
(e) The developer shall provide the Township
with information guaranteeing that no
portion of the proposed development is
located within the free space or will in
any way interfere with the operation of an
existing or proposed airport and is all in
accordance with the applicable rules,
regulations, directives and statutes.
(2) Tentative Approval Documentation: The zoning
officer shall forward one (1) copy of each of
the application for tentative approval to the
governing body, planning commission and the
Township engineer, and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and two
(2) copies to the County Planning Commission.
(3) Public Hearing: The governing body shall hold a
public hearing a required by law within sixty
(60) days of the filing of the application for
the tentative approval of a development plan.
The governing body may continue the hearing from
time to time, and may refer the matter back to
the planning agency for a report provided,
however, that in any event, the public hearing
or hearings shall be concluded within sixty (60)
days after the date of the first public hearing.
(4) Criteria for Tentative Approval: The governing
body shall give tentative approval to a proposed
development plan if, and only if, it is found to
meet the following criteria:
(a) The proposed development plan complies with
all standards and conditions of this
ordinance and preserves the community
development objectives of this ordinance.
(b) The proposals for the maintenance and
conservation of any proposed common open
space are reasonable, and the amount and
5-28
extent of improvements of such open space
is adequate with respect to the amount and
purpose of the common open space as related
to the proposed density and type of
residential development.
(c) Common open space of Planned Residential
Developments shall be maintained and
developed by the Planned Residential
Development owner. Use of these facilities
is restricted to the Planned Residential
Development property owners or renters.
All Planned Residential Developments shall
be required to construct sufficient
recreation facilities as proposed in their
tentative approval plans but usage shall be
public if public maintenance is required.
(d) The proposed development shall not place a
burden on existing public utilities or
facilities.
(e) The physical design of the proposed
development plan adequately provides for
public services, safe ingress and egress,
traffic facilities and parking, light, air,
recreation and visual enjoyment.
(f) The total environment of the proposed
development plan is harmonious and
consistent with the neighborhood in which
it is located.
(g) The proposed development plan shall afford
at least the same degree of protection of
natural watercourses, topsoil, trees, and
other features of the nature environment,
and prevention or erosion landslides,
siltation and flooding than if the subject
property were developed in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances which otherwise
apply.
(h) In the case of a development· plan which
proposes development over a period of
years, the terms and conditions intended to
protect the interests of the public and of
the residents of the Planned Residential
Development in the integrity of the
development plan area shall be sufficient.
(i) Each year, based on the anniversary of the
final approval, a separate application for
the second year's development must be
applied for showing that those structures
as applied for in the first year's
construction are completed. No further
construction shall be allowed until the
5-29
first (or prior) year's application and
construction has been completed.
(5) Grant or Denial of Tentative Approval: The
governing body shall render their decision not
later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion
of the public hearing.
(a) The governing body may:
1. Grant tentative approval of the subject
development plan as submitted; or
2. Grant tentative approval subject to
specified conditions not included in
the development plan as submitted; or
3. Deny approval of the development
plan.
(b) The decision of the governing body shall be
in writing and shall be given to the
developer personally, or mailed to him at
his last address, not later than sixty (60)
days following the conclusion of the public
hearing.
(c) The grant or denial of tentative approval
by official written communication shall
include both conclusions and findings of
fact related to the proposal and shall set
forth the reasons for the grant, with or
without conditions, or for the denial.
Said communication shall set forth with
particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in
the public interest including, but not
limited to, findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
1. In those respects in which the
development plan is or is not
consistent with the Township's
Comprehensive Plan;
2. The extent to which the development
plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations applicable to
the property including, but not limited
to, density, bulk and use, and the
reasons why such departures are or are
not deemed to be in the public
interest;
3. The purpose, location and amount of the
common open space in the Planned
Residential Development, the
reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy or
inadequacy of the amount and purpose of
the common open space as related to the
proposed density and type of
development;
5-30
4. The physical design of the development
plan and the manner in which said
design does or does not adequately
provide for public services, vehicular
traffic, preservation of natural
features, light and air, recreation,
and visual enjoyment;
5. The relationship of the proposed
Planned Residential Development to the
neighborhood in which it is proposed;
and
6. In the case of a phased development
plan, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the
residents of the Planned Residential
Development.
(d) In the event a development plan is granted
tentative approval, with or without
conditions, the governing body shall set
forth in the official written communication
the time within which an application for
final approval for the development plan
shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for
development over a period of years, the
periods of time within which applications
for final approval of each part thereof
shall be filed. Except upon the consent of
the landowner, the time so established
between grant of tentative approval and an
application for final shall not be less
than three (3) months and in the case of
developments over a period of years, the
time between applications for final
approval of each part of a plan shall be
not less than twelve (12) months.
(e) Failure of a governing body to so act
within said period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the
development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the
landowner may, within thirty (30) days
after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the governing
body, notify such governing body of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case the governing body shall be
deemed to have denied tentative approval of
the development plan. In the event the
landowner does not within said period
notify the governing body of his refusal to
5-31
accept all said conditions, tentative
approval of the development plan, with all
said conditions, shall stand as granted.
(f) If the developer chooses to reject any
conditions attached to the grant of
tentative approval, he may void such
tentative approval by notifying the
governing body within thirty (30) days of
the decision of the governing body.
(g) The grant of tentative approval may be
revoked by the governing body if they are
notified by the developer of this intention
to abandon the proposed development plan.
The grant of tentative approval shall be
deemed to be revoked if the developer does
not submit an application for final
approval within the time limits required by
law.
29. Final Approval Procedure:
(1) Application for Final Approval: An application
for final approval may be for all the land
included in a development plan or, to the extent
set forth in the tentative approval, for a
section thereof. Application for final
approval of each phase shall be filed with the
governing body not later than twelve (12) months
following the grant of tentative approval,
unless otherwise specified by the governing
body. The application shall be comprised of two
(2) reproducible copies of the development plan
for the phase, including a site plan and
supplementary data, and a Certificate of
Completion of Improvements or a Guarantee of
Improvements as required by this ordinance and
all other requirements as may be required in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code, Act 247,
Article 7.
(a) The site plan shall include:
1. All data required for a final plat as
specified in the Subdivision Ordinance;
2. Accurately dimensioned locations of all
proposed structures, parking areas, and
common open space;
3. The use and number of families to be
housed in each structure;
d. The landscaping plan, including the
location of sidewalks, trails,
screening and grading.
(b) An engineering report shall include the
following data:
1. Profiles, cross sections and
specifications for proposed street
improvements;
5-32
2. Profiles and other explanatory data
concerning installation of water
distribution systems, storm sewers, and
sanitary sewers;
3. A report on the feasibility of
connection to existing sewerage system,
including distances to the nearest
public sewer, service load of the
subdivision capacity of the treatment
plant;
4. If the connection to a public sewerage
system is not feasible, a report on the
feasibility of a separate sewerage
system, and a treatment works including
the design, population, type and
location of the treatment and receiving
stream;
(c) The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
shall specifically indicate all erosion and
sedimentation control measures to be
utilized on the site. The Plan shall meet
the following requirements:
1. The erosion and sedimentation control
plan shall be prepared by persons
trained and experienced in erosion and
sedimentation control methods and
techniques;
2. The erosion and sedimentation control
plan shall be designed to prevent
accelerated erosion and sedimentation
and shall consider all factors which
contribute to erosion and sedimentation
including, but not limited to, the
following:
(a) The topographic features of the
project area;
(b) The types, depth, slope, and areal
extent of the soils;
(c) The proposed alteration to the
area;
(d) The amount of runoff from the
project area and the upstream
watershed area;
(e) The staging of earth moving
activities;
(f) Temporary control measures and
facilities for use during earth
moving;
(g) Permanent control measures and
facilities for long-term
protection;
5-33
(h) A maintenance program for the
control facilities including
disposal of materials removed from
the control facilities or project
area.
(d) The supplementary data shall include:
1. Any covenants, grants of easements or
other restrictions to be imposed on the
use of land and structures;
2. Provision for the maintenance,
ownership and operation of common open
spaces and facilities, streets and
parking areas and sewers; and
3. Any conditions set forth in the
official written communication at the
time of tentative approval.
(e) Improvements: No development plan shall be
finally approved unless all improvements
required by this ordinance have been
installed by the developer in strict
conformance with this ordinance, or
guarantee (in the form of a bond or deposit
of funds or securities in escrow which are
acceptable to the governing body and are in
amounts sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements which may be required) that
the improvements will subsequently be
installed by the owner. such guarantee
shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of all declared
improvements for the phase within a period
of one year from the date of final approval
of the development plan of the phase.
(2) Final Review: The zoning officer shall forward
one (1) copy each of the application for final
approval to the governing body, planning
commission, and the engineer, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and two
(2) copies to the County Planning Commission.
The governing body shall not approve the final
application until reports from each of these
agencies have been received, or until the
expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the
copies of the final application were forwarded
to said agencies. ·
(3) Final Decision: The governing body shall render
their decision and communicate it to the
developer no later than forty-five (45) days
after the application is filed.
(a) When a preliminary application for a
proposed development plan has been granted
tentative approval, the applicant shall be
5-34
entitled to final approval in accordance
with the terms of the grant of tentative
approval.
(b) The governing body may deny approval of any
development plan which varies from the
preliminary plan granted tentative
approval. The governing body must forward
the written notice of such denial to the
developer within forty-five (45) days,
setting forth the reasons that one or more
variations are not in the public interest.
In the event of such denial, the developer
may either:
1. Refile his application for final
approval without the variations
objected; or
2. File a written request with the
governing body that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final
approval. If the developer wishes to
take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he
shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within thirty (30)
additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have
already passed at the time when the
developer was advised that the
development plan was not in substantial
compliance. In the event the developer
shall fail to take either of these
alternate actions within said time, he
shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public
hearing shall be held pursuant to
public notice within thirty (30) days
after request for the hearing is made
by the developer, and the hearing shall
be conducted in the manner prescribed
in this ordinance for public hearings
on applications for tentative
approval. Within thirty (30) days
after the conclusion of the hearing,
the governing body shall, by official
written communication, either grant
final approval to the development plan
or denyfinal approval. The grant or
denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases
arising under this section, be in the
form and contain findings required for
an application for tentative approval
set forth in this ordinance.
5-35
(4) Recording: The Township shall record the
approved development plan in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds forthwith. After
recording, the Township shall return three (3)
copies of the development plan to the developer
within ten (10) days.
(5) Revocation: The approval of the development
plan shall be revoked if the developer gives
notice of his intention to abandon the plan, or
if the developer fails to develop any portion of
the plan given final approval with two (2) years
of the date of such final approval, and no
further development shall take place on the
property included in such development plan
unless a subsequent development plan is approved
or such development complies with the Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances.
30. Enforcement and Modification of Provisions of the
Plan:
To ensure the integrity of the development plan and
guarantee that modifications in the plan do not
adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement
and modification of the provisions of the development
plan as finally approved, whether those are recorded
by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be
subject to the following provisions:
(1) Provisions in favor of Municipality: The
provisions of the development plan relating to
the use, bulk, and location of buildings, and
structures; the quantity and location of common
open space, except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance; and the intensity of use or the
density of residential units, shall run in favor
of the municipality. As provided by law, these
provisions shall be enforceable in law or in
equity by the municipality without limitation on
any powers of regulation otherwise granted the
municipality by law.
(2) Provisions in Favor of Residents: All
provisions of the development plan shall run in
favor of the residents of the Planned
Residential Development but only to the extent
expressly provided in the development plan.
Also, provided these provisions whether recorded
by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, may be
enforced by law or equity by
5-36
said residents acting individually, jointly, or
through an organization designated in the
development plan shall, however, be implied to
exist in favor of residents of the development
plan which have been finally approved, and have
been recorded.
(3) Modifications: All those provisions of the
development plan authorized to be enforced by
the municipality under this section may be
modified, removed, or released by the
municipality, except grants or easements
relating to the service or equipment of a public
utility, subject to the following conditions:
(a) No such modification, removal or release of
the provisions of the development plan by
the municipality shall affect the rights of
the residents of the Planned Residential
Development to maintain and enforce those
provisions, at law or equity, as provided
in this section, unless those provisions
have been broken or not enforced as per the
original Planned Residential Development
proposal.
(b) No modification, removal or release of the
provisions of the development plan by the
municipality shall be permitted except upon
the findings by the governing body or its
designated agency, following a public
hearing thereon pursuant to public notice
called and held in accordance with the
provisions of the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code". These
findings must indicate that the changes are
consistent with the efficient development
and preservation of the entire Planned
Residential Development, do not adversely
affect the enjoyment of land abutting
across the street from the Planned
Residential Development or the public
interest and are not granted solely to
confer a special benefit upon any person.
(4) Release of Rights - Residents of the Planned
Residential Development may, to the extent and
in the manner expressly authorized by the
provisions of the development plan, modify,
remove or release rights to enforce the
provisions of the development plan, but no such
action shall affect the right of the
5-37
503.8
municipality to enforce the provisions of the
development plan in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(a) No release of rights shall accommodate the
Planned Residential Development where the
Planned Residential Development has been
constructed as an entity and not subject to
the North Huntingdon Township Subdivision
ordinance. Should this type of
construction be found faulty and in need of
change, it shall be the responsibility of
the Planned Residential Development
residents and/or the Planned Residential
Development owner to rectify any faulty
construction and the Township of North
Huntingdon shall not be held responsible.
31. Penalties: Any person, partnership or corporation,
who or which has violated the Planned Residential
Development provisions of this ordinance or prior
township ordinances shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by a municipality, be subject to the penalties and
provisions of Article 9, Section 915 of this
ordinance.
Neighborhood Business District (C)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of the Neighborhood Business District is
to provide areas for the location of neighborhood
commercial facilities, each intended to serve a
portion of the municipality with relatively small
retail outlets. An objective is to encourage the
convenient placement of such uses for the benefit of
the residents in locations compatible with the type
and impact of the uses.
2. c District Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District.
(1) Front Yard Depth Minimum
5-38
30 feet minimum.
If both adjacent
dwellings have a
front yard less than
30 feet deep, the
minimum front yard
depth is then the
greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
503.9
3.
(2) Rear Yard Depth Minimum
Accessory Building
5 feet minimum
(3) Coverage Maximum
(4) Building Coverage
Maximum
(5) Building Height Maximum
30 feet
50%
35%
2 stories
Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
to commercial shall apply.)
(All references
4. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
5. Off Street Loading Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 819. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
(All references to commercial shall apply.)
7. All multiple dwelling units shall comply with the
standards and criteria for the R-lA Multiple Family
Residence District (Section 503.3).
8. Applications for zoning approval for uses in the
Neighborhood Business District shall follow the
procedure for site plan review as outlined in Article
9, Section 914. In addition, other standards may be
enforced as required in the Land Development and
Subdivision Ordinance.
9. Performance Standards for Neighborhood Business:
(1) Noise level must be consistent with the noise
Ordinance No. 531.
(2) All luminaries shall have a total cut off angle
of no greater than 60 degrees from the vertical.
(3) Set hours of operation, not earlier than
7:00 a.m. or later than 11:59 p.m. shall be
established and maintained.
Commercial District 1 (C-1)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of the C-1 District is to provide
locations in the municipality where the need for
commercial facilities serving all residents and
5-39
persons outside the community can be satisfied. Such
facilities are strongly highway oriented, prefer
maximum exposure to the public, generate larger
volumes of vehicular traffic and require generally
larger areas than those uses contemplated in
Neighborhood Business Districts.
2. C-1 Lot and Area Requirements:
3.
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District.
(1) Front Yard Depth
Minimum
( 2) Rear Yard Depth Minimum
Accessory Building
(3) Coverage Maximum
(4) Building Coverage
Maximum
(5) Building Height Maximum
50 feet minimum.
If both adjacent
dwellings have a
front yard less than
50 feet deep, the
minimum front yard
depth is then the
greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
20 feet
5 feet
50%
50%
8 stories
Signs: see Article 8, Section 823.
to commercial shall apply.)
(All references
4. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
5. Off Street Loading Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 819. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. All multiple dwelling units shall comply with the
standards and criteria for the R-lA Multiple Family
Residence District (Section 503.3).
8. Applications for zoning approval for uses in the c-1
District shall follow the procedure for site plan
review as outlined in Article 9, Section 914. In
addition, other standards may be enforced as
5-40
required in the Land Development and Subdivision
Ordinance.
503.10 Commercial District 1-A (C-lA)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of the C-lA District is to provide an
area for multiple family high rise apartments and
high rise office buildings that lie within and
adjacent to the central core area, with direct
service by existing major arterial highway
facilities. These areas shall lie or be adjacent to
other commercial districts and shall be deemed
incompatible for single family residence structures
due to the height and bulk of structures in this
zone.
2. C-1 Lot and Area Requirements:
the following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District.
(A} High Rise Residential:
(1) Density Maximum
(2) Lot Area Minimum
( 3) Lot Width at
Building Setback
Minimum
(4) Front Yard Depth
Minimum
(5) Rear Yard Depth
Minimum
Accessory Building
(6) Side Yard Width
Minimum
Abutting a Street
32 dwelling units per
gross acre
1,250 square feet per
dwelling unit
90 feet
50 feet minimum
If both adjacent
dwellings have a
front yard less than
30 feet deep, the
minimum front yard
depth is then the
greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
20 feet
5 feet minimum
20 feet minimum
20 feet
High Rise side yards, and if applicable,
rear yards shall be determined so as
5-41
to provide for adequate light and air
reaching all floors of the building. The
developer shall consult the Zoning Officer
for applicable side yard dimensions.
(7) Building Coverage 50%
Maximum
(8) Road Frontage
Minimum
(9) Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
(10) Building Height
Maximum
(B) High Rise Office:
(1) Front Yard Depth
Minimum
(2) Rear Yard Depth
Minimum
(3) Side Yard Width
Minimum
90 feet
May be 85% of the
lot width or curve
requirement
8 stories
50 feet minimum.
If both adjacent
dwellings have a
front yard less than
30 feet deep, the
minimum front yard
depth is then the
greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
20 feet
20 feet
High Rise side yards and, if applicable,
rear yards shall be determined so as to
provide for adequate light and air reaching
all floors of the building. The developer
shall consult the Zoning Officer for
applicable side yard dimensions.
(4) Building coverage
(5) Floor Area Ratio
Maximum
(6) Road Frontage
Minimum
5-42
50%
30%
90 feet
3 .
(7) Road Frontage on
Cul-de-sac
(8) Building Height
Maximum
May be 85% of the lot
width or curve
requirement
8 stories
(9) other requirements to be determined by the
Planning Commission
Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
to commercial shall apply.)
(All references
4. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
5. Off Street Loading Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 819. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. All Unit Group Development shall comply with the
provisions of Article 8, Section 829.
503.11 Limited Commercial District 2 (C-2)
1. Purpose: The purpose of the C-2 District is to
provide for a Limited commercial District for areas
of the Township which have developed in a commercial
nature and also to act as a transitional zone between
C-1 and Residential Districts where Commercial
establishments have encroached into the abutting
residential districts.
2. c-2 Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District.
(1) Floor Area Ratio
(2) Front Yard Depth
Minimum
5-43
30%
40 feet minimum.
If both adjacent
dwellings have a
front yard less than
40 feet deep, the
minimum front yard
depth is then the
greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
3.
( 3) Rear Yard Depth 20 feet
Minimum
( 4) Lot coverage 85%
Maximum
( 5) Building Coverage 50%
Maximum
(6) Building Height 3 stories
Maximum
Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
to commercial shall apply.)
(All references
4. Off Street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
5. Off Street Loading Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 819. (All references to commercial shall
apply.)
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
7. All multiple dwelling units shall comply with the
standards and criteria for the R-lA Multiple Family
Residence District (Section 503.3).
8. Applications for zoning approval for uses in the C-2
Limited Commercial District shall follow the
procedure for site plan review as outlined in Article
9, Section 914. In addition, other standards may be
enforced as required in the Land Development and
Subdivision Ordinance.
503.12 Industrial District (I)
1. Purpose:
The purpose of the Industrial District is to permit
and encourage industrial development that will be so
located and designed as to constitute an harmonious
and appropriate part of the physical development of
the municipality, to provide opportunities for local
employment close to residential areas, thus reducing
travel to and from work and to further the purpose of
the Comprehensive Plan of North Huntingdon Township.
2. I District Lot and Area Requirements:
The following dimensions unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District.
5-44
(1) Front Yard Depth
Minimum
50 feet minimum.
If both adjacent dwellings
have a front yard less
than 50 feet deep, the
minimum front yard depth
is then the greater of the
two adjacent yard depths.
( 2) Rear Yard Depth 20 feet
Minimum
( 3) Building Coverage 50%
Maximum
(4) Building Height 8 stories
Maximum
3. Signs: See Article 8, Section 823.
commercial shall apply.)
(All references to
4. Off street Parking Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 820. (All references to commercial shall apply.)
5. Off Street Loading Regulations: See Article 8,
Section 819. (All references to commercial shall apply.)
6. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
503.13 Planned Economic Development Districts 1 and 2 (PEDD 1
and PEDD 2)
1. Purpose:
These districts provide for a wide range of
business,professional and manufacturing uses, all of
which shall be able to meet comparatively rigid
specifications as to nuisance free performance.
These districts are intended to be created in
situations where, because of special circumstances,
the area is particularly suited and useful for
Economic Development purposes, and yet is in such
close proximity to existing residential uses that
additional controls are deemed necessary in order to
make these uses compatible with existing residential
uses.
2. PEDD-1 and PEDD-2 Lot and Area Requirements and
Special Provisions:
The following standards unless specified otherwise,
are the minimum requirements for the approval of uses
within the District:
(1) Maximum building coverage of 50%
(2) Minimum setback from any existing public road of
50 feet. Such setback areas must be
5-45
(3)
( 4)
( 5)
(6)
( 7)
( 8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
appropriately landscaped, and may contain a
cartway or driveway for ingress and egress
purposes.
No building which is not separated by a public
road can be built closer than 150 feet to any
residential structure.
No buildings on the same lot shall be located
closer than 30 feet to each other.
There are no specific setback requirements for
internally developed public or private roads.
Specific setbacks shall be determined by the
Planning Commission when the site plan is
reviewed, with the maximum setback requirement
being 50 feet and the minimum setback
requirement being a 5 ft. landscaped area or
sidewalk between any internally developed road
and any proposed or existing building.
Maximum building height - 3 stories. Exterior
wall surfaces shall comply with Article 8,
Section 810.
Plans for all buildings must have exterior wall
surface approved by the Planning Commission.
The maximum permitted height of any structure is
30 feet.
A minimum 50 foot buffer strip, containing a row
of evergreen trees not less than 3 feet in
height at initial planting, shall be required to
be provided and maintained along areas abutting
any residential district.
When the rear of any building faces a public
road a row of evergreens of not less than 3 feet
in height at initial planting, shall be provided
between the rear of the building and the public
road.
Any and all outside storage including refuse
shall be concealed within a structure.
A traffic barrier shall be provided when a
proposed street or driveway parallels and
existing public road for more than 100 ft. Such
traffic barrier shall consist of trees, walls,
fences, or landscaping to provide an effective
barrier between headlights and vehicles along
the adjacent cartways.
Upon review by the Planning Commission, the
requirement to use evergreen trees for screening
purposes may be changed if another plant or tree
can be shown to effectively accomplish the same
purpose.
site plans as per Article 9, section 914, shall
be submitted for all new developments and/or
changes requiring a building pennit.
5-46
6. Roads and Right-of-way Requirements:
(1) The minimum right of way for roads which are to
be dedicated to the public shall be 50 ft. with
a paved cartway width of 30 feet plus curbs.
Construction specifications shall be as per
Ordinance #299 as amended.
(2) The minimum right of way radius for
cul-de-sacs which are to be dedicated to the
public shall be 60 feet with a minimum paved
cartway radius of 50 feet plus curbs.
Construction specifications shall be as per
Ordinance #299,as amended.
(3) A minimum turning radius of 25 ft. shall be
required at intersection of roads, driveways and
parking lot entrances with public roads.
7. Parking and Off Street Loading Requirements;
(1) All parking spaces for cars shall have the
following minimum dimensions: 9 ft. wide by
20 ft. long.
(2) All aisles for car parking shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet.
(3) All parking areas for trucks shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission.
(4) The number of both car and truck parking spaces
shall be determined by the Planning Commission
on an individual use basis. Minimum
requirements shall be one for each employee on
the peak shift and one space for each vehicle
used in connection with the particular use or as
established in the Off street Parking
Regulations by Article 8, Section 820.
(5) Off street loading requirements shall be
governed by Article 8, Section 819.
8. Signs:
(1) Only one free standing sign or marquee shall be
permitted unless otherwise reviewed by the
Planning Commission.
(2) Wall signs or graphic signs shall be permitted
on all buildings for identification purposes
only. The maximum area for any sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet unless otherwise reviewed
by the Planning Commission.
(3) No billboards shall be permitted in this
district.
(4) No signs shall be mounted on any roofs.
(5) No flashing, fluttering, undulating, swinging,
rotating or otherwise moving signs shall be
permitted.
(6) Any spotlights used to illuminate signs shall be
placed such that the light source will not be
directed towards abutting roads or properties.
5-47
(7) Except as established above, all signs shall
comply with Article 8, Section 823.
9. Exterior Wall Surfaces: See Article 8, Section 810.
10. site
(1)
( 2)
( 3)
( 4)
Plan Submission Procedure:
site Plan Submission: The site plan must be
completed and submitted to the Zoning Officer at
least three (3) weeks prior to the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Commission.
This plan shall be accompanied by a check in the
amount of $30.00 made payable to North
Huntingdon Township.
The site plan shall show, in addition to any
specific requirements set forth in the district
regulations herein, the following:
(a) The location of principal and accessory
buildings existing and planned, and the
topography:
(b) Traffic circulation features within the
site:
(c) The location of vehicular access onto the
site: Department of Transportation Permit,
if necessary.
(d) The height and bulk of structure;
(e) The provisions of off-street parking and
loading facilities;
(f) The provisions of open space;
(g) The landscaping, paving, fencing, walks and
signs on the site.
(h) The location of storm sewers and storm
water management facilities including
Department of Environmental Resources
permits, if necessary. ·
(i} The location of sanitary sewers and water
lines.
(j) The location of fire hydrants.
(k) An erosion and sedimentation plan approved
by the Westmoreland county Conservation
District.
(1) Any other requirements for that specific
zoning district.
The site plan shall be reviewed by the North
Huntingdon Township Planning Commission and a
recommendation made to the North Huntingdon
Township Board of Commissioners.
A decision by the Board of Commissioners shall
be made within sixty (60) days after the initial
Planning Commission meeting at which the site
plan was reviewed, unless an extension was
agreed to by both parties.
5-48
11. Tentative Approval Procedure:
(1) Tentative Approval Documentation:
The zoning officer shall forward one (1) copy of
each of the tentative application to the
governing body, planning commission and the
Township engineer, and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and two
(2) copies to the County Planning Commission.
(2) Public Hearing:
The governing body shall hold a public hearing a
required by law within sixty (60) days of the
filing of the application for the tentative
approval of a development plan. The governing
body may continue the hearing from time to time,
and may refer the matter back to the planning
agency for a report provided, however, that in
any event, the public hearing or hearings shall
be concluded within sixty (60) days after the
date of the first public hearing.
(3) criteria for Tentative Approval:
The governing body shnll give tentative approval
to a proposed development plan if, and only if,
it is found to meet the following criteria:
(a) The proposed development plan complies with
all standards and conditions of this ·
ordinance and preserves the community
development objectives of this ordinance.
(b) The proposals for the maintenance and
conservation of any proposed common open
space are reasonable, and the amount and
extent of improvements of such open space
is adequate with respect to the amount and
purpose of the common open space as related
to the proposed density and type of
commercial and industrial development.
(c) Common open space of planned commercial and
industrial developments shall be maintained
and developed by the planned commercial and
industrial development owner. Use of these
facilities is restricted to the planned
commercial and industrial development
property owners or renters.
(d) The proposed development shall not place a
burden on existing public utilities or
facilities.
(e) The physical design of the proposed
development plan adequately provides for
public services, safe ingress and egress,
traffic facilities and parking, light, air,
recreation and visual enjoyment.
(f) The total environment of the proposed
development plan is harmonious and
consistent with the neighborhood in which
it is located.
5-49
(g) The proposed development plan shall afford
at least the same degree of protection of
natural watercourses, topsoil, trees, and
other features of the nature environment,
and prevention or erosion landslides,
siltation and flooding than if the subject
property were developed in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances which otherwise
apply.
(h) In the case of a development plan which
proposes development over a period of
years, the terms and conditions intended to
protect the interests of the public and of
the residents of the planned commercial and
industrial development in the integrity of
the development plan area shall be
sufficient.
(i) Each year, based on the anniversary of the
final approval, a separate application for
the second year's development must be
applied for showing that those structures
as applied for in the first year's
construction are completed. No further
construction shall be allowed until the
first (or prior) year's application and
construction has been completed.
(4) Grant or Denial of Tentative Approval: The
governing body shall render their decision not
later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion
of the public hearing.
(a) The governing body may:
1. Grant tentative approval of the subject
development plan as submitted; or
2. Grant tentative approval subject to
specified conditions not included in
the development plan as submitted; or
3. Deny approval of the development plan.
(b) The decision of the governing body shall be
in writing and shall be given to the
developer personally, or mailed to him at
his last address, not later than sixty (60)
days following the conclusion of the public
hearing.
(c) The grant or denial of tentative approval
by official written communication shall
include both conclusions and findings of
fact related to the proposal and shall set
forth the reasons for the grant, with or
without conditions, or for the denial.
Said communication shall set forth with
particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in
5-50
the public interest including, but not
limited to, findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
1. In those respects in which the
development plan is or is not
consistent with the Township's
Comprehensive Plan;
2. The extent to which the development
plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations applicable to
the property including, but not limited
to, density, bulk and use, and the
reasons why such departures are or are
not deemed to be in the public
interest;
3. The purpose, location and amount of the
common open space in the Planned
Economic Development, the reliability
of the proposals for maintenance and
conservation of the common open space,
and the adequacy or inadequacy of the
amount and purpose of the common.open
space as related to the proposed
density and type of development;
4. The physical design of the development
plan and the manner in which said
design does or does not adequately
provide for public services, vehicular
traffic, preservation of natural
features, light and air, recreation,
and visual enjoyment;
5. The relationship of the proposed
Planned Economic Development to the
neighborhood in which it is proposed;
and
6. In the case of a phased development
plan, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the
residents of the Planned Economic
Development.
(d) In the event a development plan is granted
tentative approval, with or without
conditions, the governing body shall set
forth in the official written communication
the time within which an application for
final approval for the development plan
shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for
development over a period of years, the
periods of time within which applications
for final approval of each part thereof
shall be filed. Except upon the consent of
5-51
the landowner, the time so established
between grant of tentative approval and an
application for final shall not be less
than three (3) months and in the case of
developments over a period of years, the
time between applications for final
approval of each part of a plan shall be
not less than twelve (12} months.
(e) Failure of a governing body to so act
within said period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the
development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the
landowner may, within thirty (30} days
after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the governing
body, notify such governing body of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case the governing body shall be
deemed to have denied tentative approval of
the development plan. In the event the
landowner does not within said period
notify the governing body of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, tentative
approval of the development plan, with all
said conditions, shall stand as granted.
(f} If the developer chooses to reject any
conditions attached to the grant of
tentative approval, he may void such
tentative approval by notifying the
governing body within thirty (30) days of
the decision of the governing body.
(g) The grant of tentative approval may be
revoked by the governing body if they are
notified by the developer of this intention
to abandon the proposed development plan.
The grant of tentative approval shall be
deemed to be revoked if the developer does
not submit an application for final
approval within the time limits required by
law.
12. Final Approval Procedure:
(1) Application for Final Approval: An application
for final approval may be for all the land
included in a development plan or, to the extent
set forth in the tentative approval, for a
section thereof. Application for final
approval of each phase shall be filed with the
governing body not later than twelve (12) months
following the grant of tentative approval,
5-52
unless otherwise specified by the governing
body. The application shall be comprised of two
(2) reproducible copies of the development plan
for the phase, including a site plan and
supplementary data, and a Certificate of
Completion of Improvements or a Guarantee of
Improvements as required by this ordinance and
all other requirements as may be reqi.iired in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code, Act 247,
Article 7.
(a) The site plan shall include:
1. All data required for a final plat as
specified in the Subdivision ordinance;
2. Accurately dimensioned locations of all
proposed structures, parking areas, and
common open space;
3. The use and number of families to be
housed in each structure;
4. The landscaping plan, including the
location of sidewalks, trails,
screening and grading.
(b) An engineering report shall include the
following data:
1. Profiles, cross sections and
specifications for proposed street
improvements;
2. Profiles and other explanatory data
concerning installation of water
distribution systems, storm sewers, and
sanitary sewers;
3. A report on the feasibility of
connection to existing sewerage system,
including distances to the nearest
public sewer, service load of the
subdivision capacity of the treatment
plant;
4. If the connection to a public sewerage
system is not feasible, a report on the
feasibility of a separate sewerage
system, and a treatment works including
the design, population, type and
location of the treatment and receiving
stream:
(c) The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
shall specifically indicate all erosion and
sedimentation control measures to be
utilized on the site. The Plan shall meet
the following requirements:
1. The erosion and sedimentation control
plan shall be prepared by persons
trained and experienced in erosion and
sedimentation control methods and
techniques;
5-53
2. The erosion and sedimentation control
plan shall be designed to prevent
accelerated erosion and sedimentation
and shall consider all factors which
contribute to erosion and sedimentation
including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. The topographic features of the
project area;
b. The types, depth, slope, and areal
extent of the soils;
c. The proposed alteration to the
area;
d. The amount of runoff from the
project area and the upstream
watershed area;
e. The staging of earth moving
activities;
f. Temporary control measures and
facilities for use during earth
moving;
g. Permanent control measures and
facilities for long-term
protection;
h. A maintenance program for the
control facilities including
disposal of materials removed from
the control facilities or project
area.
(d) The supplementary data shall include:
1. Any covenants, grants of easements or
other restrictions to be imposed on the
use of land and structures;
2. Provision for the maintenance,
ownership and operation of common open
spaces and facilities, streets and
parking areas and sewers; and
3. Any conditions set forth in the
official written communication at the
time of tentative approval.
(e) Improvements: No development plan shall be
finally approved unless all improvements
required by this ordinance have been
installed by the developer in strict
conformance with this ordinance, or
guarantee (in the form of a bond or deposit
of funds or securities in escrow which are
acceptable to the governing body and are in
amounts sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements which may be required) that
the improvements will subsequently be
installed by the Owner. such guarantee
shall provide for, and secure to the
5-54
public, the completion of all declared
improvements for the phase within a period
of one year from the date of final approval
of the development plan of the phase.
(2) Final Review: The zoning officer shall forward
one (1) copy each of the application for final
approval to the governing body, planning
commission, and the engineer, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, and two
(2) copies to the County Planning Commission.
The governing body shall not approve the final
application until reports from each of these
agencies have been received, or until the
expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the
copies of the final application were forwarded
to said agencies.
(3) Final Decision: The governing body shall render
their decision and communicate it to the
developer no later than forty-five (45) days
after the application is filed.
(a) When a preliminary application for a
proposed development plan has been granted
tentative approval, the applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance
with the terms of the grant of tentative
approval.
(b) The governing body may deny approval of any
development plan which varies from the
preliminary plan granted tentative
approval. The governing body must forward
the written notice of such denial to the
developer within forty-five (45) days,
setting forth the reasons that one or more
variations are not in the public interest.
In the event of such denial, the developer
may either:
1. Refile his application for final
approval without the variations
objected; or
2. File a written request with the
governing body that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final
approval. If the developer wishes to
take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he
shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within thirty (30)
additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have
already passed at the time when the
developer was advised that the
development plan was not in substantial
5-55
compliance. In the event the developer
shall fail to take either of these
alternate actions within said time, he
shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public
hearing shall be held pursuant to
public notice within thirty (30) days
after request for the hearing is made
by the developer, and the hearing shall
be conducted in the manner prescribed
in this ordinance for public hearings
on applications for tentative
approval. Within thirty (30) days
after the conclusion of the hearing,
the governing body shall, by official
written communication, either grant
final approval to the development plan
or deny final approval. The grant or
denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases
arising under this section, be in the
form and contain findings required for
an application for tentative approval
set forth in this ordinance.
(4) Recording: The Township shall record the
approved development plan in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds forthwith. After
recording, the Township shall return three (3)
copies of the development plan to the developer
within ten (10) days.
(5) Revocation: The approval of the development
plan shall be revoked if the developer gives
notice of his intention to abandon the plan, or
if the developer fails to develop any portion of
the plan given final approval with two (2) years
of the date of such final approval, and no
further development shall take place on the
property included in such development plan
unless a subsequent development plan is approved
or such development complies with the Zoning and
subdivision Ordinances.
13. Enforcement and Modification of Provisions of the Plan:
To ensure the integrity of the development plan and
guarantee that modifications in the plan do not adversely
affect the public interest, the enforcement and
modification of the provisions of the development plan as
finally approved, whether those are recorded by plat,
covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Provisions in favor of Municipality: The provisions
of the development plan relating to the use, bulk,
and location of buildings, and structures; the
5-56
quantity and location of common open space, except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance; and the
intensity of use or the density of commercial and
industrial units, shall run in favor of the
municipality. As provided by law, these provisions
shall be enforceable in law or in equity by the
municipality without limitation on any powers of
regulation otherwise granted the municipality by law.
(2) Provisions in Favor of Residents: All provisions of
the development plan shall run in favor of the
residents of the planned commercial and industrial
development but only to the extent expressly provided
in the development plan. Also, provided these
provisions whether recorded by plat, covenant,
easement or otherwise, may be enforced by law or
equity by said residents acting individually,
jointly, or through an organization designated in the
development plan shall, however, be implied to exist
in favor of residents of the development plan which
have been finally approved, and have been recorded.
(3) Modifications: All those provisions of the
development plan authorized to be enforced by the
municipality under this section may be modified,
removed, or released by the municipality, except
grants or easements relating to the service or
equipment of a public utility, subject to the
following conditions:
(a) No such modification, removal or release of the
provisions of the development plan by the
municipality shall affect the rights of the
residents of the planned commercial and
industrial development to maintain and enforce
those provisions, at law or equity, as provided
in this section, unless those provisions have
been broken or not enforced as per the original
planned commercial and industrial development
proposal.
(b) No modification, removal or release of the
provisions of the development plan by the
municipality shall be permitted except upon
the findings by the governing body or its
designated agency, following a public
hearing thereon pursuant to public notice
called and held in accordance with the
provisions of the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code". These
findings must indicate that the changes are
consistent with the efficient development
and preservation of the entire planned
commercial and industrial development, do
not adversely affect the enjoyment of land
abutting across the street from the planned
commercial and industrial development or
5-57
the public interest and are not granted
solely to confer a special benefit upon any
person.
(4) Release of Rights: Residents of the Planned
Economic Development may, to the extent and in
the manner expressly authorized by the
provisions of the development plan, modify,
remove or release rights to enforce the
provisions of the development plan, but no such
action shall affect the right of the
municipality to enforce the provisions of the
development plan in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
No release of rights shall accommodate the
Planned Economic Development where the Planned
Economic Development has been constructed as an
entity and not subject to the North Huntingdon
Township Subdivision Ordinance. Should this
type of construction be found faulty and in need
of change, it shall be the responsibility of the
Planned Economic Development residents and/or
the Planned Economic Development owner to
rectify any faulty construction and the Township
of North Huntingdon shall not be held
responsible.
14. Penalties: Any person, partnership or corporation,
who or which has violated the Planned Economic
Development provisions of this ordinance or prior
township ordinances shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by a municipality, be subject to the penalties and
provisions of Article 9, Section 915 of this
ordinance.
504 SUMMARY OF DISTRICT STANDARDS
504.1
504.2
Table 1, Summary of District Bulk standards, summarizes the
standards established in Section 503 and Section 504. A
lot or parcel of land having an area or frontage of lesser
amounts than required by Table 1 may be considered as
coming within the area and frontage requirements of this
section, provided such lot or parcel of land meets the
qualifications and standards as a non-conforming lot.
The setbacks shall be measured perpendicularly from the
right-of-way line where a plan of the way is on file with
the Register of Deeds, or, in the absence of such plan,
from a line 25 feet from and parallel with the center line
of the cartway.
5-58
l!lltlllil,1Ji il•I'" <'..:.;.;.;.x.;.y,,._,_..,,.,_..,.,,....:,..:.»:«<<~">:<0:
.;.:-:-:!;-';°~:;:-;:;:;:-~..;:::;:;~.;:;.;:;:;:;.;-.;:;::.::;;:;:;~:,;:;::,~;:;:;:;:~
Zoning Criteria District
R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3 R-4 c C-1 C-lA C-2 I
Minimum Lot Area 7,500 sf 7,500 sf 10,000 sf 20,000 sf 4-0,000 sf
Minimum Front Width 60 ft 70 ft 65ft 100 ft 150 ft
ln Minimum Front Setback 30 ft 30ft 30ft 30 ft 4-0 ft 30ft 50 ft 50 ft 4-0 ft 50ft
I
ln
00
I
>-' Minimum Front Setback to 22 ft 22ft 22ft 22ft 32ft
Unenclosed Porch
Minimum Side Setback 10 ft 20 ft 10 ft 10 ft 20ft 20ft
Minimum Rear Setback 30 ft 30 ft 30ft 30 ft 60 ft 30ft 20ft 20ft 20ft 20 ft
Maximum Building Height 3 2 2 2 2 2 8 8 3 8
(no. of stories)
Maximum Lot Coverage 30% 30% 25% 25% 20% 50% 50% 50% 85% 50%
(including Accessory Bldg.)
Minimum First Floor Area 950 sf 950 sf 950 sf 950 sf
504.3 The height limitation of buildings shall not apply in any
district to chimneys, ventilators, towers, spires or other
ornamental features of buildings which features are in no
way used for living purposes.
505 REAR YARD AND SIDE YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Rear yard and side yard setbacks abutting specific Zoning
Districts shall be as designated in Table 2, "Rear Yard Setback
Requirements" and Table 3, "Side Yard Setback Requirements" in
Article 5.
506 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS:
All building sites shall front on a public street.
5-59
TABLE 2
District Abutting Zoning Districts
Where
Site is
(Distance in Feet)
Located R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 c C-1 C-1A C-2
R-1 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-lA 30* 30 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30
R-2 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-3 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-4 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
c 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30
C-1 30* 30* 40* 40* 40* 30 20 20 20 20
C-lA 30* 30* 40* 40* 40* 30 20 20 20 20
C-2 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 20 20 20 20
I 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 30* 30 30 30 30
* Buffer Zone required - 10 foot planting. See definition.
5-59-1
TABLE 3
District Abutting Zoning Districts
Where
Site is (Distance in Feet)
Located R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 R-4 c C-1 C-1A C-2
R-1 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 ·10 10 10
R-lA 20* 20 20* 20* 20* 20 20 20 20 20
R-2 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
R-3 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
R-4 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
c 20* 20* 20* 20* 20* 0 0 0 0 0
C-1 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 20 0 0 0 0
C-lA 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 20 0 0 0 0
C-2 20* 20* 20* 20* 20* 0 0 0 0 0
I 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 20 20 20 20 0
* Buffer Zone required - 10 foot planting. See definition.
5-59-2
ARTICLE 6
DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS
601 Permitted Uses in Residential Districts and Open Space,
Conservation and Recreation District {Table 4)
602 Permitted Uses in Commercial and Industrial Districts
{Table 5)
601 USE REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND OPEN SPACE
CONSERVATION AND RECREATION DISTRICT
601.1
601. 2
601. 3
601.4
Uses Permitted by Right:
Uses permitted by Right shall be as indicated in
Article 6, Table 4 - "Residential Districts: Permitted
Uses" of this ordinance. Applications for zoning
approval for such uses which meet all applicable district
requirements may be approved by the zoning officer
without additional considerations by any other agency of
the municipality.
conditional Uses:
Conditional Uses may be permitted as indicated in
Article 6, Table 4 - "Residential Districts: Permitted
Uses" of this ordinance subject to criteria and
procedures listed in Article 8 and Article 9 of this
ordinance. Approval shall be granted or denied by the
Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission. In approving applications for
Conditional Uses, the Board of Commissioners may attach
such additional requirements and stipulations as are
considered necessary for proper placement of the use on
the site.
Special Exceptions:
Uses by Special Exception shall be those indicated in
Article 6, Table 4 - "Residential Districts: Permitted
Uses", of this ordinance. Uses by Special Exception may
be permitted subject to the criteria and procedures
listed in Articles 8 and 9 of this ordinance and shall be
subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Prohibited Uses:
Except as provided in Article 7, Non-Conforming Uses, no
building or structure shall be constructed, and no
building, structure or land or part thereof shall be used
for any purpose or in any manner other than for one or
6-1
Table 4:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
USE* DISTRICT
0 R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3 R-4
1. Single Dwelling Unit p p p p p
2. Duplex Dwelling Units p p
3. Multiple Dwelling Units (Low rise) p p
4. Accessory Buildings and Structures p p p p p
5. Cemetaries & Mausoleums s s s s s
6. Ceramics (See schools) s s s s s
7. Churches & Religious Institutions s s s s s
8. Clubs & Lodges (Non-profit) s s s s s
9. Colleges & Dormitories s s s s s
10. Co=unity Center Buildings s s s s s
11. Co=unity Garages (No Trucks over 3/4 ton) s s s s s
12. Essential Structures, Facilities and Institutions p p p p p
(Not service yards or offices)
13. Family Day Care Home s s s s s
14. Farms: Livestoek/poultry (Section 811) p p p
15. Farms: Agriculture p p p p p
16. Fire Station s s s s s
17. Gas Station c c c c c
18. Golf Course p
19. Group Care Home s s s s s
20. Home Occupation p p p p p
21. Intermediate Care Facility s s s s s
22. Library s s s s s
23. Mass Transit Stations & Right of Ways p p p p p
24. Mineral Removal c c c c c
25. Municipal Buildings p p p p ·p
*Any residential use not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.1 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S = Special Exception
6-1-1
Table 4: Residential Districts-Permitted Uses
Page2of2
USE* DISTRICT
0 R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3 R-4
26. Municipal Caretaker's Residence s c c c c
27. Personal Care Boarding Home for Adults s s s s
28. Planned Residential Development (PRD) c c c c
29. Public Charitable Institution s s s s
30. Public Parks, Playgrounds & Other Recreation p p p p
31. Schools: Public and Private (Profit Schools) s s s s
32. Signs (Article 823) p p p p
33. Skilled Nursing Facility s s s s
*Any residential use not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.1 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-1-2
c
s
c
s
p
s
p
s
more of the uses hereinafter set forth as permitted in
the district in which such building, structure or land is
located, or set forth as permissible by special permit in
said district and so authorized.
Any use which is noxious, offensive or detrimental to the
neighborhood by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke,
vibrations, waste or noise shall not be permitted.
602 USE REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
602.1
602.2
602.3
602.4
Uses Permitted by Right:
Uses permitted by Right shall be permitted as indicated
in Article 6, Table 5 - "Commercial and Industrial
Districts: Permitted Uses" of this ordinance.
Applications for zoning approval for such uses which meet
all applicable district requirements may be approved by
the zoning officer without additional considerations by
any other agency of the municipality.
Conditional Uses:
Conditional Uses may be permitted as indicated in
Article 6, Table 5 - "Commercial and Industrial
Districts: Permitted Uses" of this ordinance subject to
criteria and procedures listed in Article 8 and Article 9
of this ordinance. Approval shall be granted or denied
by the Board of commissioners upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission. In approving applications for
Conditional Uses, the Board of Commissioners may attach
such additional requirements and stipulations as are
considered necessary for proper placement of the use on
the site.
Special Exceptions:
Uses by Special Exception shall be those indicated in
Article 6, Table 5 - "Commercial and Industrial", of this
ordinance. Uses by Special Exception may be permitted
subject to the criteria and procedures listed in Articles
8 and 9 of tbis ordinance and shall be subject to the
approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Prohibited Uses:
Except as provided in Article 7, Non-Conforming Uses, no
building or structure shall be constructed, and no
building, structure or land or part thereof shall be used
for any purpose or in any manner other than for one or
more of the uses hereinafter set forth as permitted in
the district in which such building, structure or land is
located, or set forth as permissible by special permit in
said district and so authorized.
Any use which is noxious, offensive or detrimental to the
neighborhood by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke,
vibrations, waste or noise shall not be permitted.
6-2
Table 5:
C01\1MERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
1. Single Dwelling Unit
2. Duplex Dwelling Units
3. Multiple Dwelling Units (Low rise) p p p p
4. High Rise Multiple Dwelling Units c c c
5. High Rise Office Units c c c c c
6. Agencies: Real Estate, Insurance &Travel p p p p p
7. Amusement Enterprises: Non-retail s s p p
8. Amusement Enterprises: Permanent c c p p
9. Animal or Waste Reduction, Incineration p
or Processing (including pumps and fill)
10. Art & Antique Shops p p p
11. Assembly of Appliances & Prepared p p p p p
Parts
12. Automobile Sales Area s s
13. Automobile Reconditioning & Repair p p p
14. Automobile, Truck, Airplane p
Assembling and Remodeling
15. Bakery: Commercial or wholesale p p p p p
16. Bakery: Retail p p p p
17. Banks & Other Financial Iiistitutions p p p p
18. Barber and Beauty Shop p p p p p
19. Book or Stationery Store p p p
20. Bottling Works s s p p s
21. Brewery & Distillery p
22. Building Materials: Non-retail p p
23. Building Materials: Sales yard & p p s p
Storage
•Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-1
Table 5: CommerciaVIndustrial Districts-Permitted Uses
Page2 of6
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2
24. Canvas Products: Fabrication & Sales p p
25. Carpenter or Woodworking Shop p p
26. Carpet Cleaning Establishments p p
27. Casting: Light, non-ferrous metals s s
28. Cemetaries & Mausoleums p p p p
29. Chemical Manufacturing & Storage s s
30. Child Day Care Centers & Child Group p p p
Day Care
31. Churches & Religious Institutions p l' p ~
32 Clubs and Lodges (Non-profit) p p s
33. Clubs and Lodges (Profit) p p s
34. Colleges & Dormitories p p p p
35. Commercial Boarding Home s s s
36. Community Center Buildings p p p p
37. Community Garages (No trucks over p p p
3/4 ton)
38. Crematory (Except in cemetary)
39. Custom Tail or, Dressmaker, Milliner p p p
40. Department, Shoe & Clothing Stores p p
41. Drugstore, Dry Goods or Notion Store p p p p
42. Ename~ Japanning, Lacquering,
Galvanizing & Plating of Metals
&Plastics
43. Entertainment: Transient p p
44. Essential Structures, Facilities & p p p p
Institutions
45. Farm: Livestock/Poultry (Section 8.18) p p p p
40. Farm: Agriculture p p p p
47. ·Fat Rendering
48. Feed Store, Seed Store, Lawn and p p p
Garden Shop
49. Felt Manufacture
PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p p p
p p p
p p
s s p
p p
p
p
p
p
p
s s p
s
p
p
p
"Ally commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-2
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted Uses
Page 3 of 6
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2
50. Fertilizer Manufacture
51. Fire Station p p p p
52. Flea Market s s
53. Florist p p p p
54. Food Stores p p p p
55. Food Processing: Retail (on premises) p p
56. Food Processing: Wholesale (Excluding
meat, fish, vinegar, yeast & fat)
57. Freight Classification Yard !' !'
58. Funeral Parlor p p p
59. Furniture, Interior & Upholstery Shops p p
60. Gas Manufacturing or Storage, Coke s s
Ovens
61. Gasoline Stations c c c c
62. . Glass Fabrication and Installation p p
63. Glass Manufacturing
64. Glue and Size Manufacturing
65. Golf Courses p p p p
66. Gymnasium or Health Spa p p s
67. Hardware, Electrical Appliances & p p
Music Store
68. Hotel or Motel p !'
69. Ice Manufacturing & Storage p p
70. Intermediate Care Facility s s s
71. Jewelry Store & Repairing p p
72. Laboratories: Research p p
73. Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Agency p p p p
74. Laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Plant p p
75. Library p p p p
76. Machine Shop: Stamping Press, s s
Plumbing and Blacksmith Shop
PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p
p p
p
p p
s s p
l'
p
p
I._, I._, I._,
p p
p
p
p
p
::;
s p p
p
s s p
p p
p p p
p
*Any commercial or industriai activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-3
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses
Page 4 of 6
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2
77. Machine Shop: Non-forge, non-foundry
78. Manufacturing & Assembly from s s
prepared materials
79. Manufacturing: Brick, Tile, Terra Cotta, s s
Cement Block, Cast Stone
80. Manufacturiog: China, Pottery
& Porcelain
81. Manufacturiog: Fire Arms
82. Mass Transit Stations & Right of Ways p p p p
83. Massage Parlor (Ord. 481) s s
84. Meat Processiog (Excluding
slaughteriog, curiog & smokiog)
85. Metal Fabrication, Light p p
86. Metal Fabrication, Heavy
87. Mioeral Removal c c c c
88. Mobile Home Park p p
89. Mobile Home Sales Lot s s
90. Municipal Buildings p p p p
91. Offices: Busioess & Professional p p p
92. Optical, Scientific & Jewelry s s
Manufacturiog
93. Paint Stores, Sign Paintiog Shops p p
94. Pawnshop, Second Hand Store, p p
Auction Store
95. Personal Care Boardiog Home s s s
for Adults
%. Petroleum products & fuel
manufacturing and storage
97. Photographic Services, Supplies & p p p
Equipment
98. Prioting, Industrial: Wallpaper, etc. 1:' p
99. Printing, Publishing & Reproduction p p
Establishments
100. Public Charitable Institutions p l' p .I'
PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p p
p p p
1:' 1:'
l' y
p
s
p p
p p p
p
c c c
p p
p p p
p
1:' :s
p
1:' l' l'
p p p
•Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-4
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted Uses
Page 5 of6
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2
101. Public clinic, medical clinic p p
102. Public Garages, Bus and Taxi Service, p p
Parking Lot
103. Public Utilities: Maintenance garage p p
and service area
104. Public Parks, Playgrounds & Other l' l' l' l'
Recreation
105. Pulp, Paper, Cardboard and Building
Board Manufacturing
106. Quarry, rock crusher (See mining Ord.)
107. Radio and Television Stations and s s
Masts
108. 'Restaurant, Tavern, Cafe (Includes p p p
entertainment and liquor)
109. Sand and Gravel Pit (No crushing or
clay extraction) See mining ordinance
110. Saw Mill, Planing Mill
111. Schools: Public & Private p p p p
112. Shoe Repair Shop p p p
113. Signs (Article 8) p p p p
114. Shopping Center (3 Acres +) c c c
115. Skilled Nursing Facility s s s
116. Slaughter House, Abattoirs, Stock
Yards
117. Stone and Monument Works
118. Storage, Sorting, Baling and Processing
Gunk, wood, glass & paper)
119. Swimming Pool (Commercial Use) p .I:'
120. Synthetics and Plastics Manufacturing
121. Tanning, Curing or Storing Hides
122. Tourist Courts and Homes p p
123. Truck Terminals, Storage & Parking p p
124. Veterinary Hospitals, Kennels, Bird p p
Store & Taxidermist
PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p
p
s s
p
p
p p s
p
.I:'
p
p p
p p p
c
p
p
p
p
p
p p
p
*Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-5
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted Uses
Page 6 of 6
USE* DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2
125. Wearing Apparel: Fabrication & s s
processing
126. Wholesale Distribution Plants p p
127. Wholesale Business, Storage Building, p p
Warehouses & Mini Warehouse
128. Wool Pulling or Scouring;
manufacturing of shoddy
129. Wool or Bone Distillation
130. Yards for Storage and Repair
PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p p p
s :s p
p p p
p
p
p
•Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration under a Special
Exception.
C =Conditional Use P =Use by Right S =Special Exception
6-2-6
ARTICLE 7
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS
STRUCTURES AND USES
701 statement of Purpose
702 Registration of Non-Conforming Uses
703 Non-Conforming Lots of Record
704 Non-Conforming Structures of Record
705 Non-Conforming Use of structures or Land
706 Repairs and Maintenance of Non-Conforming Buildings
701 INTENT AND PURPOSE
Within the districts established by this ordinance or due to
amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots,
structures and uses of land which were lawful before this
ordinance was passed or amended but which would be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under terms of this ordinance or
future amendment.
701.1
701. 2
rt is the intent of this ordinance to permit these
non-conformities to continue until they are removed but
not to encourage their survival. Such uses are
declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is
further the intent of this ordinance that
non-conformities may not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended nor be used as grounds for adding signs,
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance
shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction has been diligently carried on.
Actual construction is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner, except that where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction provided that work shall be diligently
carried to completion of the building involved.
7-1
702 REGISTRATION OF NON-CONFORMING USES
All non-conforming uses shall be registered with the Zoning
Officer.
703 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
In any district in which single family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this ordinance, a single family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot
of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance.
703.1
703.2
such a lot must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the district,
provided that yard dimensions and other requirements
not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. Variation of area, width and yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for by Article 9,
Section 910.
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and
portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and
area as established by this ordinance, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel
and shall not be used or sold, nor shall any divisions
of the parcel be made which leave remaining any lot
with width or area below the requirement stated in this
ordinance.
704 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES OF RECORD
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be
built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot,
such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
7-2
704.1
704.2
704.3
No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way
which increases its non conformity except when the
Zoning Hearing Board may determine undue hardship and
may authorize a reasonable modification of such
structure.
In the event of damage or destruction, 100 percent or
less than the replacement cost of the structure,
repairs and reconstruction may be undertaken provided
such restoration is started within twelve (12) months
of the date of damage. Upon completion of repairs, the
building must continue with its original use.
Should such structure be moved for any reason for and
distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located
after it is moved.
705 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR LAND
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and or land in
combination or separately exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the
lawful use may be continued, subject to Section 704 and the
following provisions:
705.l
705.2
705.3
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by
this ordinance in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in
the district in which it is located.
Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any
parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the time of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
If no structural alterations are made, any
non-conforming use of a structure, and premises, may be
changed to another non-conforming use provided that the
Zoning Hearing Board either by general rule or by
making findings in the specific case, shall find that
the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing
non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the
Zoning Hearing Board may require appropriate conditions
and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this
ordinance.
7-3
705.4
705.5
705.6
Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in
or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a
permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district in which such structure is
located, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
When a non-conforming use of a structure or structure
and land in combination, or separately, is discontinued
or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months or for
eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period,
the structure or structure and premises in combination,
shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure
and land in combination, or separately, the destruction
of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming
status of the land.
706 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming
use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing,
to an extent not exceeding ten (10%) per cent of the
current replacement value of the building, provided that the
cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting the public safety, upon order of such
official.
7-4
801
802
803
804
805
806
807
808
809
810
811
812
813
814
815
ARTICLE 8
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Accessory Uses, Buildings
and structures
Amusement Centers
Attached Multi Family
Dwelling Regulations
Boats
Canopies
Condominiums
Day care
Essential Services Height
Exception for Structures
Exotic Animals
Exterior Wall Surfaces
Farms and Livestock
Floodplain Regulations
Group Residence and Group
Care Facilities
Home Occupations
Location of Deposits of
Fluid or Solid Waste
Material
816
817
818
819
820
821
822
823
824
825
826
827
828
829
Massage Business
Mineral and Topsoil Removal
Mobile Homes
Off-street Loading
Regulations
Off-street Parking
Regulations
Rear Dwelling Regulations
Rear Lot Subdivisions
Sign and Billboard
Regulations
Smoke Detectors
Subdivisions
Swimming Pools
Township Caretaker
Residence
Transient Business and Sale
of Goods from Parked Trucks
Unit Group Development
Standards
801 ACCESSORY USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
801.1
801.2
801. 3
801. 4
No accessory building, accessory structure or accessory
use shall be allowed on any residential lot prior to the
time of construction of the principal use to which it is
an accessory. Where temporary tool housing is necessary,
written permits must be obtained from the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning Officer.
No accessory building or use shall be permitted in the
required front or side yard setback area of any
residential district.
No accessory building, structure or use that exceeds ten
(10) feet in height shall be permitted in the required
rear yard of any residential district except for antennas
by Special Exception.
No accessory shed of less than one hundred {100) square
feet or less in area shall require a building permit and
such accessory shed may be located five (5) feet from the
side setback. Only one shed is permitted per lot.
8-1
801. 5 No accessory building, structure or use shall be placed
in the required rear yard within a ten (lo) feet setback
from the property line of any residential district. On
corner lots in a residential district the front yard
setback shall be maintained for all accessory uses on the
street side of a lot.
802 AMUSEMENT CENTERS
802.1
802.2
802.3
802.4
Location:
1. Alllusement games machines shall be located at least
1,500 feet from school building or property, and
church buildings or property.
2. Furthermore, Amusement games complexes shall be at
least 1,500 feet from each other.
Rest Room Facilities:
All establishments and places where amusement games
machines are located shall provide rest room facilities
for the patrons.
Space:
Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as
to allow its use without overcrowding.
1. A minimum width of 2 feet shall be provided per
machine where the machine is designed for use by one
player, and 3 1/2 ft. where the machine is designed
for use by two players.
2. The depth of space in front of the machine shall be
at least 5 ft. and there shall be a minimum aisle
width beyond this 5 ft. of an additional 3 ft.
3. Fire Underwriters Code requirements shall also be
complied with as applicable.
Exemptions:
Private clubs and lodges shall be exempted from all of
the above requirements of Section 802.
803 ATTACHED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING REGULATIONS
The regulations set forth in this section qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations
elsewhere in this ordinance.
803.1 When more than one multiple-family dwelling building is
erected upon a single lot or tract, the minimum distances
between main buildings shall be the following:
1. Front to Front - seventy (70) feet. Front to rear -
sixty (60) feet.
8-2
803.2
803.3
2. Side to side - twenty (20) feet.
3. Front to side - thirty (30) feet. Rear to side -
thirty (30) feet.
4. Rear to rear - fifty (50) feet.
Where multi-family attached dwelling units are designed
to face upon an open or common access court rather than
upon a public street, this open court shall meet the
following minimum width requirements:
1. Court width - (no parking) - 22 feet.
2. Court width - (parking one side) - 42 feet.
3. Court width - (parking two sides) -62 feet.
Where a multiple-family attached unit building is erected
with the intent that the attached units are to be sold as
separate dwelling units, the following regulations shall
apply:
1. The number of dwelling units per acre shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of the zoning
district in which the perspective development shall
occur.
2. The following height, area, yard and bulk
regulations shall apply to the individual attached
dwelling units which are intended to be sold. Each
dwelling unit shall have as a minimum the following
requirements:
(1) Lot area - a minimum of 2,000 sq. ft. per
dwelling unit.
(2) Lot width at building line - a minimum of
sixteen (16) feet.
(3) Front yard setback - as per the applicable
zoning district.
(4) Rear yard setback - as per the applicable
zoning district.
(5) Height - As per the applicable zoning district.
(6) Lot coverage - as per the applicable zoning
district.
(7) A minimum two (2) parking spaces shall be
required for each unit. When an attached
dwelling unit contains an integral garage, this
may be considered as one parking space toward
the requirement of two per dwelling unit.
(8) A minimum common open space area of twenty (20)
feet depth shall be required to be placed along
the side of the end lots and along the rear of
all lots where individual units in a multiplefamily
building are intended to be sold. The
8-3
purpose of this twenty (20) feet common open
space is to provide access to the rear yards of
the lots intended to be sold. This twenty (20)
foot common open space area shall not be part
of the area of any lot and shall be in addition
to any rear yard requirements.
(9) Where multi-family attached dwelling unit lots
are designed to face upon an open or common
access court, the front setback line or
building line shall be measured from the edge
of the common access court. The front setback
line or building line shall meet the
requirements of the zoning district where the
development is located.
804 BOATS
All recreational type vehicles shall be parked off public
rights-of-way and streets. On site parking must be provided
by the owner of the vehicles.
805 CANOPIES
A canopy shall be permitted in any Commercial District 1
(C-1), Limited Commercial District 1-A (C-lA) and Neighborhood
Business District(C) so long as compliance is made with the
provisions set forth herein.
805.1
805.2
805.3
805.4
805.5
805.6
The maximum encroachment into the required front yard
area or the required building setback line shall be 15
feet.
The minimum height between the bottom edge of the canopy
and the ground surface shall be 10 feet. If a concrete
pad is constructed under the canopy, the height
requirement shall be measured from the top of the
concrete pad.
No canopy shall be enclosed.
No structure, sign or building extension shall be
constructed above the canopy.
No signs or ornamental decorations shall be hung on the
canopy so as to protrude into the 10 foot minimum height
area required.
Furthermore, even if the above requirements are met, no
canopy shall be permitted where the Zoning Officer,
Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing Board, whoever is
the reviewing agency, determines that the erection of a
8-4
805.7
canopy shall be detrimental to public safety relating to
visibility for one or more of the following reasons.
1. Clear sight triangles violations.
2. Topographic conditions.
3. Adjacent structure alignment conditions.
4. Vehicle cartway alignment conditions.
5. Parking space requirement violations.
Freestanding Canopies:
1. The maximum setback from the property line to the
nearest overhanging edge of a freestanding canopy
shall be fifteen (15) feet.
2. The minimum height between the bottom edge of the
canopy and the ground surface shall be 14 feet. If
a concrete pad is constructed under the canopy, the
height requirement shall be measured from the top of
the concrete pad.
806 CONDOMINIUMS
806.1
806.2
A condominium ownership arrangement for a residential
building is allowed in any district designated as a
Residential District and allowing apartments or
townhouses.
1. Any proposed condominium whether to be created by
new construction or by the conversion of an existing
construction shall first be reviewed and recommended
to the Board of Commissioners by the Planning
Commission, and approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
2. condominiums must also comply with all zoning and
building codes that apply to the proposed structure.
Condominium plans and proposals must include in addition
to other applicable requirements:
1. A reference to the unit property act and an
expression of the intention and procedure to be used
to comply with the unit property act.
2. A description of the land and the proposed building.
3. The name by which the property will be known.
4. The statement by which the common elements and the
living units will be governed in the plan.
8-5
806.3
5. A description of the common elements including wash
areas, common or individual recreation areas and
divided or individual interests that are assigned to
each unit of the condominium. Where percentages of a
common element are divided among the units, the
final tally shall equal 100% and no part of common
area shall be left unaccounted for.
6. A statement that the individual interests of the
condominium are owned proportionately by the
occupants and that alterations of the individual
interests must be by the recording of an amendment
to the condominium charter and duly executed by 3/4
owners affected by the amendment. Such an amendment
shall also be sent to the North Huntingdon Township
Board of Commissioners for approval or denial.
7. Where the amendment violates the original intent and
rules in the condominium charter, the Board of
Commissioners may deny the requested alteration or
amendment.
8. A statement of the purposes or use for which each
unit is intended and the restrictions, penalties and
methods of enforcement of the rules governing the
intended uses.
9. The names and addresses of the condominium governing
council members. This roster or list must be kept
current and all changes must be reported to the
North Huntingdon Township Planning Agency within a
period of thirty (30) days.
10. Any further details in connection with the property
which the party or parties executing the declaration
may deem appropriate and consistent with the
subdivision codes of North Huntingdon Township. In
addition, any other details or information that the
Board of Commissioners or the Planning Commission
may require to properly review the proposal and to
assure the public's health, welfare, safety and
property rights are protected.
Approval of a condominium Proposal:
1.. Upon a declaration of recommended approval by the
Planning Commission, the plans and proposal will be
forwarded to the Board of Commissioners. Such a
declaration shall include the recommendation for
approval or denial, the time in which the Board of
Commissioners shall act on the proposal and the
necessary advertising to the public plus any
required open hearings.
8-6
806.4
806.5
2. After the Board of Commissioners has approved or
denied the proposal, duly certified copies shall be
distributed as follows:
The
1.
(1) One (1) copy to the applicant.'
(2) One (1) copy to the Recorder of Deeds where the
proposal is approved.
(3) One (1) copy to the Westmoreland County
Planning Commission.
(4) one (1) copy to the Township files.
(5) One (1) copy to the Planning Agency.
Plan Declaration must include:
Submit four (4) copies of the proposal to the
Planning Director or Zoning Officer for registration
and distribution.
2. The declaration shall show the property, the
location, the location of the proposed building or
buildings, the layout of the floors and the layout
of the common elements, the name of the property as
it shall be known upon completion, the unit
designations and a statement from a licensed
engineer declaring that the plans fully and
accurately set forth the foregoing conditions.
The Code of regulations for the condominium shall
include:
1. At least four (4) copies of the codes shall be
submitted to the Planning Director or the Zoning
Officer for registration and distribution.
2. Identification of the property by reference to the
place and address.
3. The method of calling meetings of the condominium
owners and council.
4. The number of unit owners and the council which
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
5. The number and names of members of the council, the
duration of the term of council members and the
method of filling any vacancies.
6. The duties of each officer, the compensation and the
method of removal of such officers.
7. Trash, refuse and garbage removal from the units and
the units snow removal from the common elements,
police protection and security of the common
elements, provision of the other services to the
units and other elements. Methods of maintenance
8-7
806.6
806.7
and repair and the method of replacement of common
elements or dwelling units, payment of costs of the
foregoing; all must be included in the registration
of the condominium and must be forwarded to the
Planning Agency of North Huntingdon Township in a
language assuring that all the foregoing will be
promptly attended to and that the local or state
government has no responsibility for the foregoing
services.
8. The manner of collecting common expenses from the
unit owners, which shall include a provision to the
effect that all local government fines, penalties,
and assessments against individual units or common
elements may be imposed and liened directly against
the various unit owners or common elements without
reference to any duties or functions of the council.
9. The method of adopting and amending the code of
regulations. Rules governing the operation of the
property and use of the common elements and the
requirement that the code and all amendments must be
approved by the Board of Commissioners to become
effective.
10. Any other provisions that the Board of Commissioners
may require to assure the health, welfare and safety
of the public.
11. The requirement that the Township Secretary and the
Planning Agency receive immediate notification of
any change in unit ownership, change in council
members and the change of mailing address of any
members of the council.
Code Approval:
After the code of regulations has been approved by the
Board of Commissioners, the copies duly certified by the
Township Secretary shall be distributed to:
1. The applicant for distribution to unit owners.
2. The Township files.
3. The Planning Agency.
Where existing structures are to.be converted to a
condominium, the following shall apply:
1. Whenever a multiple family dwelling structure which
is designed for and occupied as a residency by two
(2) or more persons living independent of each other
is intended for conversion by the owner or owners
into a condominium, the occupants of such dwellings
shall be notified of such proposed conversion and
shall not be required to vacate his dwelling until
the expiration of his lease.
8-8
806.8
2. All provision restrictions and benefits as applied
to newly constructed condominiums as set forth in
this condominium ordinance shall apply to converted
condominiums.
Fees and costs of condominiums:
1. The fees and cost of condominium applications shall
be consistent with those of subdivision requests.
2. Condominium filing procedures shall follow the same
procedure and shall be identified by the
nomenclature as the subdivision applications, that
being:
(1) Sketch plan.
(2) Tentative approval
(3) Final Approval.
807 DAY CARE
All care facilities shall comply with the following:
807.1
807.2
807.3
807.4
807.5
807.6
807.7
Said facility must be located on an arterial or collector
street.
said facility must protect residential areas against the
hazards of fire, offensive noise, traffic, or vibration,
smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
Said facility shall be permitted or denied operation only
after inspection by the North Huntingdon Township Zoning
Officer.
When said facility is one in which care givers reside, a
minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces are
required, regardless of other conflicting regulations.
Said facility must operate in compliance with all
applicable regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and have a registration certificate from the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, as well as
complying with any applicable regulations of Westmoreland
County and North Huntingdon Township.
Said facility must provide a minimum on-site outdoor play
area of sixty-five {65) square feet per child which shall
be fenced and leveled.
If located on a street where parking is restricted, said
facility shall have safe access to an off-street area for
discharging and picking up of persons to whom the service
is rendered.
8-9
807.8 Types:
1. Day care centers.
2. Group day care home.
3. Family day care home.
4. Foster care home.
808 ESSENTIAL SERVICES HEIGHT EXCEPTION FOR STRUCTURES
808.1
808.2
808.3
The height requirements for structures related to
Essential Services of the district wherein the use is
located may be exceeded when the necessity has been
demonstrated and when the following conditions are met:
no structure shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in
height.
When in an "R" District, for every two (2) feet above the
height limit, every portion of the structure be set back
one (1) foot from lot lines with bordering or opposite
properties. · ·
Fences and/or enclosures shall be erected to ensure the
safety of the facility.
809 EXOTIC ANIMALS
Exotic animals such as lions, tigers, bears, et cetera, shall
not be permitted in any residential district.
810 EXTERIOR WALL SURFACES
810.1 Exterior Wall surface in Residential Areas:
1. No building shall be erected in a PRD District or in
R-1, R-lA, R-2,R-3, and R-4 that has any part of its
exterior wall surfaces, except rear, composed of
concrete block or cinder block. Exterior surfaces
of buildings in these districts shall be composed of
the following materials.
Approved Materials:
(1) Brick
(2) Stone
(3) Wood
(4) Stucco
(5) Steel Siding
{6) Aluminum Siding
(7) Vinyl Siding
{8) Glass
8-10
810.2
810.3
2. When an applicant applies for a Zoning Certificate,
the Zoning Officer shall review the approved list of
materials to determine if the applicants proposed
exterior wall surface is on the approved list of
materials for that district. If it is and all other
ordinance requirements are complied with, he shall
issue the Zoning Certificate.
3. If the exterior surface requested is not on the
approved list, the applicant may request a Special
Exception from the Zoning Hearing Board for the
proposed exterior surface. All materials on the
approved list and any other subsequent proposed
material must meet the appropriate building code
requirements that are in effect at the time of the
application.
Exterior Wall Surfaces in Commercial, Industrial, PEDD 1
and PEDD 2 Districts
1. No building shall be erected in Districts c, Cl,
C-lA, C-II, PEDD 1 and PEDD 2 that has any part of
its exterior wall surfaces composed of any material
except those listed as approved materials:
Approved Materials:
(1) Brick
(2) stone
(3) Wood
(4) Stucco
(5) Steel Siding
(6) Aluminum Siding
(7) Vinyl Siding
(8) Glass
(9) Decorative Block
2. If the exterior wall surface requested is not on the
approved list, the applicant may request a Special
Exception for the proposed exterior surface. This
must be accomplished before any other approval
procedures are commenced.
Special Exception Criteria for Exterior Wall Surface:
For approval of a material other than those previously
listed, the requested exterior wall surface must meet the
following criteria:
1. The material must be shown to meet the appropriate
building codes that are in effect at that time.
2. The requested exterior surface must be compatible
with the surrounding exterior surfaces in the area
where it is to be located, so as not to be
detrimental to the surrounding property values.
8-11
3. standard concrete block may be approved as a special
exception in any district on walls that shall not at
any time be viewable to passersby or any part of the
general public and in a manner so as not to
jeopardize the general welfare and character of the
adjacent properties. If the Planning Commission
determines that standard concrete block will present
a deleterious effect on adjacent properties by
virtue of the intrinsic nature of concrete block,
then the Planning commission may recommend a
substitute material which is substantially similar,
but will be effectually compatible to the immediate
vicinity. Materials which will be considered as
acceptable shall be:
(1) Concrete shadow block.
(2) Concrete grid or scored block.
(3) Concrete split faced ribbed block.
(4) Concrete split faced block.
(5) Utility brick.
811 FARMS AND LIVESTOCK
811.1
811.2
811.3
Area
R-2
R-3
R-4
Requirements:
20 acres
15 Acres
10 Acres
Any housing or feeding structures shall be centrally
located and in all cases shall be located a minimum of
250 ft. from property lines.
Recreational Horses by Special Exception:
Recreational horses shall be permitted in all zoning
districts by Special Exception and shall meet the
following criteria:
1. Three (3) acres per one (1) horse, each additional
horse must have one (1) acre.
2. The maximum number of horses allowed shall be five
(5), as finally determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board based on the amount and type of land available
and the location of the property in relationship to
adjoining land uses. However, the Zoning Hearing
Board may reduce the maximum number of horses
permitted as above stated if all the acreage
involved is not usable, that is, topographical and
similar factors such as water supplies and similar
factors, and as such as may be determined with
relationship to the health, safety and welfare of
the adjoining land uses and the residents affected
thereby.
8-12
3. A buffer zone around the property shall be set by
the Zoning Hearing Board as needed.
4. Any housing or feeding structure or structures shall
be centrally located and in all cases have a minimum
distance of 75 feet from the nearest property line.
812 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
All development and use of land and structures in floodplain
districts shall comply with the North Huntingdon Township
Floodplain Ordinance No. 507 as amended.
813 GROUP RESIDENCE AND GROUP CARE FACILITIES
813.1
813.2
813.3
813.4
Group residence and group care facilities, including
commercial boarding homes, intermediate care facilities,
skilled nursing facilities, and personal care boarding
homes for adults, shall comply with the provisions of
this section and with all applicable state and county
regulations.
All required information, including documentation of
licensing approval in the form of a letter of
registration, shall be submitted with the application for
Zoning Hearing Board approval of Special Exception. Upon
approval of the Zoning Hearing Board, the license must be
presented before any occupancy permit can be issued.
Parking Spaces:
No parking space may access directly onto a public road.
All parking space stalls must be laid out so as to be
entered from a parking access aisle.
Personal care Boarding Home and Commercial Boarding Home:
The following general criteria shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Hearing Board for any special exception request
referenced in this section.
1. Is it necessary for the public convenience at that
location?
2. Is it so designated, located and proposed to be
operated that the public's health, safety and
welfare will be protected?
3. Will it cause any substantial injury to the value of
other property in the neighborhood in which it is
located?
4. All requests must point out why a special exception
is needed for the property or building in question.
8-13
813.5 The following specific criteria shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Hearing Board as it pertains to each of the
following special exception classifications listed on
Table 6, Group Care and Group Residence Standards and
Criteria.
1. Classification A: Skilled nursing facility and/or
intermediate care facility.
2. Classification B: Personal care boarding home.
3. Classification C: Commercial boarding home.
8-14
co
,.I_ ..
Ln
lll!tltl!illflllllL,lllfllli1111fill411Jrn
SPECIFIC CRITERIA
Zoning District Permitted
by Special Exception
Minimum Lot Area
Parking Requirements
(Section 820)
Building Setbacks
Sign Requirements
(Section 823)
Architectural
Requirements
CLASSIFICATION "A"
Skilled Nursing and/or
Intermediate Care Facility
ALL RESIDENTIAL &
COMMERCIAL ZONES
None
As Per Section 820.5 -
"Hospitals". Parking space
locations to be compatible with
area.
As per Commercial districts.
Buffers required.
Commercial regulations will
apply (Section 823.4).
Must be compatible with
adjacent residential structures.
CLASSIFICATION "B"
Personal Care Boarding
Home
ALL RESIDENTIAL &
COMMERCIAL ZONES
1 acre
As per Section 820.5 -
"Hospitals".
As per zoning district
where site is located.
(Buffer required in
residential zones).
In Residential districts
Section 823.2 will apply.
Commercial districts -
Section 823 .4 will apply.
Must be compatible with
adjacent residential
structures.
CLASSIFICATION "C"
Commercial Boarding
Home
ALL COMMERCIAL
ZONES
7,500 square feet
As per Section 820.5.
As per Commercial
districts. Buffers required.
Commercial regulations
will apply (Section 823.4 ).
SPECIFIC CRITERIA CLASSIFICATION "A" CLASSIFICATION "B" CLASSIFICATION "G"
Landscaping Requirements In Commercial areas a In Commercial areas a In Commercial areas a
landscaped outside sitting area landscaped outside sitting landscaped outside sitting
must be provided. area must be provided. area must be provided.
Public Water Service Required Required Required
Public Sewage Service Required Required Required
Location of similar No closer than 1,500 ft. in No closer than 1,000 ft.
facilities of the same Residential districts.
classification
Site Plan Submission Required Required if new construe- Required if new construe-
CXl (Section 914) tion or major alteration.. tion or major alteration. I
r"'
°' Permitted number of Not specified The appropriate zoning Not specified
occupants district dwelling unit
density/acre multiplied by
Additional information three (3).
required:
a. Name of owner Required Required Required
b. Address of owner Required Required Required
c. Number of beds Required Required Required
d. Number of staff Required Required Not required
e. Other information As determined by Zoning As determined by Zoning As determined by Zoning
Hearing Board. Hearing Board. Hearing Board.
Licensing approval Letter of registration from Letter of registration from None required
documentation Department of Health. Department of Health.
814 HOME OCCUPATIONS
814.1
814.2
814.3
814.4
All home occupations shall require a permit.
Any service oriented occupation generally and regularly
classified as a home occupation shall be determined on a
case by case basis with a consideration of all
circumstances and facts prevailing at the time by the
Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township.
Home occupations shall include the office of a physician,
dentist, clergyman, or other professional person,
including musicians, writers, teachers giving
instruction, dressmaker, ceramics, milliner, seamstress,
insurance, real estate, beauty shop, barber shop and
professional services, and where skilled services are
offered to clients by one not professionally engaged in
the purchase, sale or storage of retail goods.
1. such occupation shall be carried on wholly within
the principal building and no person outside the
family shall be employed.
2. There shall be no exterior storage of materials and
no other exterior indication of the home occupation
or variation from the residential character of the
principal building.
The following standards and contingencies shall prevail:
1. No on-street parking.
2. One sign - One (1) square foot for identification
only, in addition to any state and federally
required license signs.
3. No lighted sign
4. No noise and no neighborhood disturbances created by
the home occupation.
5. No more than two (2) students at one time.
6. No commodities shall be sold that are not the result
of the residents' handiwork.
7. No more than one (1) home occupation shall be
permitted in a dwelling unit.
In the event that a determination cannot be made by the
Zoning Officer, a Special Exception shall be required
from the Zoning Hearing Board. All home occupations
shall require an occupancy permit.
8-17
815 LOCATION OF DEPOSITS OF FLUID OR SOLID WASTE MATERIAL
Solid and fluid waste materials including but not limited to
solid and liquid waste materials resulting from mining,
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential
activities shall be deposited only in an industrial zoned
area.
816 MASSAGE BUSINESS
816.1
816.2
816.3
816.4
Business permit required:
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of
massage unless he has a valid massage business permit
issued by the Township of North Huntingdon pursuant to
the provisions of Ordinance No. 481 for each and every
separate off ice or place of business conducted by such
person.
In the case of applications for massage business permits,
the Zoning Officer shall cause to be conducted an
investigation of the premises where the massage business
is to be carried on, for the purposes of assuring that
such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements
as set forth in the Ordinance No. 481 and with the
regulations of public health, safety, morals and welfare.
Masseur's permit required:
No person shall practice massage as a masseur, employee
or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting
masseur's permit issued to him by the Township of North
Huntingdon pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No.
481.
Fee:
The permit fee for a massage business shall be one
hundred ($100.00) dollars per year or any part thereof.
The permit fee for masseurs shall be twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars.
817 MINERAL AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL
The removal of top soil and minerals shall be in accordance
with the following provisions.
817.1 Permit Required:
Notwithstanding the prior granting of permission no
person shall remove from the Township of North Huntingdon
any top soil or in place mineral, whether by deep or
surface mining, without first obtaining from the Zoning
Officer a written permit, therefore issued upon the order
of the Township as hereinafter provided.
8-18
817.2
817.3
Application Procedure:
The application shall follow the procedure for the
issuance of a conditional use permit as provided for in
Article 9, Section 906 and in Act 247, "The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code", as amended.
The
1.
application shall consist of the following materials:
A letter to the North Huntingdon Township Board of
Commissioners requesting a Conditional Use, and
specifying:
(1) The type of mining activity proposed.
(2) The approximate area where the mine is to be
located.
(3) The type of mineral which is expected to be
extracted and,
(4) The name of the person, persons, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity who will be
responsible for the mining activity.
2. Maps, diagrams or other documents:
(1) A location map prepared by a registered
professional engineer showing:
(a) The total acreage to be excavated.
(b) The boundaries of the land to be affected
by the mining operation.
(c) Boundaries of adjoining lands owned by
persons other than the applicant and the
existing uses of these adjoining lands.
(d) The location of all watercourses, bodies
of water, public rights-of-way, public
buildings, public recreation areas or
other public property within 250 feet of
the boundaries of the land to be affected
by the mining operation.
(e) A transportation plan showing the roads to
be utilized for access to and hauling from
the mining operation.
(2) A site development plan for the area to be
affected by the mining operation prepared by a
registered professional engineer showing:
(a) The legal boundaries of the land to be
affected by the mining operation.
(b) The present topography of the land with
contour intervals of ten (10) feet shown.
(c) The location of all watercourses, bodies
of water, roads which would be encompassed
within the boundaries of the land to be
affected by the mining operation.
(d) The location of:
a. Storage sites for overburden.
b. Access and haulage roads to be
constructed.
c. Storage sites for equipment.
8-19
d. Offices, structures or other
appurtenances to be used in
conjunction with the mining operation.
e. The location of any storm water
management facilities.
f. A cross section showing the nature and
depth of the various strata of
overburden above and between mineral
seams to be excavated.
g. The location and quality of
underground water to be present on the
site.
h. The location of known aquifers and the
estimated elevation of the water
table.
(3) A detailed land reclamation plan of the area
included within the permit, showing:
(a) Proposed use or uses of the land following
the mining operation.
(b) Proposed topography of the land following
the mining operation indicated by contour
lines of an interval of ten (10) feet.
(c) Actions to be taken during mining to
conserve and replace topsoil removed
during mining operations.
(d) The sedimentation and erosion control plan
for the operation including the type of
vegetation to be planted for soil
stabilization purposes.
(e) Proposed location of future roads, private
or public rights-of-way, drainage courses
and other improvements.
(4) A written summary addressing the following
points:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and
the source of the applicants right to
remove mineral deposit and whether
applicant is an owner, lessee, licensee or
permittee. In all cases, the consent of
the owner fully acknowledged, or a
memorandum of the contract with the owner
roust be attached.
(b) The purpose of the proposed mineral
removal and the estimated amount of the
mineral to be removed.
(c) The depth to which such removal is to be
occasioned.
(d) A detailed description of the manner in
which the material will be removed and
processed.
(e) An evaluation prepared by a qualified
geotechnical engineer or a hydro-geologist
of the probable impact of the mining
operation upon the community water supply.
8-20
817.4
(f) An estimate of water runoff from the area
to be affected by the mining operation
including methods of calculations.
(g) An analysis of the potential noise and air
pollution generated from the operation.
(h) Reasonable assurances that the applicant
will be capable of reclaiming the land in
accordance with the plan within a
reasonable time after completion of the
mining operation to be covered by the
required permit.
(i) A list of proposed public utilities to
serve the operation including method of
sewage and rubbish disposal.
(j) A list of all permits which will be
required before operation commences
including but not limited to, all mining
permits, sewer line extension permits and
water obstruction permits.
(k) A timetable showing:
1. Estimated time needed to obtain the
necessary permits.
2. Estimated date for start of
operations.
3. Estimated date for completion of the
mining operation.
4. Estimated time and completion date for
reclamation of the affected area.
(l) Any and all other safeguards to be taken
for protection of the general public and
the citizens of the Township in
particular.
(m) Any information the applicant feels the
municipality should have in evaluating the
proposed application.
(5) The application fee of $200 per year or any
part thereof.
Hearing:
l. Upon receipt of the application as outlined in
Section 817.3 by the Township Secretary, the
Township Secretary shall forward to the Board of
Commissioners the application, but the official
receipt date of the application will be the date of
the next regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners, which said regular meeting date will
be the official filing date of the application.
2. The Board of Commissioners shall set a public
hearing date to commence within sixty (60) days from
the date of filing of the application.
8-21
817.5
3. Before voting on the application the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing pursuant
to public notice and the Board of Commissioners
shall submit the application to the Planning
Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing on the proposed application to provide the
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
4. Within thirty (30) days following the public
hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall vote on
the proposed application.
5. Within fifteen (15) days after the decision of the
Board of Commissioners, the decision will be
communicated to the applicant in writing, at the
applicants last known address, along with any
conditions which may be attached to the decision by
the Board of Commissioners.
6. The applicant has the right of appeal from the
decision of the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with Article 10 of Act 2tr7 of Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, entitled
"Appeals".
Conditions for Approval:
Use of land for mineral removal shall be permitted as a
conditional use in any Zoning District, provided that the
applicant can show by sufficient substantial evidence
that the mining operation:
1. Will not occur within 100 feet of the outside
right-of-way lines of any public road except where
mine access roads or haulage roads join the
right-of-way line.
2. Will not occur within 100 feet of a stream, river,
lake or water impoundment which is part of a public
or agricultural supply source.
3. Will not occur within 300 feet of any public park,
public building or other public institution, places
having unique historic or patriotic interest or
value, unless the owner of the site has consented
thereto.
4. Within 300 fer"t from any occupied dwelling, unless
the consent of the owner of the dwelling has been
obtained in advance of the filing.
5. Will not substantially injure or detract from the
lawful existing or permitted uses of neighboring
properties.
8-22
817.6
6. Will not injure any public, private, residential, or
agricultural water supply source.
7. Will not affect any public land or land used for a
public purpose.
8. Will not adversely affect the logical, efficient and
economical extension of the public services and
facilities throughout the municipality.
9. Will serve the best interests of the municipality,
the convenience of the community and the public
welfare.
10. Will result in the land area subject to the
application being placed into a condition which
will allow the use of that land for economically and
ecologically productive uses of the type permitted
in the zoning district or districts in which that
land is located upon completion of the mining
operation.
11. Will not result in the quality of surface waters
becoming negatively impacted.
12. Will not result in the public roads becoming
economically burdensome to the party having
maintenance responsibility.
13. Will not result in the area affected becoming an
aesthetic blight on the surrounding property.
14. Will meet such reasonable conditions and safeguards
as the Board of Commissioners may require to protect
the public health, safety and welfare in accordance
with the spirit and purpose of the zoning ordinance,
including but not limited to, setback requirements,
buffer zones, provisions for adequate access to the
mine site and the routing and hours of operation of
trucks and other vehicles serving the mine operation
through the municipality, and the minimizing of
noxious, offensive and hazardous conditions
resulting from the existence and operation of the
mine.
Bond:
1. The applicant must submit to the Board of
Commissioners of the Township, a Bond in an
acceptable form, either cash, or with corporate
surety, conditioned upon the faithful compliance
with the provisions contained herein. Any failure
to comply with bonding requirements
8-23
817.7
817.8
shall cause any permit so issued and obtained to
become null and void.
2. The Bond required in 817.6.1 above shall be used by
the Township to pay for the repair of any damage to
its roads caused by the operation of the trucks with
transport mined materials directly originating from
the mining operation of the permit holder.
3. The Township shall determine the cost of such
damage. It may use the following factors, and other
factors found appropriate under the circumstances.
(a) The cost per mile per year of repairs to the
roads over which the trucks of the permit
holder have traveled as compared to the average
cost per mile per year of township road
repairs.
(b) Historical cost of maintenance before use by
permit holder's trucks as compared with costs
after the trucks have traveled the road.
(c) Condition of road prior to beginning of
transport activity.
(d) Extent of traffic not attributable to permit
holder compared with the extent of the truck
traffic of the permit holder.
(e) Cost of clearing mined material which has
fallen as debris along the road.
4. If several permit holders use the same road, the
Township shall adjust the amount to be contributed
from each in accordance with a comparison of the
total tonnage carried by each permit holder.
5. The Township shall determine when such road repairs
are needed.
6. The Township shall return the unused portion of the
Bond to the permit holder when the mined material
directly originating from the permit holder's
operation ceases to be carried on municipal roads.
7. No permit under this ordinance shall be used for
more than one mining operation.
· Insurance:
The applicant shall provide to the Zoning Officer before
the issuance of a permit evidence of Public Liability
Insurance with a copy authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the amount of $300.000
each person, $500.000 each occurrence and $300.000
property damage.
Payments:
The applicant shall pay to the Township such sums as
fixed herein, but in any event not less than Twenty-five
Cents ($.25 per ton) for all minerals or other materials
8-24
817.9
817.10
817.11
817. 12
removed as a result of this operation under such permit.
Every thirty (30) days after the mining operation
commences, payment shall be made to the Township. The
final payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after
the completion of the mining operation and verification
of tonnage removed shall be by the identical copy of the
monthly report, furnished to the Department of
Environmental Resources or any other or subsequent
applicable governmental agency either of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or the government of the United States of
America.
Regulations:
Any and all regulations which pertain to mining
operations or to any accessory uses, whether Federal,
state or local must be complied with fully.
Reports:
1. Whether or not operations have commenced, the person
to whom such permit is issued shall furnish monthly
certifications by a registered land surveyor or
registered professional engineer duly licensed by
the state of the quantities of materials removed or
deposited or, if none has been removed, or
deposited, a certification to that effect and that
there shall be attached to such certification a
sketch showing the progress of the operations and
any deviation from the terms of such permit. Such
report and certification shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer of the Township.
2. The Township at any time may inspect the area from
which material is being deposited.
Final Payment:
The final payment under Section 8, hereunder shall be
accompanied by a certificate by a registered land
surveyor or registered professional engineer duly
licensed by the State of the amount of material removed
and that the removal operation has been in compliance
with the provisions of this ordinance and the conditions
imposed by the resolution directing the issuance of the
permit. In computing the amount of material removed, the
Township Board of Commissioners may in its discretion,
accept a certification of the amount of material
deposited or stored as a result of such removal
operations as the equivalent of the amount removed.
Standards:
All operations under a permit issued pursuant to this
ordinance shall be done in such a manner that the removal
and/or deposition of material and the redepositing and
storage, thereof, will neither weaken, nor deprive of
support other lands in the vicinity, nor otherwise
8-25
817.13
817.14
817.15
817.16
adversely affect the watercourses and wetlands of the
Township and the lands abutting, nor unless the permit
issued pursuant thereto shall expressly provide
otherwise, substantially change the course of any channel
or the nature movement of flow of ariy waters or cause of
acceleration to the drift of soil, shale, mud, or bog,
upland or underwater, nor adversely affect fish,
shellfish, wildlife, or other natural resources.
Completion:
Upon completion of the operations authorized hereunder,
the person to whom the permit has been issued shall
submit to the Township Board of Commissioners a
certificate from a registered land surveyor or registered
professional engineer duly licensed by the State that the
work has been completed in accordance with this ordinance
and with the requirements of the Township of North
Huntingdon directing the issuance of the permit. A
survey and topographical and hydrographical map shall
show the depth of the slopes from which the material has
been removed and/or on which it has been deposited and
the slopes from which the material has been removed
and/or on which it has been deposited connecting with
adjoining lands. The horizontal control of said survey
shall be based on the approved coordinate system. The
vertical control for elevations and soundings shall be
based on United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
Upon final completion and recognition of same by the
Township of North Huntingdon, any and all securities
posted with the Township will be released.
Suspension-Revocation of Permit:
If any person to whom a permit shall have been issued
hereunder shall fail at any time to comply with the
provisions of this ordinance or with the conditions
imposed by the Township of North Huntingdon directing the
issuance of such permit, he shall, upon the direction of
the Township Zoning Officer immediately suspend all
operations under such permit for such a period as may be
prescribed by the Township Zoning Officer. Upon
direction of the Township Zoning Officer, such person
shall cease all operations and remove all equipment used.
Renewal:
Permits issued under authority of this ordinance shall be
valid for a maximum period of one (1) year and in the
event the applicant desires to continue operations beyond
that time, the applicant must request a renewal of his
permit for each succeeding one (1) year period, and pay
the cost of same.
Nullification of Permit:
In the event applicant does not begin operations within
ninety (90) days of issuance of the permit, the permit
8-26
817.17
shall be null and void and the applicant may not proceed
without a new permit.
Fine and Penalty:
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which
has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this zoning ordinance shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating the ordinance to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of Zoning
Ordinances shall be paid over to the Township.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant
an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per
diem fine pending a final adjudication of the
violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained above shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other
than the Township the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
818 MOBILE HOMES
818.1
818.2
818.3
Mobile home parks shall be permitted only in Commercial I
areas.
Double wide mobile homes and modulars on permanent
foundations shall be permitted.
Mobile Homes, double wide mobile homes and modulars shall
be considered as single family dwellngs for building
permit purposes.
8-27
819 OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS
819.1
819.2
819.3
Off-street loading berths accessory to uses allowed in
Residential, Business or Industrial Districts shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth
hereinafter as well as in Section 4.5.
General Provisions:
1. Location - All required loading berths shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the use served.
2. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) ton
capacity shall be closer than 30 feet to any
property in a residential district unless completely
enclosed by building walls or a uniformly painted
wall or fence, or any combination thereof, not less
than five (5) feet in height.
3. No permitted or required loading space shall be
located within 30 feet of the nearest point of
intersection of any two (2) streets.
4. No loading or unloading of automobiles, trucks, or
other material shall be carried out on public
streets. Sales lots and other commercial or
industrial establishments shall provide proper
loading and unloading zones. Where unusual delivery
problems require temporary use of the public rightof-
way, the Zoning Officer shall be notified and
safety measures carried out.
5. Size:
Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth
shall be at least 25 feet in length by at least ten
(10) feet in width, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.
6. Off-street loading and unloading space(s) shall not
be constructed between the street right-of-way line
and the building setback line.
7. No truck shall be allowed to stand in:
(a) a right-of-way;
(b) automobile parking area (including aisles) ;
(c) in any way block the effective flow of persons
or vehicles. ·
Vehicular Access:
Each required off-street loading space shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in
a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements.
8-28
819.4
819.5
819.6
819.7
Surfacing:
All drives and loading berths shall be surfaced with a
bituminous or other dust-free surface.
Repair and Service:
No motor vehicle repair work or service shall be
permitted in conjunction with loading spaces.
Space allocated to off-street loading shall not be used
to satisfy the space requirements for off-street parking.
Quantity:
Loading berths adequate in number and size, shall be
provided as determined by the Planning Commission.
1. At least one (1) off-street loading space shall be
provided for all commercial or industrial concerns
in excess of 3,500 square feet of floor area.
2. The number of loading and unloading spaces shall be
left to the discretion of the developer; however,
the standards of this section shall be maintained
and the number of proposed spaces approved by the
Planning Commission.
820 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
820.l
820.2
Off-street parking spaces for private passenger
automobiles and accessories to those uses allowed in
Residential, Commercial or Industrial Districts shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in
this ordinance.
The
1.
following standards shall apply to all districts:
· Vehicles in all districts shall be parked or stored
only in designated parking or driveway areas. In no
event shall vehicles be parked on grassy or open
areas not designed for parking or storage of such
vehicles.
2. General Standards:
Off-street parking space(s) with a proper and safe
access shall be provided within a structure or in
the open to serve adequately the uses on each lot
within the district.
3. Computation:
When determination of off-street parking results in
a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
shall be counted as one parking space.
8-29
4. size:
A required off-street parking space shall be at
least nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet in
length, exclusive of drives, aisles, or ramps.
5. Access:
Each required off-street parking space in Commercial
and Industrial shall open directly upon an aisle or
drive of such design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to a street in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements. No driveway across public property or
curb shall exceed a width of twenty-five (25) feet.
6. Surfacing:
All open off-street parking spaces, except a single
parking space accessory to a one-family dwelling,
shall be improved with a bituminous or other
dust-free surface.
7. Lighting:
All parking areas in Business and Industrial
Districts shall be suitably illuminated for night
use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street
parking areas shall be directed away from property
in a residential district. All luminaires shall
have a total cutoff angle no greater than 90 degrees
from the vertical.
8. One Ton Commercial Vehicles:
No commercial vehicles larger than one ton shall be
parked in a residential area. Heavy trucks such as
but not limited to tractors, tractor trailers,
highlifts, and similar vehicles, shall not be parked
in residential districts except where they are being
used as part of a construction project on a
temporary basis.
9. Screening and Landscaping:
(a) All Commercial or Industrial automobile parking
areas containing more than five (5) parking
spaces shall be effectively screened in on any
side adjoining or abutting any residential or
institutional premises including but not
limited to public school grounds, homes for the
elderly, churches, etc. such screening may be
a fence, wall or a densely planted evergreen
buffer.
(b) Any evergreen buffer must be a minimum of three
(3) feet high when planted. Maintenance of
hedges and screening shall be the responsibility
of the property owner on which the
screening is planted.
8-30
820.3
820.4
(c) Any screening may be placed in the required
setback and may be considered as part of the
required setback.
(d) Screening plantings shall not be less than ten
(10) feet thick and shall be planted such as to
prevent access to the adjoining property.
Residential Standards:
1. Residential districts may provide off-street parking
in any yard except the front yard, excluding that
part of the front yard used as driveways or garage
access routes.
2. For single-family and two-family structures, the
required parking spaces shall be designed as an
enclosed garage (either totally enclosed or a
carport) and shall have a paved or dust-free
surfaced tlriveway from street or alley to the
parking space.
3. Additional paved parking space may be provided in
the front yard provided the street access does not
exceed the 25 feet as set forth by this and other
ordinances and provided that such parking does not
limit the visibility of the access route.
Commercial, PEDD, and Industrial standards:
1. All parking areas in business and industrial
districts shall be suitably illuminated for night
use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street
parking areas shall be directed away from property
in a residential district.
2. All parking spaces required in a C-1 District shall
be located within 300 feet walking distance of a
main entrance to the use served.
3. In a C-1 District, off-street parking may be located
in any yard provided proper residential abutment
considerations as provided in (820.2.9), "Screening
and Landscaping" are met.
4. Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by
painted lines or markers.
5. Stalls shall be provided with bumper guards or wheel
stops when necessary for safety or protection to
adjacent structures or landscaped areas.
6. Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing
or proposed drainage system.
7. All vehicular entrances and exits to parking areas
shall be clearly designated for all conditions.
8-31
820.5
8. Short-term visitor parking spaces shall be
differentiated from long-term employee spaces by
suitable markings.
9. Additional Parking: Additional parking spaces may
be granted as a Special Exception for Commercial or
Industrial areas where the distance and suitable
walkway between the principal use and the parking
spaces are deemed acceptable by the Zoning Hearing
Board. Acceptable shall be interpreted to mean safe
passage for pedestrians and passing motorists.
Zoning of the parking areas to be granted a Special
Exception must conform to the requirements of the
North Huntingdon Township zoning ordinance.
Minimum Requirements:
Required off-street parking space(s) for new
construction., enlargement or change in use, shall conform
to the following minimums:
Residential Uses
Minimum Parking
Spaces per
Dwelling Unit
Single-family residence
Two-family or duplex structure
Multi-family structure (more
than two (2) units per structure
Commercial and Industrial Uses
Amusement Centers.
Automobile laundry
Automobile service stations
8-32
.2 per dwelling unit
.2 per dwelling unit
.2.33 spaces per
dwelling unit (in
garden apartment
areas, parlcing for
service vehicles
shall also be provided
in required
front yards).
At Least One (1) off-street
Parking Space for Each:
50 sq. ft. floor area.
Sufficient space to handle
45 min. of capacity of the
maximum hourly operation of
auto washing facility.
Two (2) employees.
Commercial and Industrial Uses
Automobile sale yards
Banks, business or
offices and public
buildings . . . .
professional
administration
Colleges and universities . . . . . .
Commercial boarding home . . .
Convention halls, dance halls,
skating rinks, sports arenas,
auditoriums and gymnasiums . .
Medical and dental offices
and clinics . . . . . . .
Manufacturing, assembling or
processing and warehouses
At Least One (1) off-street
Parking Space for Each:
Two (2) employees and one
(1) additional space for
every 1,000 square feet of
sale area or'fraction
thereof.
200 sq. ft. of net floor
area exclusive of the area
used for storage, utilities
and building service areas.
Three (3) employees and one
(1) parking space for each
ten (10) students based on
the maximum number of
students attending classes
on the premises at any one
time.
Bed
Four (4) seats or parking
spaces equal to 25% of the
capacity in persons.
Two (2) employees plus four
(4) spaces per doctor.
Two (2) persons employed on
the largest shift.
Motel (or hotel) ........... Separate sleeping unit in
addition to five (5) visitor
parking spaces per 100 units
or fraction thereof; and one
(1) space for each employee.
(Additional parking for
related uses shall be
provided in accordance with
the requirements of those
uses.)
8-33
Commercial and Industrial Uses
Personal service establishment
At Least One (1) off-street
Parking Space for Each:
100 sq. ft. of customer
service area in addition to
one (1) for each employee.
Private clubs and lodges . . . . . . . Two (2) lodging rooms, plus
parking spaces equal in
number to 25% of the
capacity in persons.
Private recreation facilities
Production processing, etc.
Recreation buildings, or
community centers - nonprofit
Retail stores
Restaurants, bars or other
eating establishments
1.5 members.
Two (2) employees (largest
shift) or 900 sq. ft. gross
floor area.
Three (3) employees plus
adequate spaces as
determined by the Planning
Commission
150 sq. ft. gross floor area
3 seats or one (1) for each
50 sq. ft. of patron floor
area, whichever is greater.
Schools. . • . . . . • . . . . . . . . Fifteen ( 15) students in
elementary schools, 10
classroom seats in other
schools or for each four (4)
seats of auditorium space
provided, whichever is
greater.
Theaters . . .
Trade schools
Other commercial uses
Other Uses, Including
Public and Semi-Public
Church, school, college and
other institutional auditoriums
Four (4) patron seats.
Two (2) employees plus one
space for each six (6)
students.
100 square feet of public
floor space.
At Least One (1) off-street
Parking Space for Each:
... Four (4) seats.
8-34
Other Uses, Including
Public and Semi-Public
At Least One (1) off-street
Parking Space for Each:
Fraternities, sororities, and
dormitories . . . . . . . . . Five (5) sleeping
accommodations.
Hospitals Three (3) hospital beds,
plus one (1) parking space
for each two (2) doctors
assigned to the staff, plus
one (1) parking space for
each employee on largest
shift.
Libraries, museums, etc. . . . . . . . 500 square feet of gross
floor area.
820.6 For other uses not covered herein, parking spaces shall
be provided as determined by the Planning Commission
basing the parking requirements on like use as listed
above. These uses shall include but shall not be limited
to the following:
Airports or Heliports.
Crematories and Mausoleums.
Government Operated Health Centers.
Outdoor amusement establishments, fair grounds,
permanent carnivals and other similar amusement
centers.
Penal or Correction Institutions.
Public Utility and Public Services Uses.
Rectories, Parish houses, Convents and Monasteries.
Swimming Pools.
821 REAR DWELLING REGULATIONS
821.1
821. 2
No building in the rear of a principal structure and on
the same lot not extending through a block from street to
street shall be used in whole or in part as a dwelling,
unless there is provided for such structures an
unobstructed deeded access at least twenty (20) feet wide
to a street and within lines of such easement shall be
constructed a gravelled or other paved way sufficient in
width and thickness to accommodate fire apparatus or
other emergency equipment.
Such building shall conform to all density district
requirements for a principal building and the rear line
of the required rear yard for the principal building in
front shall be considered the street lot line for the
building in the rear.
8-35
821. 3 Group dwellings and accessory buildings occupied by
employees on the premises for the purpose of residence
shall be granted by Special Exception Only.
822 REAR LOT SUBDIVISIONS
822.1
822.2
Rear Lot Subdivisions shall be permitted in all zoning
districts and shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
All Rear Lot Subdivisions shall conform to all density
and lot area requirements for the district in which they
are located. (See Appendix Cases 1 and 2 for
specifications) .
823 SIGN AND BILLBOARD REGULATIONS
The following signs are permitted in the following use
districts:
823.1
823.2
Permitted Signs in R-1, R-lA, R-2, R-3, and R-4
Districts:
In residential districts the following classes of signs
are permitted in accordance with the regulations set
forth in this ordinance. Where three (3) or more
continuous lots in common ownership are offered for sale
simultaneously an advertising sign not exceeding
32 square feet in area shall be permitted on the
properties for sale. Such a sign shall not be
constructed unless:
1. An application for a permit to erect such a sign is
applied for to the Zoning Officer of North
Huntingdon Township and the permit issued.
2. such a sign shall be removed not later than one (1)
year from the issuance of the sign permit unless the
sign permit is renewed by the property owner.
3. Failure to remove the sign as described above at the
end of the expiration of the sign permit shall
constitute a zoning violation and be subject to
zoning violation.
In residential districts designated as R-1, R-lA, R-2,
R-3 and R-4, the following non-flashing, non-illuminated
signs are permitted under the following conditions:
1. Name Plates and/or identification signs are subject
to the following:
(1) There shall be no more than one (l) name plate
not exceeding one (1) square foot in area for
each dwelling unit, indicating the name or
address of the occupant or a permitted
8-36
823.3
823.4
occupation, except that on a corner lot two (2)
such signs, one (1) facing each street shall be
permitted.
(2) For all other buildings, a single
identification sign not exceeding eight (8)
square feet in area and indicating only the
name and address of the building and the name
of the management thereof shall be displayed
except that on a corner lot such signs, one
facing each street shall be permitted.
(3) No sign shall project beyond the property line
into a public right-of-way.
(4) No sign shall project higher than ten (10) feet
above the level of the ground over which it is
located.
For Sale, For Rent signs shall be subject to the
following:
l. There shall not be more than one (1) such sign per
lot except that on a corner lot two (2) signs,
facing each street shall be permitted. No sign
shall be more than ten (10) square feet in area nor
be closer than ten (10) feet to any other zoning
lot.
2. No sign shall project beyond the property line into
a public right-of-way.
3. No sign shall project higher than ten (10) feet
above curb level.
4. Church Bulletins subject to the following:
(1) There shall not be more than one (1) sign per
lot except that on a corner lot two (2)
signs - one (1) facing each street shall be
permitted. No sign shall be more than fifteen
(15) square feet in area nor be closer than ten
(10) feet to any other zoning lot.
(2) No sign shall project beyond the property line
into a public right-of-way.
(3) No sign shall project higher than ten (10) feet
above ground level.
Signs Permitted in Commercial and Planned Economic
Development Districts
l. In all Commercial Districts, non-flashing and
flashing business signs are permitted subject to the
following:
(1) A permit from the Zoning Officer or his duly
authorized representative shall be required
before a business sign of any kind may be
erected, altered, or enlarged.
(2) All requests for erection, alteration or
enlargement of any business sign must be
accompanied by a plan drawn to scale, showing
the exact size, shape and dimensions of such
8-37
sign and its proposed location or placement
upon any structure or property.
(3) The surface area of all signs on one (1) zoning
lot shall not exceed one (1) times the lineal
front footage of the zoned lot.
(4) Where more than one business is located on a
zoned lot, stacking of signs will be
permitted. Total square footage of stacking
signs shall not exceed one (1) times the lineal
front footage of the zoned lot.
(5) For every permanent sign permit, the applicant
shall pay a fee of $20.00.
(6) Where a commercial lot is bounded by more than
one public street, and front yard setback
requirements are followed on all streets, then
the front footage shall be calculated from all
frontage when the front yard setback is
enforced.
(7) Only one (1) free standing sign per lot. The
surface area of any free standing sign shall
not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(8) Reader boards at a maximum of sixty (60) square
feet attached to the existing free standing
sign will be permitted in addition to items 1
and 2.
(9) No flashing sign facing a public street or
highway shall be illuminated or flashed to
simulate a traffic signal or a temporary
traffic hazard signal. In no case shall any
lighting project into streets or highways such
that a motorist or any person using the highway
or street may temporarily have the view of the
street or highway partially or wholly
obstructed.
(10) No sign shall project across the property line
into the public right-of-way.
(11) No sign shall project higher than thirty {30)
feet above level of the ground over which it is
located.
(12) Temporary signs or mobile signs shall be
permitted for new businesses without a
permanent sign, for a period of twelve (12)
months.
(13) Signs which make use of words such as "Stop",
"Look", "One-Way", "Danger", "Yield", or any
similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters in such a manner as to interfere
with, mislead, or confuse traffic are
prohibited.
(14) No projected business sign shall be placed to
face an abutting residential district except
when authorized as a special exception.
8-38
823.5
(15) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or
egress from a fire escape, door, window or
other required exitway is prohibited.
{16) Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a
hazard to public safety or health is
prohibited.
Permitted signs in an Industrial I District:
In an Industrial I District signs are permitted subject
to the following:
1. Signs on awnings shall be exempt from the
limitations imposed by this ordinance on the
projection of signs in Industrial Districts across
property lines into public right-of-ways, provided
that any sign located on an awning shall be affixed
flat to the surface thereof, shall be
non-illuminated and shall indicate only the name
and/or address of the establishment.
(1) The gross area in square feet of all signs on a
zoning lot shall not exceed one (1) times the
lineal feet of frontage of a zoning lot.
(2) In no case shall any lighting project into
streets or highways such that a motorist or any
person using the highway or street may
temporarily have the view of the street or
highway partially or wholly obstructed.
(3) No sign shall project across property lines
into the public right-of-way.
(4) No sign shall project higher than thirty (30)
feet above the level of the ground over which
it is located.
824 SMOKE DETECTORS
824.1
824.2
824.3
All newly constructed one {1) and two (2) family
dwellings shall be equipped with at least one (1) smoke
or combustion detector per dwelling unit.
In multi-family (more than two) dwellings, under
construction or existing, a minimum of one (1) smoke or
combustion product detector shall be installed in each
dwelling. Installation of detector sites shall be based
upon the most probable fire site with assured alarm
warning for the occupants.
Where new or existing buildings consisting of rented
rooms for transient customers or where accommodations for
people are rented on a non-transient basis such as
hotels, motels, major apartment houses, etc., a smoke or
combustion product detector shall be installed in
corridors, hallways, public areas, and storage areas.
8-39
824.4 Smoke or combustion product detectors shall mean any of
those devices which causes an alarm to be sounded when
smoke or other combustion products are detected. The
selection of power source either house current or battery
operated, shall be made by the home owner or the builder.
825 SUBDIVISIONS
All subdivisions must comply with the applicable zoning
regulations pertinent to the particular subdivision in
question and under consideration.
826 SWIMMING POOLS
826.1
826.2
Commercial Swimming Pools:
1. Commercial swimming pools shall be permitted in any
Commercial District other than Neighborhood
Business.
2. Commercial swimming pools shall provide sufficient
parking space for all users of the swimming pool.
The operator and/or owner of the swimming pool is
responsible for providing off-street public
parking.
3. All health and safety needs of any commercial pool
shall again be the responsibility of the operator
and/or the owner of the facilities.
4. Front yard, rear yard and side yard setback
requirements shall be those of a Commercial District
as set forth in Article 5, Sections 503.7, 503.B,
503.9 and 503.10 and in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of this
ordinance.
Private Swimming Pools:
Swimming Pools for non-commercial use of residents or
non-profit club members shall be permitted in all
Residential Districts with the following contingencies:
1. No swimming pools shall be located within the side
and rear yard setback lines. In no case shall a
residential district swimming pool be placed in the
front yard set-back area.
2. Where private clubs and/or multi-family swimming
pools are installed, they must be placed near the
club house or the buildings to be serviced and each
pool must be enclosed by a solid fence of a minimum
of six (6) feet in height to prevent the disturbance
of any adjacent residential property.
3. All swimming pool lights shall be directed toward
the pool and in no case shall the lighting be
8-40
directed on or toward any adjacent residential
housing.
4. Fencing not less than four (4) feet in height above
the underlying ground level and having a
self-closing, self-latching gate shall be installed
so as to completely enclose the pool area.
827 TOWNSHIP CARETAKER RESIDENCE
A structure such as a dwelling or mobile home may be located
in a township park for use as a permanent residence by an
individual and his family subject to the express conditions of
use:
827.1
827.2
827.3
827.4
827.5
The occupant shall be responsible for the supervision and
protection of park facilities in which the residence is
located.
The park shall exceed ten (10) acres in size.
The residence shall be located no nearer than two hundred
(200) feet from a park boundary line.
The residence shall be served by an on lot sewer service
or off site municipal sewer service.
The residence shall be suitably landscaped to minimize
its impact upon the park setting. A landscaping plan
shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission.
828 TRANSIENT BUSINESS AND SALE OF GOODS FROM PARKED TRUCKS
828.1
828.2
828.3
Sales of goods and merchandise from parked trucks shall
only be permitted along highways in Commercial Districts
as regulated by Ordinance No. 596, "Transient Retail
Business Ordinance" of the Township of North Huntingdon.
License Required:
No person shall engage in business as a transient
merchant unless the transient merchant agent shall first
have obtained a license to do so from the Zoning Officer
of the North Huntingdon Township.
Exemptions:
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
apply to:
1. Farmers selling their own produce;
2. To the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise,
donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof
8-41
are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose;
3. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of break
and bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk
and milk products.
829 UNIT GROUP DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
829.l
829.2
829.3
829.4
829.5
829.6
A pedestrian circulation system may be required in the
case of unit group developments dependent upon the
location of internal and external community facilities.
On-site security illumination shall be required in
parking areas, building entry ways, along paths of
pedestrian travel and recreation areas.
Buffering in the form of planting screens may be required
along property lines to eliminate adverse effects to or
from other use districts or uses.
Adequate recreation facilities designed to accommodate
the anticipated development population may be provided
concurrently with development, and recommends approval by
the Planning Commission and Township Board of
Commissioners.
A minimum of three (3) acres shall be required as the
minimum area for a unit group development.
A site plan submission as defined in Article 9, section
914 shall be required.
8-42
901
902
903
904
905
906
907
908
ARTICLE 9
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
statement of Purpose
Interpretative Clause
Board of Commissioners
Zoning Amendments or
Rezoning Requests
Curative Amendment
Conditional Uses
The Township Zoning
Officer
Building Permits and
Occupancy Permits
909
910
911
912
913
914
915
916
917
918
919
The Zoning Hearing Board
Variances
Special Exceptions
The Planning Director
The Planning Commission
site Plan Submission
Enforcement
Fees
Public Notice
Performance Zoning
Appeals
901 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The administration of the ordinance is hereby vested in the
following office in North Huntingdon Township.
a. Board of Commissioners
b. Zoning Officer
c. Planning Commission
d. Zoning Hearing Board.
e. Planning Dir'ector.
902 INTERPRETATIVE CLAUSE
Where the provisions of any other ordinance heretofore passed
by the North Huntingdon Township Board of commissioners are
inconsistent with this ordinance, they are hereby replaced and
superseded by this ordinance.
903 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
All legislative functions of this ordinance such as amendments,
hiring of personnel (except as provided for in Pennsylvnia
Act 247 or its amendments) appointment of the Planning
Commission, appointment of the Zoning Hearing Board, assignment
of monies to finance the necessary action of the Zoning
Officer shall be vested in the North Huntingdon Township
Board of Commissioners.
904 ZONING AMENDMENTS OR REZONING REQUESTS
904.1 The Township Board of Commissioners may from time to time
amend, add to, change, or repeal in its entirety this
Zoning Ordinance. In order to process any of the
foregoing actions, the Board of Commissioners must by
9-1
904.2
904.3
904.4
resolution at a legally held meeting set the time and
place of the meeting at which passage will be considered,
a reference to a place within the municipality where
copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not
greater than the cost thereof. The governing body shall
publish the proposed circulation in the municipality not
more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or
the title and a brief summary, prepared by the municipal
solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
1. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at the time
the public notice is published.
2. An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be
filed in the county law library or other county
office designated by the county commissioners, who
may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to
cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
3. In the event substantial amendments are made in the
proposed ordinance or amendment, before voting upon
enactment the governing body shall, at least ten
days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one
newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments.
All areas to be rezoned or to be changed or modified by
any zoning amendment shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the hearing. All posting shall be
placed such that any adjacent properties within 200 feet
of the zoning change shall be aware of the public
hearing.
Amendments shall include rezoning requests.
Procedure for rezoning requests, PEDD 1 & PEDD 2 requests
and amendments other than those proposed by the Planning
Commission:
l. Upon receipt of the application for rezoning or
amendment, the Township Secretary shall forward to
the Board of Commissioners the application, but the
official receipt date of the application will be the
date of the next regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners, which said regular meeting date will
be the official filing date of the application.
9-2
904.5
2. The Board of Commissioners shall set a public
hearing date to commence within sixty (60) days from
the date of filing of the application.
3. Before voting on the application the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing pursuant
to public notice and the Board of Commissioners
shall submit the application to the Westmoreland
County Department of Planning and to the North
Huntingdon Planning Commission at least thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing on the proposed
application to provide the county and the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
4. Within forty-five (45) days following the public
hearing, the Board of commissioners shall render a
decision on the proposed application.
5. Within fifteen (15) days after the decision of the
Board of Commissioners, the decision will be
communicated to the applicant in writing, at the
applicants last known address, along with any
conditions which may be attached to the decision by
the Board of Commissioners.
6. The applicant has the right of appeal from the
decision of the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with Article 10 of Act #247 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, entitled
"Appeals".
Amendments proposed by the Planning Commission:
1. Amendments shall be sent to the Board of
Commissioners.
2. The Board of Commissioners shall commence a public
hearing within sixty (60) days.
3. The Board of Commissioners shall submit the proposed
amendment to the Westmoreland County Department of
Planning for review at least thirty (30) days prior
to the public hearing.
4. Within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing
the Board of Commissioners shall take action on the
proposed amendment.
9-3
905 CURATIVE AMENDMENT
905.1
905.2
905.3
905.4
Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments:
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of a zoning ordinance or map or any
provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use
or development of land in which he has an interest may
submit a curative amendment to the governing body with a
written request that his challenge and proposed amendment
be heard and decided as provided in Act 247 as amended.
The Board of Commissioners shall commence a public
hearing pursuant to public notice within sixty (60) days
of the date the application was received.
The Board of Commissioners shall submit the request to
the Planning Commission for recommendations, at least
thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date.
The Board of Commissioners, upon determining that a
validity challenge has merit, may accept a landowner's
curative amendment which will cure the challenged
defects. The commissioners shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by
the landowner and shall also consider:
1. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewe·r
facilities, water supplies, schools and other public
service facilities;
2. If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact
of the proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing
units of a type actually available to and affordable
by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded
by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or
map;
3. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use
proposed by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands,
wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources
and other features;
4. The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural
resources and natural features, the degree to which
these are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of
the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
9-4
905.5
905.6
905.7
5. The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential
to public health and welfare.
The landowner's request for a curative Amendment is
denied when:
1. The Board of Commissioners notifies the landowners
that it will not adopt the amendment.
2. The Board of Commissioners adopt another amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner.
3. The Board of Commissioners fails to act on the
landowners request in which event the denial is
deemed to have occurred on the thirtieth (30) day
after the close of the last hearing on the request
unless the time is extended by mutual consent
between the landowner and the municipality.
If the township does not accept a landowner's curative
amendment and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not
result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire
zoning ordinance and map, but only for those provisions
which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
amendment and challenge.
Procedure for Municipal Curative Amendments:
1. If North Huntingdon Township determines that its
zoning ordinance or any portion thereof is
substantially invalid, it shall declare by formal
action, its zoning ordinance or portions thereof
substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity.
2. Within 30 days following such declaration and
proposal, the governing body of the municipality
shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting
forth the declared invalidity of the zoning
ordinance which may include:
(a) references to specific uses which are
either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity;
(b) reference to a class of use or uses which
require revision or
(c) ref<orence to the entire ordinance which
requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative
amendment to the zoning ordinance to correct
the declared invalidity.
9-5
3. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal,
the municipality shall enact a curative amendment to validate,
or reaffirm the validity of, its zoning ordinance pursuant to
the provisions of Act 247 in order to cure the declared
invalidity of the zoning ordinance.
906 CONDITIONAL USES
906.1
906.2
906.3
The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to
approve conditional uses when this ordinance specifically
requires the obtaining of such approval and for no other
use or purpose.
In granting or denying a conditional use, the Board of
Commissioners shall make findings of fact consistent with
the provisions of this ordinance. The Commissioners
shall not approve a conditional use except in conformance
with the conditions and standards outlined in this
ordinance.
General Requirements and Standards:
The Commissioners shall grant a conditional use only if
it finds adequate evidence that any proposed development
will meet all of the following general requirements as
well as any specific requirements and standards listed
herein for the proposed use. The Commissioners shall,
among other things, require that any proposed use and
location be:
1. In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the
statement of community objectives and is consistent
with the spirit, purposes, and the intent of this
ordinance;
2. In the best interests of the municipality, the
convenience of the community, the public welfare,
and be a substantial improvement to the property in
the immediate vicinity;
3. Suitable for the property in question, and designed,
constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be in
harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the
existing or intended character of the general
vicinity;
4. In conformance with all applicable requirements of
this ordinance and all municipal ordinances;
5. Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and
safety with adequate access arrangements to protect
streets from undue congestion and hazard; and
6. In accordance with sound standards of subdivision
and land development practice where applicable.
9-6
906.4
906.5
906.6
The Board of Commissioners may impose whatever reasonable
conditions it deems necessary to insure that any proposed
development will secure substantially the objectives in
this ordinance.
Review by the Planning commission:
The Commissioners shall request an advisory opinion from
the Planning commission on any application for a
conditional use; the Planning Commission shall submit a
report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of the
public hearing held by the governing body on an
application.
Conditional use applications shall be governed by the
following:
1. The landowner shall make a written request to the
Board of Commissioners that it hold a hearing on his
application. The request shall contain a statement
reasonably informing the governing body of the
matters that are in issue.
2. The application shall be accompanied by plans and
other material describing the use or development
proposed. Such plans and other materials shall
provide a sufficient basis for evaluating the
applicant's request. Information required by
provisions of Article 8 of this ordinance and of
Article 9, Section 914, "Site Plan Submission",
shall accompany the application.
3. Upon the request of the applicant, the Commissioners
shall hold a hearing in compliance with Act 247 as
amended, pursuant to public notice, commencing not
later than 60 days after the request is filed,
unless the applicant requests or consents in writing
to an extension of time.
4. The applicant for any hearing on a conditional use
request before the Commissioners shall at the time
of making application, pay a fee in accordance with
a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners or such schedule as may be amended
from time to time.
9-7
907 THE TOWNSHIP ZONING OFFICER
For the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, a Zoning
Officer shall not hold any elective office in the municipality
and shall be appointed. The Zoning Officer shall administrate
the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with its literal terms and
shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use
or change of use that does not conform to the Zoning
Ordinance.
907.1
907.2
907.3
907.4
907.5
907.6
907.7
907.8
907.9
The Zoning Officer shall issue all Building Permits and
shall maintain and keep records of all permits issued.
The Zoning Officer shall issue all land and building use
permits and shall maintain and keep records of all such
permits issued.
The Zoning Officer shall maintain and keep current the
Zoning Ordinance of North Huntingdon Township. This will
include all zoning maps, all Special Exceptions, all
Variances, Non-Conforming uses, appeals and applications
for appeals and copies of all hearings and decisions
concerning the zoning of North Huntingdon Township.
The Zoning Officer shall provide and maintain all public
information relative to all matters arising from this
ordinance.
Receive and maintain a list of all non-conforming use
buildings, structures and land areas.
Receive, file and forward to the zoning Hearing Board all
applications for appeals, variances, special exceptions
and all other requests for action by the Zoning Hearing
Board which are provided for in this ordinance or by
Pennsylvania Act 247, or its amendments.
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all Zoning Ordinances of North Huntingdon
Township.
The Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township shall
receive all fees which are payable under this ordinance
and shall remit these fees to the Township Treasurer.
All appeals from the actions of the North Huntingdon
Township Zoning Officer shall be taken in the manner
prescribed in Pennsylvania Act 247 as amended.
9-8
908 BUILDING PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS
908.1
908.2
908.3
908.4
Before the erection, alteration, or enlargement of any
building or structure in a Residen.tial, commercial,
Industrial, or Planned Economic Development district is
undertaken, a building permit shall be applied for and
issued by the Zoning Officer. Remodeling or improvement
of existing buildings which does not alter the basic
structure, create additional lot area coverage or change
the use of the parcel or building is exempt from this
specific requirement provided the estimated cost of such
activities does not exceed 50% of the fair market value.
An application for a building permit in a Residential,
Commercial, or Industrial district shall be accompanied
by the following information and no application shall
have been deemed to have been received until all this
information shall have been submitted and is in a form
and content satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
1. A plot plan which shall show the lot, the location
of all present and proposed buildings, streets,
alleys, highways, streams and land features within
the lot.
2. Architectural plans for any building, which shall be
in conformity with the provision of the building
codes of North Huntingdon Township.
3. Any other data, evidence or statements that may
assist the Zoning Officer in determining the
compliance of the proposed building or structure or
land use with the provisions of this ordinance and
any other building codes of North Huntingdon
Township. The Zoning Officer may require any
reasonable number of duplicates to complete the
various files and for presentation to the Board of
Commissioners as needed.
Once the Zoning Officer is assured that the permit
request is complete, he shall stamp the request and note
on the application the official application date which
shall be used for future hearings and starting dates.
The applicant will be made aware of the official filing
date which shall be written and stamped approval or
denial of the permit request. Where further action is
needed, the official application filing date shall
determine all timing.
In all Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and Planned
Development Districts where there is a change in the use
or character of occupied or vacant land, or a change in
the use or character of occupancy in an existing
building, or where any new building is to be occupied
9-9
908.5
908.6
908.7
908.8
for any purpose, it is required that an occupancy permit
be applied for and issued by the Zoning Officer. An
occupancy permit shall be issued only if the request has
complied with all provisions of this ordinance.
Specifically, occupancy permits are required for the
following:
1. Occupancy of a new building.
2. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter moved or
altered so as to require a building permit.
3. Change in the use of an existing building or the
change in the use of a parcel of land.
4. Occupancy and use of vacant land.
Every application for a building permit in a Residential
area shall be deemed to be an application for an
occupancy permit. Every application for an occupancy
permit for a new or changed use of land in a Residential
district, and where no building permit is required, shall
be issued by the Zoning Officer if all requirements are
met.
No occupancy permit shall be issued until the erection,
construction or alteration of a building or structure or
land change has been completed, or the use established,
and inspected and approved by the Zoning Officer. No
building or premise shall be occupied until an occupancy
permit has been issued.
A building permit or occupancy permit in any zoning
district may be revoked or withdrawn by the Zoning
Officer if he finds that the holder of any issued
building permit or occupancy permit has failed to comply
with all conditions stated in the issued permit or the
Zoning Officer shall find that the occupancy of the
building or land use fails to comply with the
requirements of this ordinance, or if the holder of any
building, or occupancy permit has been found to have
falsely defined the proposed building, structure or land
use, or provided any other material misinformation in the
permit application.
All issued building permits shall be posted in such
manner that they are visible from the property line.
Permits shall be suitably protected such that they shall
not become illegible within the use time period of the
permit.
9-10
909.3
909.4
909.5
909.6
909.7
3. To hear and decide all appeals for variances to the
Zoning Ordinance pursuant to Section 910, such
variance shall not be contrary to the public
interest and the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance.
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Zoning
Hearing Board may, in conformity with the provisions of
this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partially or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirements, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end, shall have all the powers of
officer from whom the appeal is taken. Notice of such
decision shall be forwarded to all parties of interest.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the
validity of any land use ordinance or map except those
brought before the Board of Commissioners in compliance
with Act 247 as amended.
Upon filing of any proceedings before the Zoning Hearing
Board, a stay of proceedings shall be deemed to be in
effect where it is certified to the Zoning Hearing Board
that eminent peril to life or property would exist by the
stay of proceedings.
Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other
office in the municipality.
The North Huntingdon Township Zoning Hearing Board shall
set and publicly advertise the official date of its
monthly meetings and all hearings shall be held pursuant
to public notice publicly advertised in the local
official newspaper. Official monthly hearing dates shall
be set at the reorganization meeting or the first
official meeting of the fiscal year.
910 VARIANCES
910.1
910.2
The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant variances from the
regulations of this ordinance in conformity with the
powers granted to the Zoning Hearing Board under
Article 9, Section 909 of this ordinance. All variance
applications shall be decided such that they will be in
conformity with the general purpose of this ordinance and
follow standards and principles herein prescribed. All
practical difficulties or particular hardships shall be
decided in strict compliance with the regulations of this
ordinance.
Applications for a variance shall be filed with the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning Officer who shall forward a
copy of this application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
9-12
908.9 Zoning Certificates shall read as follows: "The granting
of this zoning certificate does not imply or suggest that
the Township of North Huntingdon bears any responsibility
whatsoever pertaining to the subsurface, including but
not limited to, mines and springs, or to those conditions
reflected as flood areas, or to these properties subject
to, or possibly subject to flooding in general, and that
the aforesaid will not be the legal burden of the
Township of North Huntingdon or any of its officers,
agencies or officials."
909 THE ZONING HEARING BOARD
909.1
909.2
The North Huntingdon Township Zoning Hearing Board shall
consist of not less than three (3) members appointed by
the Board of Commissioners. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall consist of three (3) members and the terms of
office shall be three (3) years and appointed such that
one member shall be appointed each year.
The following powers are vested in the Zoning Hearing
Board: ·
1. To hear and decide appeals pursuant to Section 919,
where it is alleged that there has been an error in
any order, requirements, decision or determination
made by any administrative official in the
enforcement of any land use ordinance, including:
(1) Appeals from the determination of the zoning
officer, including, but not limited to, the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance
of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any
nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(2) Appeals from a determination by a municipal
engineer or the zoning officer with reference
to the administration of any floodplain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions
within a land use ordinance.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the zoning
officer or municipal engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and storm
water management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving Article V or VII
applications.
2. To hear and decide all requests for Special
Exceptions to the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to
Section 911.
9-11
910.3
910.4
The zoning Officer shall arrange for public notice as
called for under Article 9, Section 916 of this ordinance
and set the public hearing for the requested variance on
the agenda for the next monthly meeting of the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to public notice. Where an
emergency exists, the Zoning Hearing Board shall call for
an additional hearing to accommodate the emergency
provided the required public notice has been carried
out. Costs of all emergency meetings shall be borne by
the hearing appellant. Such notice shall also be mailed
to the Township Commissioners representing the Election
District or Ward in which the lot or building is located.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall not grant a variance from
the regulations of this ordinance unless the Board has
made a finding of fact based upon the evidence as
presented in each specific case. The Board may grant a
variance, provided that all of the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar
to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the ·
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the zoning ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
2. That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created
by the appellant.
4. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or district
in which the property is located, not substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental
to the public welfare.
A validity variance may be considered where the land
owner can prove that the zoning ordinance so severely
restricts an applicant as to deny him any use of his
land.
9-13
910.5
910.6
910.7
910.8
910.9
910.10
910.11
A use variance may be considered where the zoning
boundaries are so located or where the placement of
roads, utilities, or other public functions places the
property in such a position that its zoned use is
impossible or highly impractical.
A dimensional variance may be considered where a single
lot is located such that the area, setback and/or yard
size requirements can not be met and no adjacent land is
owned by the appellant. In no case may a dimensional
variance be considered where:
1. The dimensional difficulties are self-made.
2. The property has been taken or partially taken by
public condemnation and the owner has been properly
reimbursed.
No variance will be granted when the final use will alter
the character of the neighborhood.
Where a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall attach such contingencies as necessary to protect
the adjacent property or the neighborhood itself with
safeguards that will assist in implementing the zoning
ordinance.
Any variance granted shall represent the least
modification of the zoning ordinance that will give
relief to the appellant.
In the request for a variance from the· zoning ordinance,
notice is hereby given to the appellant that the burden
of proof of the need for a variance rests with appellant.
The granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall entitle the applicant to commence utilization of
the provision or provisions of the variance for a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the
decision.
If the applicant fails to commence utilization of the
variance within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
decision by either obtaining a Zoning certificate or Use
Permit, then the variance shall be considered null and
void and any further request to commence utilization of
the variance shall require a new approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
9-14
911 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
911. l
911. 2
911. 3
Special Exceptions shall be authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board in conformity with the powers granted to
the Zoning Hearing Board under Article 9, Section 909 of
this ordinance.
All applications for a Special Exception shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township who
shall forward a copy of this application to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Officer shall arrange for
public notice of the requested hearing as called for
under Article 9, Section 916 of this ordinance. The
Zoning Officer shall then place the request for a Special
Exception on the agenda for the next monthly meeting of
the Zoning Hearing Board. Where an emergency exists, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall call for an additional meeting
to accommodate the emergency provided all necessary
advertising and posting has been carried out. Costs of
all emergency meetings shall be borne by the appellant.
Such notice shall also be mailed to the Township
Commissioner representing the Election District or Ward
in which the Special Exception is requested.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall not grant any Special
Exceptions unless:
1. It is necessary for the public convenience at that
location.
2. It is so designated, located and proposed to be
operated that the public's health, safety and
welfare will be protected, and
3. It will not cause any substantial injury to the
value of other property in the neighborhood in which
it is located.
4. The Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe as deemed
necessary, such conditions and safeguards upon the
construction, location and operation of a Special
Exception, including but not limited to provisions
for off-street parking and loading, as shall be
deemed necessary to secure the general objectives of
this ordinance and to reduce any possible injury to
the value of property in the neighborhood.
5. A Special Exception is a matter of right and shall
be provided for in this ordinance by special
standards found in Article 8. In the granting of
Special Exceptions, the Zoning Hearing Board may
require certain conditions or safeguards as are
deemed necessary to assure the safety, health and
value of any adjacent property.
9-15
6. All ~equests for a Special Exception must point out
why a Special Exception is needed for the property
or building or structure in question. Each request
must point out in the North Huntingdon Township
zoning Ordinance, or its amendments, where provision
for the request for a Special Exception has been
provided.
7. In a request for a Special Exception, the burden of
proof rests upon the Zoning Hearing Board who must
show where the request is not provided for in the
Zoning Ordinance.
912 THE PLANNING DIRECTOR
912.1 The Planning Director shall be appointed, by a majority
vote of the Board of Commissioners, upon recommendation
of the Planning Commission. The duties of the Planning
Director will be as follows:
1. He shall be responsible for organizing and
coordinating the activities of planning and zoning;
he shall recommend to and/or advise the Planning
Commission regarding matters in these areas.
2. He shall assist and coordinate compliance with
subdivision regulations and all related codes and
ordinances.
3. He shall interpret regulations and recommend changes
in applicable Township Ordinance.
4. He shall determine departmental policies, plan longterm
programs and submit such plans to the governing
body for referral to the Planning Commission.
5. He shall attend regular meetings of the Planning
Commission, interview individuals requesting action
and advise them as to proper procedures; submit
studies and reports.
6. He shall confer with contractors, architects and
owners on questions about plans and subdivisions.
7. He shall promote public interest in and the
understanding of the comprehensive plan and
planning.
8. He shall do such other acts or make such studies as
may be necessary to fulfill the duties and
obligations as from time to time directed by the
Board of Commissioners.
9-16
913 THE PLANNING COMMISSION
913.1
913.2
913.3
913.4
913.5
The Planning Commission shall consist of a maximum of
nine (9) persons as appointed by the Board of
Commissioners to terms of four (4) years as authorized by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 as
amended) and is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and powers:
1. To receive from the office of the Planning Director
or the Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township
copies of all applications for amendments to the
North Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance that have
been filed with his office, to make findings and
recommendations on the proposed amendments and to
forward written copies of such findings and
recommendations to the North Huntingdon Township
Board of Commissioners within the allotted times set
forth in Pennsylvania Act 247 as amended. These
allotted times shall be as specified in Section 904
and Section 905 of this ordinance.
2. To initiate, direct and review from time to time a
study of the provisions of this ordinance, and to
make reports of its findings and recommendations to
the Township Board of Commissioners in a written
form.
The Planning Commission shall receive from the Office of
the Planning Director all applications for subdivisions
in North Huntingdon Township. All subdivision
applications shall receive written recommendations and
such recommendations approving or denying shall be
submitted by findings of fact.
The Governing Body may from time to time assign to the
Planning Commission such tasks as are deemed necessary
for the advancement of the community zoning.
The Planning Commission must set and publicly advertise
the date of its monthly official meeting each year after
the fiscal seating of the new Board.
All applications must be submitted three (3) weeks prior
to the scheduled monthly meeting for advertising
purposes.
914 SITE PLAN SUBMISSION
914.1 Site Plan Submission:
The site plan must be completed and submitted to the
Zoning Officer at least three (3) weeks prior to the
9-17
914.2
914.3
regular monthly meeting of the Planning Commission. This
plan shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of
$30.00 made payable to North Huntingdon Township.
The site plan shall show, in addition to any specific
requirements set forth in the district regulations
herein, the following:
1. The location of principal and accessory buildings
existing and planned, and the topography;
2. Traffic circulation features within the site;
3. The location of vehicular access onto the site:
Department of Transportation Permit, if necessary.
4. The height and bulk of structure;
5. The provisions for off-street parking and loading
facilities.
6. The provisions of open space;
7. The landscaping, paving, fencing, walks and signs on
the site.
8. The location of storm sewers and storm water
management facilities including Department of
Environmental Resources permits, if necessary.
9. The location of sanitary sewers and water lines.
10. The location of fire hydrants.
11. An erosion and sedimentation plan approved by the
Westmoreland County Conservation District.
12. Any other requirements for that specific zoning
district.
The site plan shall be reviewed by the North Huntingdon
Township Planning Commission and a recommendation made to
the North Huntingdon Township Board of Commissioners. A
decision by the Board of Commissioners shall be made in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 as
amended).
9-18
915 ENFORCEMENT
915.l
915.2
Enforcement Notice:
l. The zoning officer is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and any
amendments thereto and to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as provided for in Section
915.2 when acting within the scope of his
employment.
2. If it appears that a violation of this ordinance has
occurred, the zoning officer shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice to the owner of record of the parcel on which
the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement
notices regarding that parcel, and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
3. An enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other
person against whom the municipality intends to
take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of
the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this ordinance.
(4) That the owner of record or other person
against whom the municipality intends to take
action has fifteen (15) days to commence steps
to comply with this ordinance and thirty (30}
days within which to complete such steps to. be
in compliance with this ordinance, unless such
times are extended in writing by the zoning
officer, for cause shown.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right
to appeal to the zoning hearing board within
thirty (30} days of the date of the enforcement
notice or not later than the expiration of any
extension granted, in writing, by the zoning
officer.
(6) That the failure to comply with the enforcement
notice within the time specified, unless
extended by appeal to the zoning hearing board,
constitutes a violation with sanctions clearly
described.
Enforcement Remedies:
l. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which
has violated any of the provisions of this
ordinance, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, shall pay a judgment of not more than
9-19
916 FEES
916.l
916.2
$500.00 plus all court costs plus reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district
justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this ordinance to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice and thereafter each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition of the
defendant, may grant an order of stay, upon cause
shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other
than the Township the right to commence any action
for enforcement pursuant to this section.
All fees collected from the application or from the
violation of this ordinance shall be forwarded to the
North Huntingdon Township Treasurer. Receipts for such
monies shall be filed and maintained by the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning Officer.
Fees to be included with the zoning application shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Fee for the registration of a non-conforming use
shall be twenty-five dollars (25.00) per year. The
fiscal year beginning with June 1.
2. The fee for a public hearing by the Zoning Hearing
Board shall be one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00) to be paid upon the filing of the
application for a hearing.
3. The fee for a public hearing by the Planning
Commission shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to
be paid upon the filing of the application.
9-20
4. The fee for public hearing for a Planned Residential
Development by the North Huntingdon Township Board of
Commissioners shall be $500.00 to be paid upon the filing
of the application.
5. Where a continuance or a special public hearing is held
at the request of the applicant or the appellant the
entire cost of such hearing shall be borne by the
applicant or the appellant.
6. The fee for a Use and Occupancy Permit shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00).
7. The fee for a Sign Permit shall be twenty ($20.00) plus
$2.00 per square foot of sign area.
8. The fee for Temporary Sign Permit shall be thirty
($30.00) per three (3) months.
9. The fee for a rezoning request or Curative amendment
shall be $500.00 upon filing a letter and plot plan to
the Board of Commissioners.
10. Building Permit Fees:
(1) Residential dwellings - $.05 per square foot living
area plus $15.00 per bathroom facilities for
plumbing.
(2) Residential additions - $2.00 per thousand for
additions, alterations, etc. minimum charge of
$30.00.
(3) Temporary structures - $30.00 (permit must be
reviewed every three months) .
(4) Commercial or industrial buildings - $5.00 per
thousand for all construction with a minimum charge
of $30.00).
11. · The fee for a transient merchant license shall be at the
rate of two hundred ($200.00) dollars for each thirty
(30) day period or fractional part thereof.
917 PUBLIC NOTICE
917.1 All public notices shall be carried out as prescribed in
this ordinance. Notice shall be published once a week
for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30)
days or less than seven (7) days from the date of the
hearing.
9-21
917.2
917.3
Public notice shall be deemed to mean the advertising of
any required meeting or hearings or proposal in the
Official Township newspaper as designated by the North
Huntingdon Township Board of Commissioners. Such
advertisement shall be placed in the columns of the
newspaper under the heading of Legal Notices.
The number and timing of the advertisement must comply
with the requirements as set forth for each required
meeting, hearing or proposal in this ordinance and in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 as
amended.
918 PERFORMANCE ZONING OPTION
In areas of the Township where the slope is 25% or greater,
the developer may implement a performance zoning option. The
performance zoning option shall only be considered for
developments in Residential 3 (R-3) and Residential 4 (R-4)
areas where land improvements shall occur which may be
dedicated to the Township. Furthermore, at least 50% of the
proposed area for development must have a slope of 25% or
greater.
The performance zoning option shall entitle the developer to
decrease the zoning classification standards for that area to
zoning standards for the next lower classification. In other
words, the standards for R-4 would be reduced to an R-3 and
the standards for an R-3 would be reduced to an R-2. All
applicable provisions of the zoning, subdivision or other
applicable Township ordinance requirements shall be complied
with. The remainder of the undeveloped land must then be left
in permanent open space in accordance with the provisions of
Article 5, Section 504.1, 21.
919 APPEALS
The proceedings set forth in this article shall constitute the
exclusive mode for securing review of any ordinance, decision,
determination or order of the governing body of a municipality,
its agencies or officers adopted or issued pursuant to
this ordinance and of Act #247, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
919.l Time Limitations:
No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with
the board later than 30 days after an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been approved by
an appropriate municipal officer, agency or body if such
proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to
believe that such approval had been given.
9-22
919.2
919.3
919.4
919.5
All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners
shall be filed by the landowner within 30 days after
notice of the determination is issued.
The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal
from an adverse decision on a tentative plan or from an
adverse decision by a zoning officer on a challenge to
the validity of an ordinance or map shall preclude an
appeal from a final approval except in the case where the
final submission substantially deviates from the approved
tentative approval.
Upon filing of any proceedings before the Zoning Hearing
Board, a stay of proceedings shall be deemed to be in
effect unless the zoning officer or any other appropriate
agency or body certifies to the board facts indicating
that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the development or official
action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the board or
by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on
petition, after notice to the zoning officer or other
appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or
final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to
reverse or limit the approval are filed with the board by
persons other than the applicant, the applicant may
petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals
to order such persons to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the board.
9-23
ARTICLE 10
ZONING MAP DIAGRAMS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
1001 Zoning Map 1009 Illustration: Yards on
1002 Interpretation of District Rectangular Lots
Boundaries 1010 Illustration: Yards on
1003 Procedure Diagram for Non-rectangular Lots
Amending Zoning Ordinance
1004 Procedure Diagram for
Conditional Use
1011 Illustration: Yard Requirements
for corner Lots
1012 Illustration: Types of
1005 Procedure Diagram for Residential Buildings
Variance 1013 Illustration: Application
of Height Regulations to
Different Types of Roofs
1014 Illustration: Required
Access Case 1
1006 Procedure Diagram for
Special Exception
1007 Illustration: Types of
Lots
1008 Illustration: Percentage
of Lot Coverage
1015 Illustration: Required
Access case 2
1001 ZONING MAP
1001.1
1001.2
1001.3
1001.4
The location and boundaries of the zoning Districts shall
be as shown on the official North Huntingdon Township
Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated in this
Ordinance.
The Zoning Map together with everything shown thereon and
all amendments to the zoning districts shall be marked on
the Zoning Map and shall become as much a part to this
Ordinance as if fully set forth and described herein.
The Township Official Zoning Map shall be marked and
dated with each subdivision and/or development annually.
This shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Officer.
It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman of the
Planning Commission to notify the Zoning Officer of all
recommended approvals of subdivisions. The Zoning
Officer shall then, upon the approval of the recommended
subdivision or those subdivisions not recommended, see
that the Zoning Map is properly marked and dated with the
subdivision locations annually.
1002 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
1002.1 The boundaries of districts shall be shown on the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning map.
10-1
1002.2 Where doubt exists as to the precise location of the
boundary of any of the aforesaid districts, the following
shall apply:
1. A district boundary indicated within a street or way
shall be construed to follow the center line
thereof.
2. Boundaries shown as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as exactly following
such lot line.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
Township limits shall be construed as exactly
following such Township lines.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines
shall be construed to be midway between the main
tracks.
5. The zoning boundary line for commercial areas shall
be construed as either 400 feet from the center line
of the road right-of-way or the rear property line
of abutting parcels whichever is less, unless
previously designated otherwise.
6. Boundaries following streams or other natural or
man-made features shall be construed as the
centerline of these features.
7. Where boundaries of the various zoning districts are
not those of the lot lines, in the case of
unsubdivided property, and where the zoning
boundaries are given in dimensions such that a firm
and legal boundary can not be determined, then the
Township Engineer shall be called to make an
official measurement setting up the zoning boundary.
8. Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground used to demarcate district boundaries, are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered by subsection 4
above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall engage
engineering services to determine the proper
district boundaries based upon the comprehensive
plan, engineering studies and the trend of the area.
10-2
1003 PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING ZONING ORDINANCE (See also Article 9,
Section 905)
PLANNING COMMISSION SENDS
RECOMMENDED AMENDMENT TO
,
~
THE GOVERNING BODY
' .. ~
SEND COPY TO COUNTY GOVERNING BODY ADVERTISE
PLANNING AGENCY AT PUBLIC HEARING
LEAST 30 DAYS BEFORE
GOVERNING BODY HEARING
1 • ' ,
GOVERNING BODY HOLDS
PUBLIC HEARING AND HEARS
OPINIONS
APPROVE DISAPPROVE • ...
I ENACT AMENDMENT I RETURN TO PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR THEIR
STUDY, IF DESIRED
~
PLANNING COMMISSION
MAY DECIDE TO REVISE
AND RESUBMIT
I
Note: See Section 609, Act 247. If the amendment is prepared
by someone other than the Planning Commission, the governing
body must send the proposed amendment to the Planning
Commission for at least 30 days consideration. The process
then is the same as it is outlined above.
10-3
1004 PROCEDURE DIAGRAM FOR CONDITIONAL USE (See also Article 9,
Section 906)
APPLICATION
FOR
CONDITIONAL USE
' .
MUNICIPAL
BODY
' ,
PLANNING
COMMISSION
FOR
RECOMMENDATIONS
GOVERNING
BODY MAKES
DECISIONS
REQUEST GRANTED
ZONING OFFICER
ISSUES PERMIT
10-4
' .
REVISED
PLANS
REQUEST REFUSED
•
APPLICANT CAN
REVISE PLANS
OR
APPEAL ..T O COURT
I APPEAL I
' .
1005 PROCEDURE DIAGRAM FOR VARIANCE (See also Article 9,
Section 910)
ZONING OFFICER
ISSUES PERMIT
REQUEST GRANTED • ZONING OFFICER
ISSUES PERMIT
APPLICATION
ZONING OFFICER
DISAPPROVES
APPLICATION
(OR) • REQUEST VARIANCE
FROM
ZONING HEARING BOARD
J, I
ZONING OFFICER
ADVERTISES
PUBLIC MEETING
. , • ZONING HEARING BOARD
HOLDS PUBLIC MEETING
AND
HEARS TESTIMONY
'
ZONING HEARING BOARD
GRANTS OR REFUSES
VARIANCE
I I
10-5
•
ZONING OFFICER MUST
NOTIFY ADJOINING
PROPERTY OWNER
I
_.. ZONING HEARING BOARD MUST KEEP STENOGRAPHIC
RECORDS OF MEETING
REQUEST REFUSED
....
APPLICANT CAN
CHANGE PLAN OR
APPEAL TO COURT
1006 PROCEDURE DIAGRAM FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION
APPLICATION
FOR .__ __ - , SPECIAL EXCEPTION ...
ZONING OFFICER CONTACTS
ZONING HEARING BOARD
•• I
ZONING OFFICER __ J
ADVERTISES ---
PUBLIC MEETING
• •
ZONING HEARING BOARD
HOLDS PUBLIC MEETING - ZONING HEARING BOARD
AND .. MUST KEEP STENOGRAPHIC
HEARS TESTIMONY RECORD OF MEETING
1•
ZONING HEARING BOARD
GRANTS OR REFUSES
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
REQUEST GRANTED I I REQUEST REFUSED
• ...
ZONING OFFICER APPLICANT CAN
ISSUES PERMIT CHANGE PLAN OR
APPEAL TO COURT
10-6
1007 ILLUSTRATION: TYPES OF LOTS
fw- A CORNER
W:
n::: I
f- B INTERIOR
(/) .
I
c DOUBLE FRONTAGE
(THROUGH LOTS)
1008 ILLUSTRATION: PERCENTAGE OF LOT COVERAGE
100% COVERAGE
...... ·;.< .· . .
>< ./. . .........
50% COVERAGE
~ BUILDING
-··-··-··- LOT LINE
10-7
/ '·. / ...-·"-.. / " ....... _,,.
/ .· &/!)""" ." ,.... .. . ........
.......... •' ,,,,,. ....... >< /
10% COVERAGE
I
I
\
1009 ILLUSTRATION: YARDS ON RECTANGULAR LOTS
"S TREE'T
~-·-··-··-··-··- .. -··-"-"-··-··-.. 1
I
~ FRONT YARD
0 SIDE YARD
REAR YARD
BUILDABLE AREA
LOT LINE
1010 ILLUSTRATION: YARDS ON NON-RECTANGULAR LOTS
~··-··- .. --.
-"-··
··-··-
" -...
~ FRONT YARD
0 SIDE YARD
bm REAR YARD
D BUILDABLE AREA
- .. - .. -LOT LINE
\
\
I 1,:
1011 ILLUSTRATION: YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR CORNER LOTS
-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-
- .. --,.·.. _. . T. . _,,_,,_ .. - .. -·r~
----- ~ -----1---EZr-----!
I :
: . I
L .. _,,_ .. _,,_,,_.l~
r,,_,,_,,_
I
I
I
I
I
[ZI
[]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
ACCESSORY BUILDING
LOT LINE
FRONT BUILDING LINE
LINE TO WHICH SIDE OF PRINCIPAL
BUILDING SHALL BE PERMITTED
10-9
------------
<
1012 ILLUSTRATION: TYPES OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
/
_,...,,.··ROW HOUSE
ATTACHED DWELLING
_,. DUPLEX
.>-'
/
. ........ /
/
_ _,...· DUPLEX
...._ ....._,. _,. ONE FAMILY
DETACHED DWELLING
1013 ILLUSTRATION: APPLICATION OF HEIGHT REGULATIONS TO
DIFFERENT TYPES OF ROOFS
··- ... :>""
/
/
/
··-·/
/
/
.·_,..· HIP ROOF
··-....,../
/
.. /__,.FLAT ROOF
"-::_:,·/
/
___ ,. .. GAMBREL ROOF
MANSARD ROOF
- .. _ ,,,.
··-··-··-.. -_/""'
_,. GABLE ROOF
H - HEIGHT
10-10
1014 ILLUSTRATION: REQUIRED ACCESS CASE 1
r··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··-··1
LOT 2
BUILDING LINE .L . ........................................................... -1.
i.j -REQ-UI-R·E·D- F-R·O·-NT-AGE ,.j
~ w
1 LOT 1 /;:0;'.i
. ~,,_;; DEEDED 20 FT.
I ACCESS
BULJ .. JG LINE ~ ................................................ ~ -·- -· [:::~~:,:~:R~:~GE !-_-- _
1015 ILLUSTRATION: REQUIRED ACCESS CASE 2
r .. _,,_ .,_,,_ .. _,,_., - .. - .. ..., .. - ,,_ .. - ,,_ ,,_ .. _. ·-.. - .. ,
I
I
LOT 3 LOT 2
I I I
BUILDING : : :
LINE ~ ............................................................ -~------------------------------~ BUILDING LINE
j REQUIRED . 20 FT.'20 FT. REQUIRED j
: FRONTAGE · FRONTAGE : L .. _ ,,_,,_ ,,_ .. - ,,_ .. _.. , ,,_,,_ .. - ,,_ .. - ,,_ .. - .. -j
LOT 1
DEEDED 40 FEET
ACCESS I
· ................................................ ~ BUILDING LINE
~ REQUIRED FRONTAGE!
/;(.& '\: .. - .. - .. - .. - .. - .. - .. - .. _i_ .. - .. - .. -
40 Fr. ACCREDITED ROAD
10-11
1101
1102
1103
1104
1101
1102
Repealer
ARTICLE 11
REPEALER, NON-CONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES, SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Non-conforming Uses and Structures
Severability Clause
Effective Date
REPEALER
The passage of this Ordinance acts as an automatic
repeal to previous Zoning Ordinance No. 542 enacted
by the Board of Commissioners on March 26, 1980 and
the following substantive amending ordinances with
reference to Zoning Ordinance No. 542 being:
Ordinance No. 559 enacted April 8, J.981, Ordinance
No. 562 enacted May 13, 1981, Ordinance No. 564
enacted June 10, 1981, Ordinance No. 572 enacted
October 14, 1981, Ordinance No. 593 enacted January
12, 1983, ordinance No. 595 enacted April 13, 1983,
Ordinance No. 597 enacted May 11, 1983, Ordinance No.
622 enacted October 10, 1984, Ordinance No. 624
enacted November 14, 1984, Ordinance No. 634 enacted
December 11, 1985, Ordinance No. 637 enacted July 10,
1985, Ordinance No. 643 enacted December 12, 1985,
Ordinance No. 661 enacted November 19, 1986,
Ordinance No. 679 enacted July 8, 1987, Ordinance No.
702 enacted September 14, 1988, Ordinance No. 705
enacted November 9, 1988, Ordinance No. 706 enacted
November 9, 1988, Ordinance No. 733 enacted January
17, 1990 and Ordinance No. 745 enacted June 21,
1990. The repeal of the previous Zoning Ordinance
No. 542 and amendments thereto does not in any way
affect actual zoning changes or other matters
processed during the validity period of time of
Ordinance No. 542, but only repeals actual Zoning
Ordinance No. 542 and any amendments thereto of a
substantive nature.
NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
The passage of this Ordinance shall in no way whatsoever
affect those recognized and registered nonconforming
uses and structures as established under
previous Zoning Ordinance No. 542 enacted March 26,
1980 and previous Zoning Ordinance No. 230 enacted
July 9, 1964, even though said previous Zoning
Ordinances shall hereinafter be repealed by the
passage of this new Zoning Ordinance.
11-1
1103 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
Each section of this ordinance is an independent
section and the holding of any section, or part
thereof, to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective
for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
1104 EFFECTIVE DATE
ATTEST:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be
Thursday, February 21, 1991.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Huntington, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this
Wednesday, the 20th day of February, 1991.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY:
Russell L. Auberle, President
Board of Commissioners
Charlene A. Riggins, Secretary
SEAL
REVIEWED AND APPROVED:
Katherine B. Petrosky
Township Manager
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
11-2
Index of Amendments (See Appendix)
Ord.# Date Subject
Inclusion of previous Ord. #490 regarding planned residential developments &
798 2/19/1992 changes in the enforcement remedies for violations & as required by PA Act 170.
867 3/15/1995 Accessory Structures
935 2/18/1998 Enforcement Notices
Modifying provisions to medical clinics & telecommunications facilities &
936 2/18/1998 establishing standards for land use classifications
966 3/17/1999 Regulate Adult-Related Businesses
Requirements of location & hours of operation of Methadone or other drug
977 7/21/1999 facility
1028 1/17/2001 Adult oriented businesses obtaining to license, fees, fines & penalties
Defme Shopping Ctrs. as conditional uses in C-1 & PEDD1 Districts; Eliminate
Shopping Ctrs. as conditional uses in C1-A & C-2; Set forth Requirements &
1033 3/21/2001 Standards for conditional uses.
1050 2/20/2002 New Standards & Regs. For PEDD! & to modify exisiting PEDD1 & C-1 & PEDD2
Include Municipal buildings as a permitted use in PEDD 1, PEDD2, & Industrial
2018 5/19/2004 zones .
2093 11/15/2006 Amend 503.3, 2 (6) Side Yard width minimum R-1A
2145 4/21/2010 Micro-breweries in C-1A
2151 10/20/2010 Revisions to C-1A Zoning District
2152 11/17/2010 Signs text changes
2163 6/15/2011 Shallow Oil & Gas Wells
Index of Amendments (See Appendix)
Ord.# Date Subject
Inclusion of previous Ord. #490 regarding planned residential developments &
changes
798 2/19/1992 in the enforcement remedies for violations & as required by PA Act 170.
867 3/15/1995 Accessory Structures
935 2/18/1998 Enforcement Notices
Modifying provisions to medical clinics 7 telecommunications facilities &
936 2/18/1998 establishing standards for land use classifications
966 3/17/1999 Regulate Adult-Related Businesses
Requirements of location & hours of operation of Methadone or other drug
977 7/21/1999 facility
1028 1/17/2001 Adult oriented businesses obtaining to license, fees, fines & penalties
Define Shopping Ctrs. As conditional uses in C-1 & PEDD1 Districts; Eliminate
Shopping Ctrs. As conditional uses in C1-A & C-2; Set forth Requirements &
1033 3/21/2001 Standards for contional uses.
1050 2/20/2002 New Standards & Regs. For PEDD! & to modify exisiting PEDD1 & C-1 & PEDD2
Include Municipal buildings as a permitted use in PEDD 1, PEDD2, & Industrial
2018 5/19/2004 zones
2093 11/15/2006 Amend 503.3, 2 (6) Side Yard width minimum R-A1
2145 4/21/2010 Microbreweries in C-1A
2151 10/20/2010 Revisions to C-1A Zoning District
2152 11/17/2010 Signs text changes
2163 6/15/2011 Shallow Oil & Gas Wells
0 F F I C I A L
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 5 OF 1992
ORDINANCE NO. 798
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 765 BEING THE ZONING
ORDINANCE ENACTED FEBRUARY 20, 1991 FOR THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON WHICH SAID ZONING ORDINANCE INCLUDES NUMEROUS
DEFINI'l:IONS, THE INCLUSION OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCE NO. 490
REGARDING PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND CHANGES IN THE
ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS AND AS REQUIRED BY
PENNSYLVANIA ACT 170.
WHEREAS, this amendment includes various corrections and
clarifications set forth in Ordinance NO. 765, the amendment primarily
addresses front yard depth minimwn requirements in all zoned districts with
the determination by the North Huntingdon Township Planning Commission that
.said requirements were inadvertently placed in all zoned districts and also
by recommendation of the said Planning Commission to remove that portion of
the verbiage addressed in Ordinance No. 765 regarding said front setback
requirements.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
Commonweal th of Pennsylvania :f'ollowing a p·ublic input hearing held Or!.
Wednesday, March 18, 1992 at 6:00 o'clock P.M. at the Town House at 11279
Center Highway, NortJ·1 Huntingdon, Pennsylvania that Zoning Ordinance No. 765
be amended as follows:
SECTIOl\ 1 : Resolution No. 109 of 1992 consisting of four (4)
pages is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit 11 A11 and
incorporated by reference thereto as fully as though the same has been set
forth herein at length.
-1-
follows:
SECTION 2: The proposed amendments to Ordinance No. 765 are as
Article 5, Section 503.5; Paragraph (4) - Page 5-7 (R-3)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 30 feet minimwn.
Remove - If both adjacent dwellings have a front yard
less than 30 feet deep, the minimwn front
yard depth is then the greater of the two
adjacent yard depths.
Article 5, Section 503.6; Paragraph (4) - Page 5-8 (R-4)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 40 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503.8; Paragraph 2, Item (1) - Page 5-38
(NB)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 30 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503.9; Paragraph 2, Item (1) - Page 5-40
( C-1 )
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 50 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503.11; Paragraph 2 - Item (2) - Page 5-43
( C-2)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 40 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503.12; Paragraph 2, Item (1) - Page 5-45
( I )
Front Yard Depth Minimum -- 50 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
The Front Yard Depth Minimwn requirements remain as stated for
those areas zoned R-1 and R-2. In these zoned classifications are the areas
-2-
of Shafton, Larimer, Westmoreland City, and Hahntown, or older areas of the
Township in which setback requirements were not established at the time of
development and in most cases would be impossible to meet by todays
standards.
In the R-3, R-4, NB, C-1, C-2 and I districts, any future
development would have to meet the standard setback requirement or the
applicants for use of those properties in these districts would have the
right of appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for relief from same.
SECTION 3: All other provisions contained in Ordinance No. 765
remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
SECTION 4: Severability clause. Each section of this
Ordinance is an independent section and the holding of any section, or part
thereof, to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
SECTION 5: Effective date. The effective date of this
Ordinance shall be Wednesday, April 15, 1992.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday,
the 15th day of April, 1992.
Charlene A. Riggins, Secr§t ry
SEAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
C-7 /, k' BY?;::~--k~~~
~ene Walczyk, Pr~ ent
Board of Commissioners
-3-
REVIEWED AND APPROVED:
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
-4-
it •/
'!
'
;1
'• :i
ii
!!
.;
I
i
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
RESOLUTION NO. 109 OF 1992
WHERE.AS, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Nortn i!
11 Huntingdon has determined that there is a need to amend Zoning Ordinance No. Ii
ii
/1 ·I
II
ll ii
II
:1
!1
765 enacted February 20, 1991; and
WHERE.AS, the North Huntingdon Township Planning Commission has
reviewed Ordinance No. 765 as it addresses front yard depth minimwn
requi~ements in all zoned districts with the determination that said
requi~ements were inadvertently placed in all zoned districts; and
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon Township Planning Commission has
I reco~ended that Zoning Ordinance Mo. 765 be amended to remove that portion
I
1
1 of the verbiage addressed in the ordinance regarding said front setback
I
requirements.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AND IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED that
' in accordance with the provisions of Zoning Ordinance No. 765, Article 9,
II Ii Sub-article 904 entitled "Zoning Amendment or Rezoning Requests",
.I Sub-sub-article 904-.1, said Ordinance No. 765 shall bE amended, added to or
I
1,
changed and the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions
thereof sets Wednesday, March 18, 1992 at 6:00 o'clock P.M. for a public in
put hearing on the proposal received from the North Huntingdon Township
Planning Commission and at which public in put hearing passage of the
arne ndmen ts , additions and/or changes will be considered.
This Resolution may be examined without charge at the Town
EXHIBIT "A"
:1
ii I
if
I:
~ I
!'!/ Hoc.se during regt.:_lar business hot.:.!'S :rom 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 ?.M. a~d a :::.o~:; ~;co
ii
•:this Resolution con:aining the proposed amendment may be obtai:-:ed for a
/I charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Township of Nonh Hunt~n;;o~"
ii I! shall publish the proposed circulation within the To....,nship no-: more tha11 6:)
fili days nor less than 7 days prior to passage of an ordinance a1nending Ord::;a~.;:::e
ii
l
'I No. 765 and publica-:ion of the proposed ordinance amending Ordinance No. 765
when approved by the Board of Commissioners shall include either the full
I
JI
text thereof or the title and a brief swnrnary, prepared by the Townshi?
Solicitor and setting forth all of the provisions in reasonable detail anG
specifically in accordance with Paragraphs 1 through and including 3 of
Sub-Sub-article 904.1.
--
The proposed amendments to Ordinance No. 765 are as follows:
Article 5, Section 503.5; Paragraph (4) - PAGE 5-7 (R-3)
Front Yard Depth Minimum. - 30 feet minimum.
Remove - If both adjacent dwellings have a front yard
less than 30 feet deep, the minimum front yarC
depth is then the greater of the t',..o adj ace;.:;
yard depths.
Artic:e 5, Section 503.6; Paragraph (4) - Page 5-8 (R-4)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 40 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503.8; Paragraph 2, Item (I) - Page 5-38
(NB)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 30 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503. 9; Paragraph 2, Item (I) - Page 5-40
( C-1 )
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 50 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
-2-
,,I
I
·1
i/
ii
!i
.",
.1,1
'i
I ii
I
I
Arti<::~e 5, Section 503.11; Parag:-aph 2 - Item (2) - ?age 5-J.3
(C-2)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 40 feet minirrn.: . .. m.
Remove - Remaining statement.
Article 5, Section 503. 12, Paragraph 2, Item (I) - Page 5-45
(I)
Front Yard Depth Minimum - 50 feet minimum.
Remove - Remaining statement.
The F~ont Yard Depth Minimwn requiiements remain as stated for
those areas zoned R-1 and R-2. In these zoned classifications are the areas
of Shafton, Larimer, Westmoreland City, and Hahntown, or older areas of the
1
1
il township in which setback requirements were not established at
development a.11d in most cases would be impossible to_ meet by tcdays
the -cime of
I
I
I
11
11
sta..'1_9.ards.
In the R-3, R-4, NB, C-1, C-2 and I districts, any future
development would have to meet the standard setback requirement or the
applicants for use of those properties in these districts would have the
right of appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for relief from same.
RESOLVED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of
:I Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland a~~
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorwn being present, this Wednesday,
the 19th day of February, 1992.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY: /s/ Eugene Walczyk
Eugene Walczyk, President
ATTEST: Board of Commissioners
/s/ Charlene A. Riggins
Charlene A. Riggins, Secretary
SEAL -3-
/s/ Katherine B. Petrosky
. Katherine B. Petrosky
:j To...,nshi? Manager
!I
'I
.; SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
,,i'
:·
!1
:1
!1
Ii !!
.I i"i
1/
:'1·
'I
I
i1
11
l!
ii
11 ii
i'
1/ 1,
!l
li
LI
Ii
i
I'
I
I
11
-4-
ii II
,,i,,f
II
1:
:I
ii
JI
ii ii I,i'
II
I I ,,
II
ii i"i
0 F F I C I A L
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 1 OF 1995
ORDINANCE NO. 867
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 765 BEING
THE ZONING ORDINANCE ENACTED FEBRUARY 20, 1991 FOR THE
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTH!GDON AND SPECIFICALLY AMENDING
SECTION 801 ,3 RELATING TO ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED AND IT IS HEREBY
I11· ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
l Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania following
!, a public input hearing held on Wednesday, March 15, 1995 at 6:45 o'clock P.M.
11 at 11279 Center Highway, North Huntingdon, Pennsylvania 15642, that Zoning
!I
'I
11
'I
11
11
11
11 I'I,
'I
11 1· ii 'l
II
11 [· iqi
!1
H
I,1'
11
I\
II
l!
\!
ii
tl
ii i: il
Ordinance No. 765, Section 801 .3 be amended as follows:
SECTION 1: Resolution No. 110 of 1995 is attached hereto,
made a part hereof and marked Exhibit i1An and incorporated by reference
thereto as fully as though the same has been set forth herein at length.
SECTION 2: The proposed amendment to Ordinance No. 765,
Section 801 .3 is as follows:
11 801. 3 No accessory building or structure or use that exceeds
the maximum height at the peak of the roof of fourteen (14) feet or a maximum
area o f624 square feet shall be permitted in the required rear yard in a
residential district. Accessory structures includillg antennaes in excess of
the maximum requirements may be granted by Special Exception. No Special
Exception will be granted for an accessory structure other than an antennae
unless the lot area is in excess of one ( 1 ) acre."
-1-
Ii I'
I
REVIEWED AND APPROVED:
,,1 LI
Char 1 ene A. Riggins, j
Township Manager
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
-3-
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. __...._ OF 1998
ORDINANCE NO. 935
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 765,
BEING THE ZONING ORDINANCE ENACTED FEBRUARY 20,
1991 FOR THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON AND
SPECIFICALLY AMENDING ARTICLE 9, SECTION 915.1 (3)
RELATING TO CONTENTS OF ENFORCEMENT NOTICES.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED AND IT IS
HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, following a Public Input Hearing held on Wednesday.February ll.1998 at
6:00 o'clock P.M. at 11279 Center Highway, North Huntingdon, Pennsylvania
15642, that Zoning Ordinance No. 765, Article 9, Section 915.1 (3) be amended as
follows:
SECTION 1: Resolution No.109 of 1997 is attached hereto, made a part
hereof and marked Exhibit "A" and incorporated by reference thereto as fully as though
the same has been set forth herein at length.
SECTION 2: The proposed amendment to Ordinance No. 765, Article 9,
Section 915.1 (3) is as follows:
-lprovisions
thereof sets Wednesday, the 11th day of February, 1998 at 6 :00 o'clock P.M.
for a public input hearing on the proposal received from the North Huntingdon Planning
Commission and at which public input hearing passage of the amendments, additions and/or
changes will be considered.
This Resolution may be examined without charge at the Town House during
regular business hours Monday through Friday from 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. and a copy of
this Resolution containing the proposed amendment may be obtained at the established costs
thereof. The Township of North Huntingdon shall publish the proposed amendment within
the Township not more than sixty (60) days nor less than seven (7) days prior to passage of
the Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 765 and publication of the Proposed Ordinance
amending Ordinance No. 765 when approved by the Board of Commissioners shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the Township
Solicitor and setting forth all of the provisions in reasonable detail and specifically in
accordance with Paragraphs 1 through and including 3 of Sub-Sub-Article 904.1.
The proposed amendment to Article 9, Section 915.1 (3) is as follows:
"915.l
3
(7) Notwithstanding Subparagraphs (4) and (5) of this paragraph, if the
conditions existing, which initiated the Zoning Enforcement Notice are immediate and
serious and likely to cause irreparable harm to the Township, or its residents or
landowners, then the time periods provided in said Zoning Enforcement Notice may be
shortened to any period necessary to abate the violation, and prevent further harm or
damage."
The Board of Commissioners will consider passage of Proposed Ordinance
No. 1 of 1998 with reference to this Resolution at the regular meeting scheduled for
Wednesday, February 18, 1998.
RESOLVED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 21st day
of January, 1998.
ATTEST:
(• ,_£ . ., \ " - Eb:JV~L G ~ Ao J
Charlene A. Riggins, Sec( y
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY:~~/~
Thomas L. Kerber, President
Board of Commissioners
I
l I
11
I
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
RESOLUTION NO. 109 OF 1998
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Huntingdon has determined that there is a need to amend Zoning Ordinance No. 765
enacted February 20, 1991; and
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon Township Planning Commission has
recommended that Ordinance No. 765 at Article 9, Section 915.1 (3) is as follows:
"915.1
3
(7) Notwithstanding Subparagraphs (4) and (5) of this paragraph, if the
conditions existing, which initiated the Zoning Enforcement Notice are immediate and
serious and likely to cause irreparable harm to the Township, or its residents or
landowners, then the time periods provided in said Zoning Enforcement Notice may be
shortened to any period necessary
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AND IT IS HEREBY
RESOLVED by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon,
County of Westmoreland and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that in accordance with the
provisions of Zoning Ordinance No. 765, Article 9, Sub-article 904 entitled "Zoning
Amendments or Rezoning Requests", Sub-Sub-Article 904.1, said Ordinance No. 765 shall
be amended, added to or changed and the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the
EXHIBIT "A"
"915. 1
3.
(7) Notwithstanding Subparagraphs (4) and (5) of this paragraph, if
the conditions existing, which initiated the Zoning Enforcement Notice are immediate
and serious and likely to cause irreparable harm to the Township, or its residents or
landowners, then the time periods provided in said Zoning Enforcement Notice may be
shortened to any period necessary to abate the violation, and prevent further harm or
damage."
SECTION 3: All other provisions contained in Ordinance No. 765 or
prior amendments thereto remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
SECTION 4: Severability clause. Each section of this Ordinance is an
independent section and the holding of any section, or part thereof, to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
Commonwealth of Pe1111sylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the
18th day of February . 1998.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY~/~
Thomas L. Kerber, President
Board of Commissioners
-2-
ATTEST:
dJvLL,,j_Q >tv~!M~)
Charlene A. Riggins, Se tary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
-3-
Cbr:IEct.:i.m3 ~ 83::'-.J.ms I arrl VII
4/29/gs c
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 1998
ORDINANCE NO. 936
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON,
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ORDINANCE
NO. 765 OF THE TOWNSHIP, BEING THE "NORTH HUNTINGDON
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE," MODIFYING AND ADDING
DEFINITIONS OF WORDS, MODIFYING PROVISIONS AS TO MEDICAL
CLINICS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, ADDING THERETO
OR MODIFYING SAME AS TO CONDITIONAL USE STATUS, AND
ESTABLISHING STANDARDS FOR THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF SAID
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED AND IT rs HEREBY ORDAINED AND
ENACTED by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County
of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, under and pursuant to the authority of
the First Class Township Code, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, being Act
No. 247 of 1968, as amended, and related laws and regulations, the following:
SECTION I. In Article 3 of Ordinance No. 765, Rules and Definitions, the
following definitions and terms are hereby inserted in alphabetical order:
1. Broadcast and Relay Towers: A freestanding support structure, attached
antenna, and related equipment intended for transmitting, recervmg or
retransmitting commercial television, radio, telephone, cellular or other
telecommunication services.
2. Co-Location: The placement and arrangement of multiple antenna and
equipment on a single support structure and equipment pad area.
3. Telecommunications Company:
Communications System Service,
System Service in the Township.
1
Any person providing Fiber Optics
Telecommunications Service, or Open Video
i
I
I ' 1
4. Telecommunications Facilities: The plant, equipment and property, including
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, towers,
electronics, and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer Fiber Optics Communication System Service,
Telecommunications Services, or Open Video System Service.
5. Telecommunications Provider: Means and includes every person who provides
Telecommunications Service over, tllrough, and by means of
Telecommunications Facilities without having any ownership, management or
control of the facilities.
6. Telecommunications Service: Any transmission of interactive switched and
non-switched signs signals, writing, images, sounds, messages, data or othe1
information of any nature by wire, radio lightwave, or any other electromagnetic
means (including access services), which originate or terminate in the Township
and are offered to or for tlle public, or some portion tllereof, for compensation.
7. Telecommunications Carrier: Means and includes every person tllat directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages, plant, equipment or property
within tlle Township, used or to be used for tlle purpose of offering or providing
telecommunications services.
SECTION II. In Article 6 of Ordinance No. 765, District Use Regulations
Section 601, Table 4 (Residential Districts Permitted Uses), a new line #34
Telecommunications Facilities is hereby added as follows:
0 R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3; R-4
34. Telecommunications facilities c
SECTION III. In Article 6 of Ordinance No. 765, District Use Regulations
Section 602, Table 5, (Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses), line #101, Public
clinic, medical clinic, is hereby revised as follows:
c C-1 C-lA C-2 PEDD PEDD I
-1 -2
101. Public clinic, medical c c c c
2
I
I
I I
I I
I
I
: I
I
11
I
SECTION IV. In Article 6 of Ordinance No. 765, District Use Regulations,
Section 602, Table 5 (Commercial/Industrial District permitted Uses), a new line #122 is
hereby added as follows and all subsequent lines renumbered consecutively:
122. Telecommunications
facilities
c C-1 C-lA C-2 PEDD PEDD
-1 -2
c c c
I
p
SECTION V. In Article 8 of Ordinance No. 765, Special Regulations, a new
Section #806, entitled Clinics, Medical, is hereby inserted and all subsequent sections
renumbered in consecutive order:
SECTION 806 CLINICS, MEDICAL
806.1 A development narrative shall be submitted which accurately
describes the nature of the medical services being offered and by
whom.
806.2 An existing structure proposed for adaptive reuse shall be brought
into compliance with all current building codes and other applicable
Township, County, and State regulations prior to occupancy.
806.3 Any clinic with direct access to a major highway (carrying more
than 10,000 Average Week Day Trips) shall prepare and submit a
traffic impact analysis. Such analysis shall demonstrate the
following:
1. The number of vehicle trips expected to be generated
during an average week day and during both a.m. and
p .m. peak hours of adjacent street traffic.
3
1 ·
'I
i
I ·I
I/
I
2. The number and types of vehicles, with an ongm or
destination at the subject site, the need for which is
generated by said use.
3. The routes or roadways used to reach the clinic.
4. Impact on the levels-of-service at intersections within
one mile of said clinic.
5. Recommended traffic control devices designed to
mitigate the documented impact on adjacent roadways.
806.4 Operation of such use shall be approved or denied following submittal of a
completed application and required information for land development approval as per the
prov1S1ons of the North Huntingdon Township Subdivision and Land Development
[ Ordinance.
I
SECTION VI. In Article 8 of Ordinance No. 765, Special Regulations, Section
820, Off-Street Parking Regulations, Subsection 820.5, Minimum Requirements, is hereby
revised as follows:
I
Medical and dental offices One space per each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area,
and clinics plus one space per employee, plus four (4) spaces
I __per doctor or practitioner. • ·
I 1 SECTION VIL In Article 8 of Ordinance No. 765, Special Regulations, a new
11 Seoti°" 830, emitled Tel~wri"ti= F"ilW~. i• hereby '"'' M follow•
I! Section 830 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
I'
I [
ii
i'
,1 I,
Ii
! j
830 .1 All proposed telecommunications facilities proposed in North Huntingdon
Township, whether classified as conditional or permitted uses shall comply
4
I
I
1 I
I
with the requirements of this section.
830.2 Co-location on existing broadcast or relay towers shall be investigated by the
telecommunications carrier. Where co-location has been demonstrated to be
impractical, new broadcast and relay towers shall be located only following
review and approval by the Township.
830 .3 The following information shall be submitted with all applications:
1. A site plan, drawn at a scale not less than one inch (1 ") per fifty feet
(50'), showing the boundaries and dimensions of the parcel or site,
including any adjacent public streets or easements.
2. An elevation of the proposed facility, including any buildings, existing
or proposed, associated with the facility, and which shall include all
dimensions of existing and proposed structures.
3. A topographic map, based upon the most recent site survey or
information available, at no less than five foot (5') contour intervals.
830.4 The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than this
minimum height shall be approved. In addition, no antenna shall exceed two
hundred feet (200') in height.
830.5 All broadcast and relay towers must be stealth towers. A stealth tower is a
Broadcast And Relay Tower which is not recognizable as a conventional
Broadcast And Relay Tower (e.g. a metal lattice structure), but instead is
disguised or concealed in such a fashion as to conform to its surroundings.
5 I
I i ·
I
1 I
11
Examples of such stealth towers include a tower which looks like a tree or
one which is concealed in a church steeple.
830.6 The Township Commissioners may waive the stealth tower requirement
where the applicant can demonstrate that the requirement is not necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare, considering items such as impact on
surrounding and abutting property values; height; screening; number of uses
per tower, including public uses; location; and actual setbacks.
830. 7 If a new broadcast and relay tower is constructed (as opposed to mounting
the antenna on an existing structure), the minimum distance between the base
of the support structure or any guy wire anchors and any property line shall
be the largest of the following:
1. One hundred percent (100%) of antenna height.
2. The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district.
3. Fifty feet (50') minimum.
830.8 A fence shall be required around the broadcast and relay tower and other
equipment, unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure. The fence
shall be a minimum of eight feet (8 ') in height.
830.9 The following landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the
broadcast and relay tower as possible, the fence surrounding ihe support
structure, and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in
general soften the appearance of the telecommunications facilities site. North
6
i
'
I I
i
;
i
I
!
I
!
I
'I
Huntingdon Township may permit any combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping,
if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If
the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, and other equipment 1s
housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
1. An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The screen
can be either a hedge (planted three feet [3 '] on center maximum) or a
row of evergreen trees (planted ten feet [10'] on center maximum). The
evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six feet (6') at planting,
and shall grow to a minimum of fifteen feet (15 ') at maturity.
2. In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved·
to the greatest extent possible.
806.10 In order to reduce the number of telecommunications facilities needed in the
community in the future, the proposed broadcast and relay tower shall be
required to accommodate other users, including other telecommunications
service, and local police, fire, ambulance services and municipal authority
and road departments. In addition, a linear two (2) mile separation shall be
maintained between broadcast and relay towers, measured from the base of
the structure.
806 .11 The telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission.
806.12 Broadcast and relay towers under two hundred fee (200') in height should be
painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained, in order to reduce the
7
visual impact. Structures near airports, shall meet all Federal Aviation
Administration regulations. No broadcast or relay tower may be artificially
lighted except as provided for and required by the FAA.
806.13 A land development plan shall be required for all telecommunications
facilities sites, showing the broadcast and relay tower, building, fencing,
buffering, access to public rights-of-way, and all other items required in this
Ordinance and the North Huntingdon Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. The site plan shall not be required if the antenna is
to be mounted on an existing structure.
I 1
806.14 In granting the use, the Commissioners may attach reasonable conditions
warranted to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not
limited to, location, fencing, screening, increased setbacks and the right to
use said facilities for public purposes.
806.15 All approvals shall be only for specific telecommunications facilities set forth
in the application. No additions or alterations thereto will be permitted
without a new application.
SECTION VIII. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this Ordinance as a whole, or of any other part thereof, nor the provisions of Ordinance
No. 7 65, which this Ordinance amends.
II ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
'
1 I of
1 I
the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
11
i l
! :
;
8
" I
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 18th day of February,
1998.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
B~/~ Thomas L. Kerber~
Board of Commissioners
ATTEST:
I Charkne A. Riggins, Secretary
· ISEAL
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
9
.L..L.r.::;~ lfLi:ll:l:. ...1....l./ L:J/~d '11;-IC.L.1
s2:::ondj'.:lraft 12/10/98 TP'.:II
thirct'Jlraft 12/14/98
I
Ir
! I II
11 i:"iI
I
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 1999
ORDINANCE NO. 966
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON,
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
ZONING ORDINANCE, ARTICLE 8 TO REGULATE ADULTRELATED
BUSINESSES.
SECTION 1. LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS. PURPOSE, AND INTENT
A. Finding-s. The Township Commissioners of North Huntingdon
Township finds the following with respect to adult-related business.
1. Adult-related businesses in any given area will cause blight and
deterioration in that area.
1. Properties that are adjacent to adult-related businesses will
decrease in value.
3. Businesses which are not adult-related in nature will not locate in
an area with adult-related businesses.
4. Neighborhoods adjacent to adult-related businesses are adversely
affected by the conduct of patrons of the adult-related businesses,
who interfere with the quiet, peaceful, and lawful enjoyment and
use of the neighboring properties.
5. Criminal activity has increased in connection with certain adultrelated
businesses.
1
ii
ii
ii
I! Ii
ii
I!
ij
I ;
.I
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the retail trade of
the Township, prevent neighborhood blight. maintain stable property values. maintain the
quality of residential neighborhoods, and reduce the potential for criminal activity.
C. Intent. The intent of this Ordinance is not aimed at the content of the
material sold, conduct within, or content of films or books of adult-related businesses, but
rather to minimize and control the adverse secondary effects of such businesses on the
surrounding community and protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and
character of surrounding neighborhoods and deter the spread of blight. Accordingly, this
Ordinance permits adult-related businesses in certain zoning districts, but regulates the
time, place, and manner of adult-related businesses.
SECTION 2. ENACTl\!IENT
BE IT ·DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended by the
addition of the following provisions.
A. Section 302. Definitions
(1) Adult Arcade - any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the unages so displayed are
2
Ii
I! .! "11
j !
ii
ii I! ,Ii .
I!
i r ;I"/'
1 j
i j
l \
I'I:
II!i I 1
! i
ii
,11 ,
11
'I i !
I I i \
1 ,,I
I I ! !
~ :. i I
1'1' ii
I I
! I
Ii ,i
i I
'I
11
'I
1 ·
'
I 1
I
'
I
Ii 'I
1 r
1
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
"sexual activities" or "nudity".
(2) Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store - an establishment,
having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade,
for sale or rental, books, magazines, video tapes, computer
disks, or other materials which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"sexual activities" or "nudity" as defined herein.
(3) Adult Cabaret - a cabaret, tavern, bar, nightclub, theater, or
similar club which features strippers, female topless and/or
bottomless waitresses or employees or bottomless male
waitresses or employees, male or female impersonators, or
similar entertainers who exhibit, display, or engage in nudity,
sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined in this
Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Obscenity Code.
(4) Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater - an enclosed building or
structure offering video presentations or other visual media
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis or matter
depicting, describing, or relating to "sexual activities" or
"nudity", as defined herein, for observation by patrons within
private viewing booths and/or by use of token or coin-operated
projectors or other video machines.
3
ii
i 1
i I
. i
.'I
. ,
i !
I;
: i
I!
(5) Adult-Related Business - any adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video srore, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture
theater, or adult theater as defined herein and which, under the
Pennsylvania Obscenity Code. must exclude minors or may not
knowingly disseminate to mmors. Also, a massage
establishment as defined herein.
(6) Adult Theater - any business which exhibits an indoor morion
picture show or other presentation which, in whole or in pan,
depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse as
defined in the Pennsylvania Obscenity Code. Any adult theater
which proposes to exhibit a motion picture show or other
presentation as defined above, outside the confines of a building
or structure, is prohibited.
(7) Holidav - the entire 24 hour period of the days of New Year's
Day (January l"), Good Friday, Election Day (both primary and
general elections), Memorial Day, July 4'", Labor Day.
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
(8) Massage Establishment - any establishment or business which
provides the services of massage and body manipulation.
including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and
all fom1s of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor, or professional physical therapist
licensed by the State of Pennsylvania. This definition does nor
4
/I
i:
I
include an athletic club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, Il
spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidencal or
accessory service.
(9) Nuditv - shall be defined as completely without clothing; or the
showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of
covered male genitals in discernible turgid state.
(10) Sexual Activities - shall be defined as: (1) acts of masturbation,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a
person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or
if such a person is a female, breast; (2) the condition of human
male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal; and/or (3) flagellation or torture by or upon a person
clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
B. Section 830. Adult-Related Businesses
l. Adult-related businesses which are defined in this Ordinance shall
only be permitted in the C-1, Commercial District when approved as a Conditional Use by
5
If
/I
I
I
[
/1
I
the Board of Commissioners and if all of the requirements of this section are adhered to.
Adult-related businesses shall not be permitted in any other zoning district.
2. Adult-related businesses shall only be permitted in the C-1.
Commercial District and shall also meet or exceed the following setback requiremems. The
building shall be setback as follows:
(a) The building shall be at least 250 feet in any direction from
any residential dwelling, (including multi-family buildings), also at
least 500 feet from any public park property (including such uses in
adjacent municipalities);
(b) The building shall be at least 1000 feet in any direction from
any school property, church property, preschool property, or child
day care center property (including such uses in adjacent
municipalities);
( c) The building shall be at least 100 feet in any direction from
any hotel or motel (including such uses in adjacent municipalities);
and
( d) The building shall be at least 2500 feet in any direction from
any other building which is utilized for any other adult-related
business which is defined in this Ordinance (including such uses in
adjacent municipalities).
3. All activities pertaining to the adult-related business shall be
conducted emirely within the confines of the building. No theater which shows adult-
/
, related films shall project the film outside the confines of a building. No music or sound
I
'I 'I
11
6
/I
'/
/1
emitting from the business shall be audible to normal human hearing at any time al any
exterior property line of the business. Adult related businesses shall at all times comply
1. with Ordinance No. 800, adopted June 17, 1992 regulating permissible noise levels.
4. No adult-related business shall utilize a local road as defined in the
North Huntingdon Township Subdivision Ordinance, for access to the site or egress from
the site.
5. Any adult-related business which has liquor for sale shall abide by
all rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. If any of the applicable
regulations of the Liquor Control Board are more stringent than the regulations specified in
this section, those regulations shall be adhered to by the applicant.
6. Unless governed by more stringent regulations by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board, the following hours of operation shall be adhered to by all adultrelated
businesses.
(a) No adult-related business shall be open from 2:00 A.M. to
11:00 A.M. daily.
(b) No adult-related business shall be open on Sunday and
holidays except that an adult-related business open on
Saturday may remam open until 2:00 A.M. on Sunday
mornmg.
7. The maximum gross floor area of any building which is utilized for
I an adult-related business shall be 5,000 square feet.
11
it
!
I 1
II
I
1,1I
11
,[
ii
'I
11
1/
I
8. No adult-related business shall display an exterior sign which displays
obscene materials or which depicts nudity or sexual explicit activities. All other regulations !
pertaining to commercial signs shall be complied with.
9. Parking, landscaping, exterior lighting, and other required site
improvements shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.
10. To insure the regulations of this section are adhered to by the
applicant, the following information shall be provided with the application for a conditional
use.
(a) A site survey of the property and building proposed for the
adult-related business and a survey illustrating the distance
to the location, size, and type of all buildings and uses
within 2500 feet of the building proposed for the adultrelated
business. The survey shall be prepared and sealed
by a surveyor licensed by the Stare of Pennsylvania and
shall be at a scale no less than 1 inch to 100 feet. The
survey shall indicate the scale, date drawn, north point, tax
parcel number of all parcels illustrated, the names of any
roads or highways illustrated, and shall be on paper
measuring 24 inches by 36 inches. Twenty (20) copies of
the survey shall be submitted with the application.
(b) The above-referenced site survey shall indicate the proposed
parking layout, landscaping, lighting, sign location.
building location, and any other exterior improvements.
8
I
!1
1!
II J!
(c) If liquor for sale is proposed, a copy of the license issued
by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board shall be
submitted.
11. In addition to a conditional use permit, a site plan shall be required
for the development of the site. Requirements for the site plan are in the North Huntingdon
Township Zoning Ordinance.
12. An applicant proposing an adult-related business shall satisfy all
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance which relate to general requirements for approval of
conditional uses.
13. This Ordinance shall be construed not to invalidate any portion of
the North Huntingdon Township Code and shall be read and interpreted in part materia with
the ordinances of North Huntingdon Township.
SECTION 3 REPEALER
Any provisions or parts of other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance
are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any prov1s1on of this
Ordinance is found unconstitutional or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions of the Ordinance shall be unaffected.
SECTION 5 ENACTMENT
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately after the enactment
thereof.
9
'/~_,,·/
I I
./I
I'
1 I
I'''
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at· a regular meeting of the Board of
j i
., I; Co rnm1.ss.1 oners
. I
of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
'i
;
·'Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 17th
' ,
"
,',!I d ay of ---M'-ar=ch =--,
1999.
; i
" r I
Ii
, .
I ATTEST:
I ./// / ,V/' .-/ ./ .. ! ____ . ? Ax< /~>- :__)wA~ d//
J,,etin M. Shepherd, Township Secretary
/'
I
It SEAL
i I
I SOLICITOR: Thomas P Cole, II
""
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
10
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 12 OF 1999
ORDINANCE NO. 977
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON, WESTMORELAND COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE TOWNSHIP ZONING
ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 765, TO ADD
REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO THE LOCATION AND
HOURS OF OPERATION OF METHADONE OR OTHER DRUG
MAINTENANCE OR TREATMENT FACILITIES, TO AMEND
THE REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR ALL
CONDITIONAL USES, AND TO LIMIT OFF-STREET
PARKING IN THE REQUIRED FRONT AND SIDE YARDS IN
C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
BE IT DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that
the Township Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 765, is amended as follows:
SECTION 1: Section 806 of Ordinance No. 765, Special Regulations: Clinics, Medical,
is hereby amended by adding the following new Section 806.5:
806 .5 Any methadone or other drug maintenance or treatment facility shall also
meet the following requirements:
1. The building shall be a minimum of 500 feet in any direction from
any residential dwelling, including any multi-family building.
2. The building shall be a minimum of 500 feet in any direction from
any public park property.
3 . The building shall be a minimum of 1000 feet in any direction from
any school property, church property, preschool property or child
daycare center property.
4. The building shall be a minimum of 2500 feet in any direction from
any other methadone or other drug maintenance or treatment
facility.
5. In measuring compliance with the requirements of subparagraphs
806.5.1 through 806.5.4, any uses or buildings located in adjacent
municipalities shall also be considered.
6. The building shall be located within 1000 feet of a public transmit
stop.
7. The hours of any such facility shall be limited to 7 a.m. to 5 p.m.
daily.
SECTION 2. Section 906.3 of Ordinance No. 765, Conditional Uses: General
Requirements and Standards, is hereby amended by deleting Section 906. 3 in its entirety and
substituting the following:
906.3 Requirements and Standards
The Commissioners shall grant a conditional use only if the applicant meets
the burden of proving that the following criteria are met:
1. That the development will not create detrimental visual impacts,
such that the size and visual bulk of the proposed development is
determined to create an incompatible relationship with the
surrounding built environment, public streets and open spaces and
land use patterns ;
2. That the development will not create detrimental transportation
impacts, such that the proposed development is determined to
adversely affect the safety and convenience of residential
neighborhoods or of vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the
vicinity of the subject tract, including traffic reasonably expected to
be generated by the proposed use and other uses in the area given
the existing zoning, existing land uses and proposed land uses in the
area;
3. That the development will not create detrimental transportation
impacts, such that the proposed development will result in traffic
volumes or circulation patterns that substantially exceed the capacity
of streets and intersections likely to be used by traffic to and from
the proposed development;
4. That the development will not create detrimental operational
impacts, including potential impacts of hours of operation,
management of traffic servicing and loading operations, and any onsite
operations associated with the ongoing functions of the use on
the site, in consideration of adjacent and surrounding land uses
which may have differing sensitivities to such operational impacts;
5. That the developmem will not create detrimental health and safety
impacts, including but not limited to potential impacts of noise,
emissions, or vibrations from the proposed development, or
functions witllln the proposed site which would otherwise affect the
health or safety of others as a direct result of the operation of the
proposed use.
6. That the development will not create detrimental impacts on the
future and potential development of parcels in the vicinity of the
proposed site of the development; and
7. That the development will not create detrimental impacts on
property values.
SECTION 3. Section 820.4.3 of Ordinance No. 765, Off-Street Parking Regulations:
Commercial, PEDD and Industrial Standards, is hereby amended by adding the following
underscored language:
In a C-1 District, off-street parking may be located in any rear yard provided
proper residential abutment considerations as provided in (820.2.9), "Screening and
Landscaping" are met. In a C-1 District. off-street parking may be located in anv
· front vard or any side yard provided any such parking area is set back at least 15
feet from the propertv line and further provided that the area between the parking
spaces and the property line is landscaped in such a fashion so as not to conflict
with the safe and efficient access to the property.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full
quorum being present, this Wednesdav the 1ls.t day of July '1999.
Attest:
1~hn M. Shepherd,
(.;
ii/ (SEA ) .--~~
, II, Solicitor
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
10/24/00
revised 12,A:/OO
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 28 OF 2000
ORDINANCE NO. 1028
AN ORDINANCE TO REQUIRE ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES TO
OBTAIN A LICENSE AND TO ESTABLISH FEES, FINES, AND
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATONS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted as follows:
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS
A. PURPOSE: The Township of North Huntingdon desires to promote the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens; pursuant to the authority of the First Class
Township Code.
B. FINDINGS: The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Huntingdon find as follows:
l. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place
the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure
will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that
the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the
health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the
citizens of the Township. It is appropriate to require reasonable
1
assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented
business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities
occurring therein.
2. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information
regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce
the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors
from working in such establishments.
3. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business will help limit and control the adverse secondary effects
of such businesses.
4. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to
obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who
may engage in the conduct which this Ordinance is designed to prevent or
who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
5. The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that
the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of this
Ordinance.
6. The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually oriented
businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
2
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
A. Adult Oriented Business - means any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
B. Adult Arcade - means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled stiff or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices
are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas. "
Arcades must be constructed according to the attached Exhibit A.
All Adult
C. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store - means a commercial establishment
which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
1. books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which depict or depict or describe "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas;" or
2. instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for, use m
connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as "Adult Bookstore or Adult Video
3
Store." Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an "Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store" so long
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas. "
D. Adult Cabaret - means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment, which regularly features:
1. persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
2. live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or
3. films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, digital 1magmg, photographic
reproductions or any and all visual media using the most recent technology,
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
E. Adult Motel - means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1. offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, digital imaging, photographic reproductions or any visual
media using current technology which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas; " and
has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability
of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
4
2. offers sleeping rooms for rent four (4) or more times in one calendar day during
five (5) or more calendar days in any continuous 30-day period.
F. Adult Motion Picture Theater - means a commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
G. Adult Theater - means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities. "
H. Code Enforcement Officer - means the authorized individual or individuals
designated by the Board of Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township or any member
of the North Huntingdon Township Police force.
I. Escort Agency - means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip
or other consideration.
J. . Knowingly - means having a general knowledge of; or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1. the character and content of any material or performance described herein which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by a permittee or persons;
2. the age of a minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an
excuse from liability hereunder if the permittee or person made a reasonable
bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
5
K. Municipality - means the Township of North Huntingdon, Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania.
L. Nude Model Studio - means any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university
which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure under the following conditions:
I . that there is no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other such
advertising which indicates that a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
2. where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3)
days in advance thereof; and
3. where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
M. Permittee - means a person m whose name a permit to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as the
applicants on any permit application.
N. Person - means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
6
0. Sexual Encounter Center - means a business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. physical contact in. the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex; or
2. activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when
one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
P. Sexual Misconduct - means any conviction for a violation of Chapter 31 (sexual
offenses) or Chapter 59 (public indecency) or Section 6312, of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code, or any conviction for a violation of a similar statute in any other state or federal
jurisdiction.
SECTION 3: PERMIT REQUIRED
A. Any person who operates an adult oriented business without a valid permit
issued by the Municipality is guilty of a violation of this Ordinance.
B. An application for a permit to operate an adult oriented business must be made
on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The applicant must be qualified hereunder and the premises must be inspected
and found by the Code Enforcement Officer to be in compliance with the law.
D. If a person who wishes to operate an adult oriented business is an individual, he
must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an
adult oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10%)
percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a corporation is listed as owner of an adult oriented business or as the entity which wishes
7
to operate such a business, the President of the corporation must sign the application for a
permit as applicant.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of permits issued by the Municipality
shall not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining an adult oriented business
permit under the provisions hereof.
SECTION 4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within forty-five ( 45) days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or
more of the following to be true:
1. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the
Municipality of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or imposed
upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business.
3. An applicant has failed to provide all information required for issuance of the
permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
4. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been reviewed
and have been disapproved by the Code Enforcement Officer as not being m
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
5. The permit fee required by this Ordinance has not been paid.
6. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not m
compliance with any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
8
7. An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or indirect interest of
more than ten (10 % ) percent of a corporate applicant, or any of the officers and
directors of a corporate applicant, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the
manager or other person in charge of the operation of the applicant's business,
has or have been convicted of an offense involving sexual misconduct. In order
for approval to be denied pursuant to this subsection, the person or person's
conviction or release in connection with the sexual misconduct offense must have
occurred within two (2) years of the date of application if the sexual misconduct
is a misdemeanor and within five (5) years of the date of application if the sexual
misconduct is a felony.
B. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the adult oriented business.
The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall complete his certification that the premises
are or are not in compliance within forty-five (45) ·days of receipt of the application by the
Code Enforcement Officer. Failure to complete such certification shall be deemed a denial
of the permit application.
SECTION 5: FEES
The annual fee for an adult oriented business is Five Hundred ($500. 00) Dollars.
9
SECTION 6: INSPECTION
A. As a condition of the approval of a permit, an applicant, or permittee, shall
permit an administrative inspection of the premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at any
time that the permitted business operation is open for business in order to ensure continued
compliance with the law.
B. Any person (or his agent or employee) who operates an adult oriented business
violates this Ordinance if such person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises
as set forth above, and the permit shall immediately be revoked.
SECTION 7: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
A. Each permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in Section 4. Application for renewal
should be made at least sixty (60) days before the expiration date and, when made fewer
than sixty (60) days before the expiration date, the pendency of the application will not
prevent the expiration of the permit.
B. If the Code Enforcement Officer denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall
not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except that after ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may be granted a permit if the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected
or abated.
SECTION 8: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days if he determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
A. violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Ordinance;
10
B. refused to allow an inspection of the adult oriented business premises as
authorized by this chapter; or
C. knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult oriented business
premises.
SECTION 9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension
set forth in Section 8 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit if he determines that:
1. A permittee has been convicted of any sexual misconduct.
2. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the
Mumcipality during the application process.
3. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed possession,
use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.
4. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution
on the premises.
5. A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the adult oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended.
6. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other explicit
sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted premises.
7. A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Municipality or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania of any taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
11
C. When the Code Enforcement Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one (1) year, and the permittee shall not be issued an adult oriented business
permit for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective, except that if the
revocation is pursuant to (B) (1) above, the revocation shall be effective for two (2) years in
the event of a misdemeanor or five (5) years in the case of a felony.
D. All permit denial, renewal, suspension or revocation decisions shall be sent in
writing to the applicant and/or permittee. All such decisions which deny, refuse to renew,
suspend or revoke a permit shall state specifically the ordinance requirement not met and
any other basis for the decision. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or after suspension or revocation of any permit, the applicant or permittee may
appeal pursuant to procedures set forth hereinafter. Any such appeal must be filed, in
writing, with the Code Enforcement Officer, within twenty-five (25) days from the date of
the mailing of the decision appealed from and shall specify, in detail, the basis for the
appeal. Failure or refusal to file said appeal or specify the basis of said appeal with the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be deemed a conclusive determination as to the issues or
matters addressed by the written decision. If an appeal is timely filed, the Board of
Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township will then schedule a public hearing and
shall render a written decision within forty-five (45) days thereafter. In the case of a denial
or renewal, or in the case of a permit suspension or revocation, the permittee may continue
to operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the
earlier of: (1) the expiration of the ten (10) day appeal period without filing an appeal; or
(2) the date of a final decision dismissing any appeal.
12
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Commissioners of North
Huntingdon Township may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, within thirty (30)
days of the date of the decision.
SECTION 10: TRANSFER OF PERMIT
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. A permittee shall not
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than
the address designated in the application.
SECTION 11: INJUNCTION
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult oriented business without a
valid permit or in violation of this Ordinance is subject to an action in equity or a suit for
injunction.
SECTION 12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or permits the violation of any
provisions of this Ordinance or the rules and regulations approved and hereinafter adopted
shall pay a fine not exceeding $600. 00 for each violation. Whenever such person shall have
been officially notified by the Township that said person is committing a violation of this
Ordinance or the rules and regulations approved and hereinafter adopted, each day that said
person shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate
violation punishable by a like fine. Any person who violates or permits the violation of this
Ordinance shall pay, in addition to the fine set forth above, all court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the Township in connection with any civil enforcement
proceedings brought to enforce this Ordinance.
13
The Township may commence civil enforcement proceedings to assess fines for
violations of this Ordinance. In addition to such civil enforcement proceedings, the
Township may commence, at any time, appropriate actions in equity or otherwise to
prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of this Ordinance.
SECTION 13: ENFORCEMENT
The enforcement of all provisions contained in this Ordinance shall be by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or such other person as designated in the absence of the Code
Enforcement Officer by the Township Manager.
SECTION 14: SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and, if any section, subsection,
clause, sentence, part or portion hereof shall be held or declared illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect
or impair any of the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, sentences or parts hereof, of
this Ordinance; it is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon that this Ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, subsection, clause, sentence, part or portion thereof had
not been included herein.
SECTION 15: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days following its enactment.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 17th day of
--Jan-ua-ry- --, 2001.
14
ATTEST:
ip Secretary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Thomas P. Cole, II
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY:~_d~ ;I dvt-e~
Thomas L. Kerber, President
Board of Commissioners
15
EXHIBIT "A" TO ORDINANCE NO.
BEING AN ORDINANCE TO REQUIRE ADULT
ORIENTED BUSINESSES TO OBTAIN A LICENSE
AND TO ESTABLISH FEES, FINES AND
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF
EXHIBIT "A" PROVIDES FOR
EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT
ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.
REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO
FILMS, VIDEOS, DVD'S OR LIVE
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, DVD, live entertainment, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches. The Township may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be
made without the prior approval of the Township.
4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one (I)
licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
1
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area specified in
subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that
no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this Exhibit.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less. than five (5) foot candles as measured at the floor
level.
9. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms
or booths.
11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing booths or rooms.
12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls
between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
2
14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceilings surfaces in viewing
booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily
cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material shall be used within forty-eight ( 48) inches of the floor.
15. A licensee shall brief all employees as to the approved infectious control plan
and OSHA regulations before and during employment at intervals of at least
six (6) months.
B. A person having a duty under subsection 1 through 15 of subsection A above
commits a violation of this Ordinance if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
3
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. __12__ OF 2000
ORDINANCE NO. 1O3 3
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON, WESTMORELAND COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE TOWNSHIP ZONING
ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 765, TO DEFINE
SHOPPING CENTERS, TO AUTHORIZE SHOPPING
CENTERS AS CONDITIONAL USES IN THE C-1 AND
PEDD-1 DISTRICTS, TO ELIMINATE SHOPPING
CENTERS AS CONDffiONAL USES IN THE Cl-A AND C-2
DISTRICTS AND TO SET FORTH REQUIREMENTS AND
STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
BE IT DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that
the Township Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 765, is amended as follows:
SECTION 1: Section 302 of Ordinance No. 765, Definitions, is amended by adding the
following new definitions:
LOT COVERAGE - That percentage of a lot which when viewed directly from above
would be covered by a structure or structures. For purposes of calculating lot coverage,
access drives and parking areas shall not be considered structures.
* * * * *
SHOPPING CENTER - Any retail use or uses developed in accordance with a common
scheme or design, which initially or cumulatively either (a) are situated on a parcel or
parcels exceeding three acres or (b) occupy more than 75,000 square feet of building floor
area.
BUFFERY ARDS -Landscaped area of a specified depth around the perimeter of the
shopping center designed to shield or buffer neighboring properties and uses from light
and sound generated by the shopping center and to act as a visual screening from the
center.
SECTION 2. Table 5 of Section 602 of Ordinance No. 765, Use Regulations for
Commercial and Industrial Districts, is hereby amended
I.by adding a double asterisk(**) adjacent to each of the following use line
items: Line Item Nos: 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 40, 41, 43, 53, 54, 59,
61, 67, 68, 71, 93, 97, 99 and 108; and
2.by adding the following notation at the bottom of Table 5:
**Any such use falling within the definition of "shopping center" shall only
be permitted as a conditional use in the C-1 and PEDD-1 Districts in accordance
with the requirements of Section 906.7.
SECTION 3. Table 5 of Section 602 of Ordinance No. 765, Use Regulations for
Commercial and Industrial Districts, is further amended by deleting the following bracketed text
from line number 114:
USE DISTRICT
c C-1 C-lA C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
114. Shopping Center[ (3 c [CJ [CJ c
Acres +)l
SECTION 4: Section 906 of Ordinance No. 765, Conditional Uses, is hereby amended by
adding a new Section 906. 7 as follows:
906.7 Shopping Centers, Requirements and Standards.
1. Al;mlicability
In addition to the requirements of Section 906.1 through 906.6, an applicant has the
burden of proving that the requirements of this Section 906. 7 are met. These criteria are in
addition to and not in lieu of any requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district. In the
event of a conflict between the provisions of this Section 906. 7 and any other section of this
Ordinance, the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or other Township
ordinance, the more stringent requirement shall apply.
2. General Statement for Conditional Use Review
Shopping center conditional use applications shall be reviewed in terms of location,
transportation and traffic impacts, impacts on applicable infrastructure, overall design scheme,
including landscaping and buffering, architecture, parking layout, pedestrian circulation, lighting
and signage, and shall adhere to the specific requirements contained herein.
A. The shopping center shall conform to the underlying district and
conditional use provisions and all general regulations of this Ordinance.
B. The shopping center shall meet all special standards which are set forth in
this Ordinance.
C. The shopping center shall be sited, oriented and landscaped as required by
this Ordinance, so that the relationship of its buildings and grounds to
adjacent buildings and properties does not impair health, safety or comfort
and does not adversely affect values of adjacent property.
D. The shopping center shall produce a total effect which is consistent with,
and not harmful to, the environment of the neighborhood;
E. The shopping center vehicular access and parking shall be configured so as
to minimize conflicting traffic movement on adjacent streets.
F. The shopping center shall promote the objectives of this Ordinance and
shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the Township.
3. Bulk Standards for Shopping Centers
A. Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres
B. Minimum front lot width along any right- of-way: One hundred fifty (150)
feet
C. Minimum front setback: Fifty (50) feet
D. Minimum side setback: Fifty (50) feet
E. Minimum rear setback: Fifty ( 5 0) feet
F. Minimum Setback from adjacent residentially zoned parcels: One hundred
(100) feet.
G. Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet. Height may be increased
to a maximum of fifty (50) feet, provided the minimum front, side and rear
3
yard setbacks are increased two (2) feet for each foot of height in excess of
thirty-five (3 5) feet.
H. Maximum Building Footprint: 200,000 square feet for each building.
I. Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five (35%) percent.
J. Minimum distance between buildings: Fifty (50) feet.
4. Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking requirements of
Article 8 of this Ordinance shall apply in their entireties, with the following
modifications:
A. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be one (1) space
per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
B. The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be one (1) space
per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area.
5. Buffen'ards
A. Bufferyards shall be required m conjunction with the
development of any shopping center as follows:
(1) Bufferyard A: Minimum bufferyard bordering any
residentially zoned property: forty ( 40) feet.
(2) Bufferyard B: Minimum bufferyard from any public or
private right-of- way: thirty (30) feet.
(3) Bufferyard C.: Minimum bufferyard m all other
instances: twenty (20) feet.
B. No structures or uses, including but not limited to buildings,
accessory structures, parking spaces, and curbs. Access drives and light
devices may be located in any required bufferyard except that access drives
and signs may be located in the bufferyard intersecting the main access
point to the shopping center, if otherwise in accordance with applicable
setback requirements.
4
C. Bufferyards shall be landscaped in accordance with the
illustrations set forth in Appendix A.
D. When any bufferyard as specified in this Section 906.7.5 is
in conflict with the bulk regulations set forth in Table 1 of this Ordinance
or any other ordinance of the Township, the greater distance shall apply.
The planting requirements of this section shall be adhered to regardless of
what the minimum setback requirement is.
E. All trees and shrubs required to be planted within a
bufferyard shall be of the minimum diameters and heights set forth in the
illustrations to Appendix A
F. Any existing trees within the required bufferyard which are
a minimum of four ( 4) inches in diameter at a point three (3) feet above the
ground shall be preserved and shall count as a required tree within the
bufferyard. At no point, however, shall any existing trees and required
trees be separated at a distance greater than the distances specified in the
required bufferyard.
G. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/applicant to insure
the continued growth of all required landscaping and/ or to replace the same
in the event of freezing or drought, vandalism, disease or other reasons for
the discontinued growth of the required trees and shrubs.
H In addition to the requirements of Appendix A, a row of
low-level evergreen shrubs or hedges or earthen mounding shall be
installed or constructed in the bufferyard. These aforementioned
tequirements shall provide a year round visual screen. Hedges or shrubs
shall be at least three feet in height at planting. Earthen moulding shall be
at least four ( 4) feet in height. Planning Commission may recommend
alternative minimum or maximum height requirements as long as the visual
5
barrier suffices to block direct light from vehicles and equipment circulating
through the shopping center.
6. Landscaping.
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following specifications:
A. Planting required in bufferyards as outlined in Section 906.7.5 cannot be
substituted for any required planting mandated in this section.
B. A landscaping plan, with appropriate details, shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect and submitted at the time of site plan or subdivision and
land development application. This landscaping plan must contain and
show the following information:
(1) All required bufferyards with proposed plantings (identifying each
proposed tree, bush or shrub) drawn to scale and identifying the
height and width of any proposed mounds (provide illustrated
section).
(2) All required planting independent of any bufferyard requirements
(identifying each tree, shrub, the use of sod or seeding, etc.) drawn
to scale.
(3) Any planting in excess of the requirements in Section 906.7.5 and
this section.
( 4) Any existing trees or vegetation which are to be preserved,
accurately identifying their relative location.
( 5) Any existing trees or vegetation which will be removed, accurately
identifying their relative location.
C. At least one (l) deciduous tree must be planted for each five thousand
(5,000) square feet of the site area. Any existing deciduous trees that are at
6
least four ( 4) inches in diameter at a point three (3) feet from the ground
shall count towards the total requirement.
D. All trees which are required to be planted as per the regulations of this
section shall be of the minimum diameters and heights set forth in the
illustrations to Appendix A, and shall be planted in accordance with
Appendix A and accepted conservation practices.
E. Landscaping of Parking Areas
(1) Parking area perimeter. Perimeter parking area landscape screening
shall be provided in accordance with the bufferyard standards as
defined and required in Section 906.7.5. The perimeter parking
landscape area shall be a minimum often (10) feet wide.
(2) Parking area interior.
(a) Interior landscaping shall be required for new parking areas
or for the alterations and additions to existing shopping
centers which meet the definition of a shopping center and
are thus regulated as a conditional use under this ordinance.·
Interior landscaping for the entire parking area shall be
provided and not merely to the extent of its alteration or
expansion.
(b) At least ten percent (10%) of the total parking area (all
paved and interior landscaped areas) must be landscaped in
accordance with this subsection (E).
(c) Interior landscape islands shall be a minimum ten (10) feet
wide with a total area of at least one hundred eighty (180)
square feet. One (1) internal landscape island shall be
provided for every twenty (20) parking spaces.
7
(d) No more than twenty (20) parking spaces shall be provided
in an unbroken row without the provision of interior
landscape islands.
(e) At least one (1) shade tree shall be provided in each interior
landscape island. The remaining area of the required
interior landscaped area shall be landscaped with shrubs or
perennials not to exceed two (2) feet in height, or turf grass.
(f) Required plantings for interior landscape islands shall be in
accordance with the conceptual illustrations set forth in
Appendix A. All trees and shrubs required to be planted by
this Section 906. 7. 6 shall be of the minimum diameters and
heights set forth in the illustrations to Appendix A.
(g) There shall be a mini.mum distance of five (5) feet from the
edge of paving to the base of all shade trees.
(h) Interim landscape islands shall be enclosed by appropriate
curbing or a similar device at least six ( 6) inches wide and
six ( 6) inches in height above the paving surface (wedge
curbing is acceptable).
F. Landscaping for service structures. All service structures shall be fully
screened. For the purposes of this subsection (G), service structures shall
include propane tanks, dumpsters, air conditioning units and condensers,
electrical transformers and other equipment or elements providing service
to a building or a site.
( 1) Location of screening. A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or
earth mound shall enclose any service structure on all sides unless
such structure must be frequently moved, in which case screening
8
7.
on all but one (1) side is required. The average height of the
screening material shall be one (1) foot more than the height of the
enclosed structure, but shall not be required to exceed eight (8) feet
in height. Whenever service structures are screened by plant
material, such material may count towards the fulfillment of
required landscaping.
(2) Protection of screening material. Whenever screening material is
placed around any trash disposal unit or waste collection unit that is
emptied or removed mechanically on a regular basis, a fixed barrier
to contain the placement of the container shall be provided within
. the screening material on those sides where there is such material.
The barrier shall be at least eighteen (18) inches from the material
and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent possible damage to the
screening when the container is moved or emptied. The minimum
front opening of the screening material shall be twelve (12) feet to
allow service vehicles access to the container.
G. All areas not utilized for structures, driveways, planting strips or parking
facilities must be seeded, sodded or landscaped within two (2) weeks after
construction activities are completed, unless those activities are completed
between a time period of November I through April 1. In such case, the
required sodding or seeding must occur within two (2) weeks of April 1.
H. Planning Commission may recommend additional landscaping at a ratio as
noted in Appendix A. Said landscaping may be located around building
perimeters, detention ponds, and other areas as recommended.
Building Materials and Facade Treatment
A. Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to ensure that the physical
characteristics of proposed buildings and uses are compatible when
9
considered in the context of the surrounding area and community as a
whole. They are intended to promote the design of an environment that is
built to human scale and consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Township Comprehensive Plan
B. Every portion of any exposed exterior wall surface shall be composed of
brick, stone, decorative split-face block, glass, or marble, with wood used
for trim only, except as provided herein. A minimum of 50% of the facade
of any structure shall be composed of brick, decorative split-face block or
stone.
C. The Board of Commissioners may approve alternative materials only if
such material is determined to be equal or superior compared to approved
material.
D. Building Design. Building design shall contribute to the uniqueness of the
zoning district in which the shopping center is located and the Township,
with predominant materials, elements, features, color range and activity
areas tailored specifically to the site and its context, in consultation with
the Township.
E. Multiple-Building Developments. Buildings in multiple-building developments
shall possess common design characteristics including, but not
limited to, consistent rooflines, use of compatible proportions in building
mass and outdoor spaces, complementary relationships to the street, similar
window and door patterns, and the use of similar building materials m
terms of color, shades and textures.
F. Maximum Horizontal Wall Dimension o(All Walls Facing the_Front Yard
of a Shopping Center. Building elements shall have a wall surface no longer
than one hundred (100) feet without a break. A break shall consist of(!) a
recess or offset measuring at least twenty feet in depth or one-quarter of
10
the building in length or (2) a series of recesses or offsets, at intervals of
not more than forty feet, that vary the depth of the building wall by a
minimum of four feet. Not less than twenty-five percent of the building wall
shall be varied in this way. The objective of this standard is to avoid large,
undifferentiated wall surfaces.
G. Buildings over thirty (30) feet in height shall include architectural features
that mimic two story structures, such as windows or similar components.
Buildings with flat roofs shall have mansard roof facades or gabled roofs
over the required offset areas.
8. Signage
A. A sign plan for the entire shopping center shall be submitted with the first
land development application. Said plan shall include all wall, ground, and
directional signs along with construction details for each sign. Said plan
shall be evaluated using the following criteria :
B.
l. The design scheme of sign styles as part of the entire shopping
center.
2.
3.
4.
Permitted types of signs:
1.
Safety of ingress and egress.
Integration of signs with the building
architecture and style.
All requirements of this Ordinance.
Wall signs
2. Directional signs
3. One free standing sign
4. Temporary signs as specified in this Ordinance.
5. Hanging Directional Sign
C. All other sign types, including the following, are prohibited:
11
D.
1. Roof signs
2. Flashing and animated signs
Freestanding signs
1. One freestanding sign is pennitted for a shopping center.
2. The lowest copy area of a freestanding sign must be located at least
but not more than ten (10) feet above the average grade upon
which it is placed.
3. The structure upon which the signs are placed may not extend more ·
than three (3) feet above the highest sign affixed to that structure
nor more than three (3) feet to either side of the sign.
4. The sign shall not have more than two (2) faces.
5. Structures supporting such signs may consist of the following:
(a) Two poles supporting the sign at opposite ends.
(b) A monument style sign.
(c) A single pylon sign where the width of the pylon is at least
seventy :five (75%) percent of the width of the sign copy
area
( d) The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be twenty
(20) feet
7. The background area of any sign shall not extend more than two (2)
feet beyond the copy area of the sign.
8. Multiple signs may be attached to the freestanding sign structure.
9. The cumulative square footage of such signs may not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
10. Lights directed at the sign or the sign itself shall not interfere with
site distance or visibility.
E. Wall Signs.
12
I. Each business occupying a wall space and having a main entrance
on that wall shall be permitted one wall sign per wall subject to the
following limitations and conditions.
2. Said wall or walls shall consist of only the exterior walls housing
the occupation of the business.
3. The total square footage of one business's wall signs shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet for each wall.
4. The square footage of the sum of said signs shall not exceed twenty
(20%) percent of the surface area of the exterior face of the wall to
which they are affixed.
5. The maximum square footage of any wall sign, excluding canopy
and projected signs, may be increased to one hundred fifty (150)
feet, provided there iS no internal illumination.
6. Projected signs may not project more than five (5) feet from the
building to which they are attached.
7. Canopy signage is permitted in lieu of wall signage. The square
footage of the copy area of canopy signage shall count towards the
maximum wall signage permitted for the business, the occupation of
which the canopy abuts.
8. No more than ten (10) square feet of the area allotted for each
business's signage under this section shall consist of changeable
signs.
9. The background area of any sign shall not extend more than two (2)
feet beyond the copy area of the sign.
F. Directional Signs.
1. Directional ground signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in width and
two (2) feet in height.
13
2. Directional ground signs must conform to a uniform style
tlrroughout the shopping center.
3. The number and placement of directional ground signs are subject
to approval by the Board of Commissioners. At least two signs are
permitted at each point of ingress or egress to a public right-of-way
or from an out parcel complex to a central retail area.
G. The following definitions shall apply to this Section 906. 7.8.
1. Copy area: The area of the sign the edges of which are tangent to
displayed graphic images, letters, numerals, and symbols on that
sign. The copy area also includes the additional area of the
immediate background of the sign excluding building facades.
2. Roof signs: Any sign attached to the roof of a structure or
extending more than five feet above the structure. Roof signs shall
not include those signs attached to the side of a mansard roof and
not extending above that roof, which shall be considered wall signs.
3. Changeable signs: Signs, the lettering of which is manually
changeable.
4. Animated Signs: Signs with flashing lights and electronic animated
text.
5. Canopy: A multisided overhead structure with a roof-like
projection that is attached to a building as a cantilever or supported
by columns or similar structures.
6. Projected sign: A sign attached to a building's face that projects
more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the building's face. A
projected sign includes hanging signs under canopies or roofs.
7. Wall sign: A sign attached to a building's face including projected
and canopy signs.
14
8. Freestanding sign: A sign that is attached to, erected on or
supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame or other
structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a
building or other structure whose principal function is something
other than the support of a sign.
9. Hanging Directional Sign: A sign that hangs under and from a
canopy structure, the copy area of which faces perpendicular from a
storefront. The purpose of a hanging directional sign is to direct
pedestrians to a store in a strip mall environment. Hanging signs to
not exceed two (2) square feet.
9. Traffic Flow, Internal Circulation and Impact
A. The requirements of Section 416 of the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall also apply to an application for shopping
center conditional use.
B. Ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as not to constrict the
flow of traffic on the public road.
C. No conditional use approval shall be granted without permit approval from
applicable state or county transportation agencies.
10. Lighting
A All lighting shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Township's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
B. In addition, no lighting standard shall be higher than twenty-five (25) feet in
height.
11. Deliveries and Operation Hours and Other Nuisances
A. Deliveries, collection of refuse and other activities incident to the operation of a
shopping center shall be confined to such hours and such type as will not create
any unreasonable disturbance to neighboring residential areas. No deliveries to the
15
premises or collection of refuse shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p .m.
and 6:00 a.m.
B. Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided so as to permit the transfer of
goods and materials on the premises rather than Oil a public street or in the offstreet
parking area Oil the premises. A landscaping screen of no less than six (6)
feet in heigl:tt shall be required where off-street loading and unloading areas abut
residential uses, so that such operations shall be shielded from view from such
residences.
12. Submission Requirements and Review
A. An applicant proposing a shopping center shall comply with the general
application submission and drafting standards and requirements applicable to
major land developments in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
DULY ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum
being present, this ;Z/.d day of /(arc/, , 2001.
Attest:
(SEAL)
Thomas P . Cole, II, Solicitor
BOARD OF COMMJSSIONERS
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
B~1?UM//~,v
Thomas L. Kerber, President
16
APPENDIX 'A'
The following pages provide concepts and a
basic selection of plant materials that may be
applied to the described bufferyards and parking
lots.
As provided for in this chapter, the Township
of North Huntingdon encourages creative
interpretation and welcomes an innovative
approach to site emichment with the use of
plants and land forms
APPENDIX 'A'
II)
'.'.;
w
I-
~x
0 n::
()._
()._
<(
~~~~~~~~~~~~~•! •
.J
<(
I- z
w z
<( z
n::
0 w
FIRST
!}) w
-~- ::J n::
0 I-
::J w
LATERAL
0 0
<(
lw) I (jJ
0 n:: a'. 0 0 LL
LL '° "' ~
2 2
::J ::J ::;;: ~
;,;;: ;,;;:
2 :z:
MINIMUM MEASURING HEIGHT
2" CALIPER (o
ROOT BALL / <o l ~
~ 2
2s· I
-l------~f
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DEC1DUOUS
ORNAMENTAL & SHADE TREES
CENTER OF
!'.\ SINGLE LEADEH
." '"'4"l ~" 'Ife - ( ''" . :U.,.I)D:1J\ - "'!'''"\,"'\'\1~.
;,~} '~,<,!"" ~>1t-1W''· ~;;;~
~ .!•\ ~\}~-lj,
_q,>·i. ,,,,,,.:-ti''·
r{~ '~ IJ..~"
·"''""l';Ui'>l@:ti-I')\ l -i ~1 ,. ." '~--"..,~,. ;..-~\l~-. .J I :i ~yf.,,7'@~
·'!,l}llI:liti_,,f<ri1 ~~.,~~M!' '.':
!l)l~:\.11\'!:"'·r~ <~«-f. .._,- z ""'it - lt /fr"V. . 2 ~~.~ "'I-"'~~ z
""~ n t"i\--~ z . r ::i'~ .,1r;..r ~~ ::::.
,,,;;:;!'.). ~) .. ~-~ z
~~I' _,, & ~~'~
~~w."'~) "'1,'l:i~~
~A\- -~ 1"\~:,,
~)i\llJiip \~1'tif<'""
~~. -~F~~l.(i:
:..r
ROOT BALL I ~ I
20· .\
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR
CONIFEROUS I EVERGREEN TF
APPE
> u
u m
7
0
0
c
co
r
m
7J z> 0 0 ~
(j) s- :r: :z ;::a
s c c OJ
3:: :r:
m oo
rn o
Om
Ou
Cr
0 )> Cz
CJ)
-n
(JJ 0
;:oc 7J
c OJ
co c
"Tl
(JJ 11
-l m
p ;::o
z -<
0 )>
p ;::o
;o CJ
o en
Cf)
)>
- CT-I
~
·z
~
-t- .-' -
I + T
I '
< )> ::a
m
+ en
-'I- -
i
1~
T '
~ ~
"l
C" 3' -0"
NOTE A
NOTE B
+
AVERAGE MINIMAL SPREAD FOR SPREADING, SEMI-SPREADING OR GLOBE SHAPED EVERGREEN SHRUBS.
THE HEIGHT VARIES.
AVERAGE MINIMAL HEIGHT FOR CONICAL AND BROAD UP-RIGHT EVERGREEN SHRUBS_
THE SPREAD VARIES.
VARIES
+ +
+ +· \l + + +
3.5'
30"
SEE NOTE 'A'
µ~~~" < '"'-~. ~
~ ~O) ~
~1f4'"'"'$"fl:" ~ ~--L
ROOT BALL\ ~
~
0
~
\ 14" r-
SINGLE ROW EVERGREEN HEDGE PLAN
AND MINIMUM. EVERGREEN SHRUB STANDARDS
APPENDIX 'A'
--- ---
GRADE
VARIES
40'
CD PROPERTY LINE
.5'MINIMUM
VARIES
BUFFERYARD 'A' CONCEPTUAL SECTION
FORTY FEET WIDE
5' MINIMUM
40'
PROPERTY LINE CD
APPENDIX 'A'
- - ------ ----------- ----------
ADJACENT BUFFERYARD ..
- - - --~- - - ·-T'------4-
0
a:
~-
a:
w
LL
LL
=i co .
1-z
w
u
<(
MINIMUM 2.5'
--,
0
<(
00~~(\ ~
O~ 1n§ 5' MINIMUM
SHADE TYPE TREE 8,
EVERGREEN OR DECIDUOUS ORNAMENTAL TREE
MEDIUM I TALL SHRUBS
BUFFERYARD 'A' CONCEPTUAL PLAN
FORTY FEET WIDE
APPENDIX 'A'
40'
0
~ )--
0::
w
""
::)
OJ I I- .
ZW
u.<.. (, • · 1
0
<(
ADJACENT BUFFERYARD
(£()~ a ('1
I 5' MINIMUM
SHADE TYPE TREE
-1--I EVERGREEN OR DECIDUOUS ORNAMENTAL TREE
MEDIUM I TALL SHRUBS
MINJMU.M 2.5' ~f\J--
BUFFERYARD ''B' CONCEPTUAL PLAN 1 30· I
THIRTY FEET WIDE
APPENDIX 'A'
2.5'
MINIMUM r-
- GRADE-j;:
VARIES
30'
G) PROPERTY LINE
5' MINIMUM
VARIES
BUFFERYARD 'B' CONCEPTUAL SECTION
THIRTY FEET WIDE
5'~
2.5'
MINIMUM---;
30'
PROPERTY LINE G)
APPENDIX 'A'
--------
--~. " I . .. '----:-. -:--. -:-----:-----:------=----:--------
c0c . \
. -ADJACENT BUFFERYARD ..
TREE CENTERS MUST BE A MINIMUM
OF 5' INSIDE BUFFERYARD LIMITS
b
"'
~cc . ·II EVERGREEN OR DECIDUOUS ORNAMENTAL TREE
w LL .•
'LL
::::>
OJ
. 1-
z
10.}--l\-J SHADE TYPE TREE
.w· . "'- _,;
<u{. ·~ . ci
• <{
I I MEDIUM I TALL SHRUBS
MINIMUM 2.5'
\ ~I BUFFERYARD 'C 1 CONCEPTUAL PLAN
TWENTY FEET WIUI::
APPENDIX 'A'
2.5'MINIMUM
'-'1'--11'--- GRADE VARIES
-5' MINIMUM
20'
G) PROPERTY LINE
VARIES
BUFFERYARD 'C' CONCEPTUAL SECTION
TWENTY FEET WIDE
5'-
20'
2.5'
MINIMU
PROPERTY LINE G)
APPENDIX 'A'
0
"'
SHADE TREE SELECTED FROM PARl<ING LOT ISLAND LIST
+ +
iO' ~(TYPICAL)
DEEP CONCRETE CURB
+ +
CONCEPTUAL PARKING LOT ISLAND PLANTER PLAN
FOR ISLANDS 10' W X 20' L
APPENDIX 'A'
b
"
SHADE TREE SELECTED FROM PARl<ING LOT ISLAND LIST
+
+
+
-f-
I~ 9' ~~ (TYPICAL)
DEEPCONCRETECURB~~~---1
+
+
CONCEPTUAL PARKING LOT ISLAND PLANTER PLAN
FOR ISLANDS 10' W X 40' L
APPENDIX 'A'
Sheet1
Bufferyard l'v1inimal Plant Quantities
Bufferyard A
per 400 L_F. Average per 100 L_F.
10 shade trees 2.5
20 conifer or deciduous ornamentals 5 ( 3 conifer I 2 deciduous)
96 medium I tall plants 24
B uffe rya rd B
per400 L_F_ Average per 100 LF.
8 shade trees 2
16 conifer I deciduous ornamentals 4 ( 3 conifer I 1 deciduous)
g4 medium I tall shrubs 21
Bufferyard C
Jer 400 L_F_ * Average per i 00 L_Ff'*
! shade trees 2
2 conifer I deciduous ornamentals 3 ( 2conifer11 deciduous)
i2 medium I tall shrubs 13 .
,2 evergreen shrubs 8
'Per '8000 square feet for additional landscape area per Section 906.7.6.J
'Per 2000 square feet for additional landscape area p~r Section 906.7.6.J
RECOMMENDED TREES ANO SHRUBS FOR FUTURE PLANTINGS
Common Name
Deciduous Shrubs
_.Red Barberry
Pygmy Red Barberry
·summersweet
·Muskingum Gray Dogwood
Si/verblotch Dogwood
Redvein Enkianthus
Dwarf Burningbush
Siebold Weeping Forsythia
Dwarf Fothergilla
· P.G. Hydrangea
Oakleaf Hydrangea
'Sparkleberry Winterberry
Virginia Sweetspire
'Northern Bayberry
Black Jetbead
Anthony Waterer Spirea
Improved Red Dwarf Spirea
Little Princess Spirea
Gold Flame Spirea
Koreanspice Viburnum
Maries Doublefile Viburnum
Doublefile Viburnum
'Black Haw Viburnum
'Arrowwood Viburnum
Scientific Name
Berberis thunbergii atror
Berberis thunbergii atro.
C/ethra alnifolia
Camus racemosa 'Mus~
Camus alba elegantissi1
Enkianthus campanulat
Euonymous alatus com
Forsyth'ia suspensa siel
Fothergilla gardenii
Hydrangea paniculata f
Hydrangea guercifolia
llex x 'Sparkleberry'
ltea virginica
M yrica pens ylvani ca
Rhodotypos scandens
Spirea x. bumalda 'Anthony Waterer'
Spirea x. bumalda 'Cciccinea'
Spirea japonica 'Little Princess'
Spirea x_ bumalda 'Gold Flame'
Viburnum carlesi
. Viburnum p.t. mariesii
Viburnum olic. tomentosum
Viburnum prunifolium
Viburnum dentatum
'Indigenous species in Eastern United States
Evergreen Shrubs
Common Name Scientific Name
Korean Boxwood Buxus koreana
Tiny leafed Boxwood Buxus microphylla compacta
Common Boxwood Buxus communis
·rnkbeny llex glabra
··Brue Holly llex x meservae cultivars
Compact Pfitzer Juniper Juniperus c. pfitzeriana comp.
Saybrook Gold Juniper Juniperus c. 'Saybrook Gold'
Sea Green Juniper Juniperus c. 'Sea Green'
Tam Juniper Juniperus sabina tamariscifo/ia
Grey Owl Juniper Juniperus virginiana 'Grey Owl'
.. Oregon;.Grape Holly Mahonia aguifolium
English Yew Taxus baccata repardens
Dense Yew Taxus m. densiformis
-pruning f shearing required to control height
Shade Trees for Bufferyards f Street Trees
·Red Sunset Red Maple Acer rubrum 'Red Sunset'
·sugar Maple Acer saccharum
"Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
"American Beech Fagus qrandifolia
European Beech Fagus sylvatica
Maidenhairtree Gingko biloba (male)
'Thomless Honeylocust Gleditsia tria. inermis
American Swe·etgum Liguidambar
·sourgum Nyssa sylvatica
Bloodgood London Planetree Platanus acerFolia 'Bloodgood'
Swamp White Oak Ouercus bicolor
·Northern Red Oak Quercus borealis
Pin Oak Quercus palustris
Shumard Oak Quercus shumardi
European Linden Tilia cordata
·indigenous species in Eastern United States
Ornamental Deciduous Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Hedge Maple Acer c:cmpestre
Amur Maple Acer ginnala
Japanese Maple Acer pa Ima tum
·shadblow Serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis
'Apple Serviceberry Ame/anchier x grandifloria
'River Birch Betu/a nigra
Pyramidal European Hornbeam Carpinus betu/us fastigiata
•Gray Dogwood Camus racemosa
Chinese Dogwood Camus kousa
*Flowering Dogwood Camus fforida
*Ohio Pioneer Dotted Hawthorn Crataegus punctata 'Ohio Pioneer'
*Winter King Hawihom Crataegus viridis 'Winter King'
Star Magnolia Magnolia stellata
·sweetbay Magnolia Magnolia virginiana
Snowdrift Crabapple Malus 'Snowdrift'
Sugar Tyme Crabapple Ma/us 'Sugar Tyme'
*American Hophombeam Ostrya virginiana
Sourwood Oxvdendron arboreum
Evergreen Trees for Bufferyards A, Band C
Concolor Fir Abies concolor
American Holly llex opaca
Norway Spruce Picea abies excelsa
White Spruce Picea alba
Serbian Spruce Picea omorika
•Eastern \IVhite Pine Pinus strobus
Scots Pine Pinus sylvestris
Douglasfir Pseudotsuga menziesi
·canadian Hemlock Tsuga canadensis
*Indigenous species in Eastern United States
APPENDIX 'A'
Shade Type Trees for Island Planters in Parking Lots
Common Name Scientific Name
"Green Mountain Sugar Maple Acer saccharum 'Green Mountain'
"Hackberry Ce/tis occidentalis
'Thornless Honeylocust Gleditsia tria. inermis
Columbia London Planetree Platanus x acerfolia 'Columbia'
Liberty London Planetree Platanus x acerfolia 'Liberty'
Special Interest Tree Species
Katsuratree Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Maidenhairtree Gingko biloba (male)
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia glyptostroboides
English Oak Quercus robur
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
•Indigenous species in the Eastern United States
APPENDIX 'A'
I '
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NUMBER 1 OF 2002
ORDINANCE NO. 1050 -
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND ORDINANCE #765, THE NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP
ZONING ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH NEW STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR THE
PEDD-1 ZONING DISTRICT, AND TO MODIFY EXISTING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN
THE C-1 ZONING DISTRICT, AND TO MODIFY AND AMEND THE EXISTING PEDD-1 AND
PEDD-2 PROVISIONS OF THE ORDINANCE TO REPEAL PEDD-1 REFERENCES IN ORDER
TO CREATE A SEPARATE AND DISTINCT PEDD-2 DISTRICT FROM THE MODIFIED PEDD-
1 DISTRICT
WHEREAS, The Township of North Huntingdon, Westmoreland County, adopted a Comprehensive Plan
in March ,2000, and
WHEREAS, The adopted Township Comprehensive Plan included goals, o~ectives and action strategies
to promote economic development within the Township and to preserve community character and natural
resources, and
WHEREAS, the adopted Comprehensive Plan recommended specifically the creation of a new Office
District, and
WHEREAS, the existing PEDD-1 and PEDD-2 districts of the Zoniog Ordinance, (#765) while providing
for economic development opportunities within the Township have been found not to provide for
development of a nrixed-nse variety, and
WHEREAS, it was the :finding and recommendation of the Planning Commission in a report to the Board
of Commissioners in March, 2001 that a new PEDD district be created to accommodate qnality mixed use
development within the Township, and
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners authorized the Planning Commission to study this issue and
prepare an ordimmce for a new mixed use district, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission, working with the Planning and Zoning Department and a
professional planning consultant, conducted six ( 6) public meetings to solicit ideas and input from Township
residents and developers fur fue a new mixed use filstr:ict, and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission reviewed this Ordinance on October 8,2001 as being consistent with
the goals and objectives of the adopted Township Comprehensive Plan and recomrnen~d approval of this
Qrdinance as an 11mendment to Ordirumce #7fi5, the Township Zoning Qrdinance
BE IT DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North
Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the Township Zoning
Ordinance, Qrdinance No. 765 is amended as ibllows by adding sections 1 through 8, and referenced
appendices of this ordinance and making modifications and deletions to Ordinance No. 765 contained in
Section 9 of this Ordinance.
Section 1: Purpose and Intent
Consistent with the goals and objectives of the adopted Township Comprehensive Plan, the purpose of tl1ese
regulations are to facilitate the development and redevelopment of large underutilized or vacant tracts of
land which may be suitable for a variety of new uses, so arranged, designed and balanced in a manner
consistent with community 1111d economic development objectives of the Township. It is the intent of the
Planned Economic Development 1 (PEDD-1) district to promote flexibility in design, while assuring the
following community development objectives are promot:ed, encouraged and controlled:
A. Promote orderly and unified development and redevelopment in response to changes in market
conditions, whlle assuring fuat the timing and kication of fillCh development is consistent with '1Vl!ilatile
capacities of transportation and public utilities as well as the overall land use goats, as expressed in the
Township Comprehensive Plan.
B. Throngltthe·provision of the·variatiOllS within titis district, contrtned herein, =rtrol the tregatiw effucts
of commercial and residential sprawl than can result from more traditional single-use commercial and
residential developments.
C. Encourage economic growth consisting of a well-billanced and regulated mix tff 1lPJlroPriate· residential
and non-residential uses, oriented more toward a predomination of office and research and development
facilities, advanced technology firms, health, education and other service industries and non-polluting
light industrial ares. ProVtde fur limits oo tl1e a:motmt , type and location of retail development within
the site, and require residential development within the site fur larger developments. The proposes of all
required uses and limitations on uses being the employment and consmner needs of occupants of the
district and rownsbip residents while strengthening existing businessoo.
D. Encourage, to the fullest extent possible, development of a type that provides fur quality employment
opportunities for residents of the community that pay more than minimum wages, aod contribnte to the
creatiun t'lfa divemified·oonmmnity.iolr bare for the 1U'€a.
E. Provide for an adequate mixture of quality housing types to serve the needs of the elderly persons l!lld
young families within the Township, as well other household sizes, ages, and income levels than can
well.filtuated and integrnted witlt <'lllrer nmM:esi:dsnti:al uses.
F. Provide for the transition of uses through adequate bu:lrers' and setbacks to avoid conflicts between
incompatible land uses adjoining the development and within the development site. Provide for a
namitio1r of mreS" tiirouglt tlte IDciitimi <if uses at areas- witliii:r tire devei<ljlttl:ertt, sucil as requiring
residential development to aqjuin residentially zoned pmpeities and allowing large-scale re1ail to be
allowed only ne,,,'l to commercially and industrially zoned properties.
G. Provide for ttrinimurtt reqairem<irt\S·artd~ fur<Opeil $005 ·amt·envirormtentai pi'!l(1)ctron within
the development site to serve as both buffeting and transitional areas as well aS' providing for the
integration of passive, active and functional open spaces of a public and semi-public nature as part of
tlte''OVlll'iiltdesfgtt dertre
H. Provide for design requirement• to create pedestrian orientation, streetscape amenities, and other design
treatments which includes sidewalks, bikeways, ornamental street lighting, street trees and screened
µarkingmws.
I. Provide for opportmrity for the creative redevelopment of existing commeroially zoned site and
shopping centers, which may have blight and high vacancy rates and underutilization of existing retail
lltmcturi!S', by p!Ovidirrg fur ·oppor!Ulli!J• 10 Ti!'-'deve!OJ' tltlitt 'Sit@s" witl.t~ 2:0llittg fitidbitity tltan:
traditional commercial zoning standards, allow for residential-mix deVelopment, while adequately more
intense uses from adjoining residential properties
J. P!ovide f<Jr·ttre'Sl!N'l!il'Wt!ni€llt'Of'Jl00Pk, pd!r, ·and'VEfhtC!es' witllout 'incroasittg·~'Ol"creatmg
hazards within the district or within the area of impact in the larger community througlr requirements on
access to the development and staodards for trip generation consistent with the capacity of highway
·systems·arid:itttetsectlcms Ilttertdltd'to-sttw the "<Wvl!klpitte1tt ·si.te
Section 2: Definitions
In ndditi<in to the •defrJiitidns <icrntllned m Artiole 3 of Ordinance #?65, the following terms ·sl!al:I ·have
·specifi:c nteanirtgs indiC!ited for the purpose ·o'f ittll!rpreti:ng tltiSOn:linance gwei:rthtg;ttte PEDD-1 district.
Active Recreation - Any recreation use otherwise not included in the definition of passive recreation whose
pu1TJOSe :is to' provide a greater-sports and~ oriented resource.
Buildable Area: The gross area of a development site minus those areas are categorized as
Bnvironrtretttally Sertsttive Areas.
Building Cu.eiage The pet centage of a lat which whett "Viewed directly from abo've wl'mld ·be coveted by
a structure or structures. For purposes of calculating building coverage, access drives, parking areas aod
landscaping-sln!H 110tbe considered-structures.
Environmentally Sensitive Overlay: A mapped area, compiled and nurintained ·~, ihe North Huntingdon
Township Planning Department, the boundaries of which are composed of flood plains, wetlaods, aod steep
-sltlpes.
Floor Area Ratio: The specified percentage of a lot, in square feet, which determines aod equals the
maximwn runottl1! of gross floor-area penttlt!'ed on lhat lot
Garden ApartmentJCondominium:- A multi-dwelling unit building not exceeding three (3) stories or
filit!y-fiV<! \35) fuet in hei.glit Whi.cltowr is less. ·
High Rise ApartmentJCondominium: A multi-family dwelling having a height of five (5) stories or no
ttrorn lha1! sixty {60) "feet from ground lewl 1it tlte fumt of the building.
Dlustrative Site Plan: A master plan for the development site submitted as part of the tentative approval nf
the PEDD The purpose of the illustrative site plao is to visually describe how the development plao for all
·phases moots llte'6tandat'dS1111d-gtlideliltes-expressoo 1n 'ihi.s-Ordinanee.
Land lJre Categorle!~ Those uses that are permitted with the development site of a PBDD as gwuped by
similar uses. Included as laod use categories within a PEDD are: offices; limited 1llllllufacturing; aocillary
commercial; large ~1; mtdrosiderttial
Limited Manufacturing: The processing ar fabrication of materia'ls and products which by the nature of
the materials, equipment and processes used is quiet aod free of aoy objectionable or hazardous element aod
wmcltit;-oot'61*cti0naoteby~ofi!dor,~,'l'ilmili<in.~,p,fumes,~,-=okenifu5e-mfltter
ar water carried waste. Limited mamdilctruing uses includes .. those categorized and listed in the NAICS use
table inclnded in this ordinaoce, or those uses that cao be demonstrated by conditional use to have similar
~11Cl'satti<tli&~wft'hin~<lrdiminoe.
Mid Rise ApartmentJCondominium: A multi-dwelling building haviug a height of four ( 4) stories aod no
more fuan mty {5Gj feet ;ttrheightmm 'li1l!'gt'<lurt<Hevehit'theftotit ~flltebttiiding.
Mixed Use Building: A building on a development site that is comprised of several laod nse categories,
including: rosidentia1, "llttciHllfy retail, srnillhwti1, -dfficet·and ful:tlredntnmfactnri:ng.
Multi-Family Apartment/Condominium: Any residential building containing tlrree (3) or more dwelling
units where the dwelling units contain share an entraoce through a common corridor, including garden
apaftfilems, ruld•rise apattments orhlgh-me· apm'tlllertts, 'but not· inc1udillg towtihouses 11s ·defined 'by this
Ordinance.
O'fftee11: A. bufufutg or urtit whici1 is devOted exclt!Gtmy :tct business or prof~ ~. J.tOt ilivOlving
any retail or wholesale sales of the principal nature of the business, and excluding au:y industrial activity.
~ Space: The total l:alid· ll1ld wat«area ·witlrltt a Planmld Ecooomic Developmmt roe, nm individually
owned, which i~ designed and intended for the common lfSe or enjeyment of the residents' and wcupants of
the development. Common open space includes e11vironme11tally sensitive areas, secondary environmentally
reru:ttive arem:, pru;sive recte<ttion areai:, aci:ive 1'€Crtlation areas, and J)lazas, bu'! speciftcally .excludes
required bufferyards, streets, rights-of-way, parking areas, detention ponds and access to detention ponds.
Passive Recreation: Facil.itie" for ieisure and centertainment whiohdo-nat involve ~"·.exercise, -or ofuer
forms of active participation, including but not limited to sitting areas, picnic areas, game tables, gazebos,
obsewat=ion:weas, wildlife ·sanetuaries 1IIId natnre-areas.
3
Plllllning Are-;, £-ommereial: That portion of a Type 2 PEDD that is reserved to provide for opportunity
for large retail development, but also pennits office development, limited manufacturing, small retail,
ancillary -retail and residential. 'Commercial cplanning areas ·are :littUted to areas witltin '6Ul'T feet front
boundaries with existing commercial or industrially zoned properties and from Comprehensive Plan
odesignated:collector-or1t!'leriltlroads.
Planning Area, Core: That portion of a Type 2 PE~! or a Type l PEDD-1 with grearer than 5(} acres,
that is reserved for a variety of uses, specifically, office development, limited manufacturing, small retail,
-ancillary :retaihtndresidetttlaHhatis typically -located in the middle•of :the:developmertt osi:te, bordered by the
residential and commercial planning areas (fur a Type 2 PEDD)
Planning Area, .Office: The at'ell of a Type l PEOO with less -than 5l1 acres that is -reseived fur the
development of offices, limited manufacturing, ancillary retail and residential uses. The office planning
encompasses-Rte entire development site for a Type t PEDD with ~!ban W· acres-.
Planning Area, Redevelopment: The entire· development site of a Type R PEDD Ulilt provides fur
redevelopment of an existing commercially or .industrially zoned property meeting specifications contained
fu this ordinance.
Planning Area, Residentiat: That portion cl' a Type 2 PEDD or a Type 1 !'EDD' with greater than SlJ acres
that is specifically reserved for the residential development as a Planned Residential Development. The
Residilntial Planni1tg Area consists of a tninimum of twenty {2'0%)' and a maximum of fifty {56%} percent
of the development site and borders all residentially zoned properties.
Planting, Hil(lt Level: Consists- of trees of a deciduons nature with a miuimum heigh! 6f six f.6) fuet at
planting and a caliper of l I-> inches at planting and ft= of an eveigteen natnre will! a minimum of six' {6)
feet at planting All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the American Standards for
Nursery Stock published by the Americatl Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D. C.
Planting, Low-Level: Consists of shrnbs and other plant species that is greater than two (2) feet in height at
pianting and less than six (6) feet in height at pianting. All measurements and plant quality shall be
consistent wtth the Autetican Standards for Nurn:ry S!Oek pul1lished by the Amezk:an Association of
Nurserymen, brc., Waslringl'on, D.C.
Planting, Ornamental!- Consists· of trees-of a deciduous· nature with a m.iltimttm-height of four- (4)feet· and
caliper of one (I) inch at planting consistent with the character of the trees noted in Appendix A of this
ordinance and trees of an evergreen nature with a height of four (4) feet at planting. All measurements and
plant quality sbilll be consistent with the American StandardS' for Nnrsery Stock published by the American
AssocialirnrofNrusetymen, hrc'., Washington; D.C.
Plaza: Attopett space that may be improved, lanctscape or paved usually sunom!ded by buildings Ot"streets
and used for passive recreational activities and recreatiou.
Retail, Ancillary - A use classified as retail use (R ) in the NAICS table within this ordinance that is
involved i1t the sale of goods-or-servi=', thatCOtltalns lesS'thmt 5,tl9llsquare-feet of grossftoor-area:
Retail, Large - A use classified as retail use (R ) in the NAICS table within this ordinance that is
involved tu the sale of goods or-services and eotttains greirter-thau 7, 500 square feet of gross floor-area.
Retail, Small: - A use classified as retail use CR )' m the NAICS tabie" wi!hin fuis ardimmre that is
involved in the sale of goods or services and contains greater than 5,000 square feet and less than 7,500
5qUafC feet ()f gt'OS'S floor area.
4
Semndary Environmentally Semilivc Area: Those iands 1tln>ing features 'Of iesser environmwtal
sensitivity as the environmentally sensitive areas. These areas may be developed on a limited basis, but are
pFefet1ed to ile piesei ved 11S"parhl1'1he-open space. The features included wi!hitt these area~ are ·indluded :in
Section 8 (M) (3) mtbis 01ditmnce.
1'teep Slopes: Areas uf existing topography, where muver-a =-htmdredfoat horiZ'Onttl distance, oc·where
the difference in elevation is over twenty (20) feet, the slope equals or exceeds twenty five (25%) percent
from thetoptabottmtt oftbe break in grade.
Su!nltantial Remion - Any clrange to the illusttative site plan whlch invclves 'lt·change to ritgress ur-egress,
any increase in dwelling unit density, any increase in the approved amount of square footage for retail
development, any change of= which results in tbe tcrtal pa1king or loading bertl1$ required, an inci ease of
more than ten (10%) percent of all buildings, a change in the phasing or tiers, or the proposal of a use that
was not originally proposed as part of the tentative approval application.
Tier: A segment of the implementation of the total approved development plan of the PEDD that
establishes tbe amounts of developme1lt permitted among the carious' land use categories
Townhouse: A residential building consisting of a minimum of two (2) and a maximum of six (6) attached
~family dwelling units; separated frottteachoth.el'ey verticalwalis'wrthtJut OJXrtitlgS
Wetlands: All areas regulated as wetlands by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or
F'C:deral agencies.
Section 3: Applicafion Procedures and PEDD-1 Oassifications
A TY.PES Of'PEDD-! DiS1'RrC'TS
The following types of PEDD-1 districts are established by tbis Ordinance. The provisions of this Ordinance
shall apply to all types' deseiibed herein, tl1lkss otherwise specified in this Ordinattce.
1. T"J'PC !:
Purpose: The purpose of the Type 1 PEDD-1 district is to provide the opportunity for development that
results' in a development sire wttlt a greater' emphasis® offices' amHimited nllTltu:factwing = , and limits
retail development ro rttose uses tinlt = '3t1ci!my ro fueiarger 'development 'located = the 'Si'te. ''f<ype 1
sites may be located on medium size parcels with a minimum of fifteen (15) contiguous acres under single
ownership o; agi:ec'!l101lt for owneishi:p. Type l de'lclopment sites' {!f fifty (507 ~ or= ·shlill include
required residential development to serve as a transition area between adjoining residential nses, per
standard's contained m Section 5 otthls ordinance.
2. Type 2: The propose of the Type 2 PEDD-1 district is to provide fue oppottunity furdevelopraent·of
large-scale mixed nse projects that encompass office development, limited manufacturing, residential
deveioprnent, ancillary retail development, smali retail development and limitett lll:rge retail development.
Development sites incl.mies a required transition = fur residential deoclopment per~ '5 i!f fuis
ordinance, bufferyards and defined planning areas to protect the public, health, safety and welfare and are
located on sites' with greater than fifty (50')' contiguous acres under singlC' ownerslrip or agi:eement for
owneniltip
3. Type R: Tue pnrpose of the Type R PEDD-l is to provide oppo1tunity for redevelopment of existing or
vacant rommerci:tl and industrial filtes fucated mt Route 3'7 Nfuntle·""3 tlnough 'f'ite provisi:ruis'to a'fitYW fur
greater flexibility in development standards and allowing for more intense development of a mixed use
nature than would otherwise be provided through existing C-l and I zoning district regulations.
Development sites shall have a minimum of 15 acres that are currently zoned C-1 (Commercial 1), C-lA
(Conunercial 1-A} or Industrial (f) and are under single ownershi]:ror agreement for ownership.
5
B. Af>?L!CATIDNP~S
In order to provide an expeditious method for processing the development plan for a Plaimed Economic
Development District -1 and to avoid delay and uncertainty which would arise· if it were necessary to secure
app1oval bya nnmicipallty ·offoClliprocedru es, ofaphrtof sctbdivisionmrdiortarnt ·development as well as
approval of a change of zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the property, it is hereby declared to be
in the public interest that all procedures with respect to the approval or disapproval of a development plan
for a Planned Economic Development District - 1 and the continuing administration thereof shall be
consistent with the following·provisions:
(a) All properties currently designated wlth the PEDD-1 zone on the Official Zoning Map shall remain
zooedasmclt, m1less"<!!!!erwireamendedll:noagltptoeedwesesta111is!Ied'by~
(b) The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the development or redevelopment or enlargement of
any site currently zoned PEDD-1 in the following manner:
'('l) Vacantptopeities <mdpropettieswi'lh abandoned uses: Mtprovisio=·offue 01dinance 'llJ'llly
(2) Properties with existing occupied structures; The regulations of Ordinance #765, Article 7, NonConfornring
Uses shall apply to· the redevelopment or expansion of sites currently zoned PEDD-1 with
·exisfurgmes.
2. Procedures for the Creation of New PEDD-1 Zoned Propeity
'f!tis·ordtmmce·estab!ishes'llre'ffiOO-i ·clistrict·asit~·fucse~·cunentty ronedi'B00-1 ·on
the official zoning map of the Township as an overlay district. The creation of a PEDD-1 zone is subject
exclusively to the provisions of this Ordinance providing that land requested for this overlay zone satisfies
all standards for PEDD-1 eligibility for the overlay, and satisfies all requirements for tentative and final
approvals·, as prescribed by this Ordinance.
To be eligible for development under the PEDD-1 zoning district, the following requirements shall be met
for each type of PEDD-1 district in which an applicant is seeking the overlay zone
flt] 'fypel
(1) Parcel Size: Minimum of fifteen (15) contiguous acres under single ownership or agreement of
ownership at the time of application
{2} A mhtimtitll ·of ·one 'Side ,of a kng!!f greater than -two ·hum!ted ·and 1lf!y '(l':!l&)' feet ,<ff 1lre piope:tty
bordering one of the following zones: C-1, C-lA, I or PEDD-2
(3) Having one of the property lines of the proposed PEDD-1 located no further than one-half mile from
U. S, fumteJ&-ur'Sla!eRmrte·~:J.mntwrttt·existing urproposedtlirectaceesirro'ltonte"m;
(4) The site has access to public sewer and water service.
(5) Having an underlying zoning district of one of the following zones; C-1; C-lA; R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or
I.
(b) Type2:
'(l') Minhnumoffifty{~rontigmmsacres'tlf'lder''S.ing!emvnerslrip,onrgreement·of·ownersttip'·l!tttte·time
of application
(2) A minimum of one side, of a length greater than five hundred (500) feet bm'dering one of the following
ztme'S; C~l, C-l:A, h!rl'f!00-:2
(3) Being located no further than one-half (1/2) mile from U. S. Route 30 or SR 993 with existing or
proposed direct access to Route 30 or SR 993;
{4) The site ·has access to plilllic sewer and water service.
(5) Having an underlying zoning district of one of the following zones; C-1; C-lA; R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or
I.
(6) Exception: No Type 2 PEDD-1 shall be permitted contiguous to a previously approved Type 2 PEDD-1
that bas been abandoned under the provisions of Section 3 (C) (10) (c) of this ordinance.
(1) Minimum of fifteen (15) acres and maximum of fifty (50) acres under single ownership or agreement
·of-ownershlpm·ttte·time of application
(2) Having contiguous frontage on U.S. Route 30 or State Route 993
(3) Having an underlying zoning district of one of the following zones; C-1; I
(a) An applicant may review conceptual plans with the Planning Commission by requesting to be placed on
ttte meeting agenda. Such ·disoussions ·!llld · hd\nllllll review wlll ·alert the Commission to major ·new
developments, familiarize the applicant with plan requirements and submission procedures and identify
potential problem areas with the proposed development. 1bis informal review procedure shall not constitute
a furmat application fur-deveiopment.
(b) Submission requirements for informal review. An applicant requesting an informal review shall:
(1) Complete an application for informal review indicating the type of PEDD-1 district request with an
applicllfum form furtite'Same-sl!att'ile'J'l'<"'idedby·lhe'ItlWllShip.
(2) Prepare a sketch plan that comprises the entire site proposed for development; the sketch plan shall:
[a] Be legibly drawn and clearly show the proposed development and the date prepared
[bl Include information known by the applicant which will assist the Planning
Commission and township staff in providing guidance to the applicant
(c} Submissi.m for infunna! review :must 'be reecived '!er! '(ttl] 'Cl!lendar- -days to tile :regular ¥immlng
Commission meeting where the review is requested. Twelve ( 12) copies of the sketch plan must be received
by the Planning and Zoning Department for informal review.
-{d] At·-the iufmmai--rev?e:w; ·the Pl@miug·finmtlssiwt amt adrni::tristralive 'Statf·carrreview ·the'·'Sketcb"phms;
recommend guidelines to meet district standards and identify potential conflicts in the plan with township
development standards
(e) The Planning Co.mmiSsfun SlialT nlit :fonna'.lly .act on plans presented :for infbrmaI review. The '.l'fanning
Commission may offer suggestions to may assist the applicant in complying with the district's development
standards.
1. The application for tentative approval of a proposed PEDD-1 development shall contain all information
rnquited by this -section mid -slmll be "S'C!bntitled tu '!be 'Township 'f'lamling -and l!kmmg Depatltnerlt
within twenty (25) days of the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting
2. Twenty -five (25) copies of the application and all plans and reports, as required by this Ordinance,
-shall be filetlwilh·1heP!annlllg an:d·ZmringDepaitmenl fur-disset1tina!ioo-llr!lte.Platntingt:onnnission,
the Board of Commissioners and to required review agencies. The application fee as prescribed by the
Fee Ordinance shall accompany the application.
3. The-app!icam 'Shall be required, -.it ms~e, 1tr~ pt'.IS! 1lle perilneten:Jf 1het!evetopment
site at points deemed sufficient by the Township to notify potentially interested citizens of the pending
development of the site. Such notices shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the first
consideration of"tlle developrne.n! by :the l'lanoingCommiwon and .shall Il'Illllin posted l'lrroughout the
time the development plan is being considered by the Planning Commission and the Board of
Commissioners.
4. Hhtshative Site Plan: The applicant -sllldl ~bmi! mi ±llustratfve mte plan with '!he ·applicafum 'fur
Tentative Approval. The pmpose of the illustrative site plan is to visually describe how the
development plan for all phases meets the standards and guidelines e>qm:ssed in this Ordinance. The
illustrative site plan shall be legibly drawn to a scale not to exceed one (1) inch equals one huodred
( 1 OCJ) feet on a sheet not to exceed thirty (30) by forty ( 40) inches. It shall at a :minimum:
7
(a) Be prepmecl ·111Icl •Jle8ted ·'by 11 ·licensed 11fC!rltect, 1andscape architect, =gineer or su10ey en in
accordance with standards architectural and engineering practices.
(b) Delineate all required buffers and transition areas as prescribed by this Ordinance
{c) Delineate areas fur l!ll proposed land use categories (office l!lid limiled indttstthil , ancillary
retail, small retail, large retail, residential, pla1111ed residential development and open space
designated for each lot or parcel within the entire development
{~) The illustrative site plan may a!st> fttdicate ~c uses by fight, as allewet! bylhis utefittam;e
proposed for each lot or parcel
( e) Include a written description of the various proposed uses for each Jot or parcel, when known.
Wl!en not known at time tlf mbmission !Ire proposed 1arttt tllle categories-·af each lot or paroel,
and the allowed square footage or densities or each use, as permitted by provisions of this
ordinance shall be provided in the written description and noted on the illustrative site plan.
(!) The illusttative .me platt filla!t be accompanied by evic!enre that Ille tract cart be serviced by
public water and sewer systems of sufficient capacity
(g) The illustrative site plan shall include the layout of roads per the classification of roads as
indicated in Sec!i<m it (NJ {tr} of this- mdinance, within the devclapment site tu provide sme
and sufficient flow of traffic throughout the site
(h) The illustrative site plan shall include the zoning district of all properties contiguous to the
development site.
(i) The illustrative site plan shall include the frontage or direct access that the development site
provides the required arterial streets as defined by this ordinance
(j) Tueittnstra!fvesiteplan!lhattincludedesigna!ioftofphasesoftlresite~p!att.
(k) The illustrative site plan shall include all areas to be designated as preserved as open space as
euviro11111entally sensitive areas, secondary environmentally sensitive areas, passive recreation
areas and active rec1catrorrareas.
(I) The illustrative site plan shall be accompanied by a plan narrative which shall contain:
[I] A statement outlining the proposed uses of all building lots, when known, or when not
known a detail of tire land me mrteg01iesof l!ll b!i:ildinghi!s;
[2]Any requested waivers or modifications from specified township regulations and
standards otherwise applicable to the su~ect property with statements as to why the
gtatttittg-oftite- waiv ets requested: ar&neeesSatJ amti:trthe-pubtte-intetcst
[3 ]A schedule, when development is to be phased over a period of years, showing
proposed times for the filing of applications for final approval of each phase of the
propooecl development plan, comptiaflce wi!h tier ieqttitcmcttts tlf this V!dinatlce, and
estimates of construction times for each phase
[4] A statement of public interest setting forth the reasons why the proposed development
plan is- in tire public mterellt; and !row it meets- the applicable demft.y and bttlld-out
standards, and how it is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the community
development objectives of this Ordinance, and meets other community development
standards
[5] A tabulation of densities and build-out standards proposed that includes the amount of
total square feet proposed for each plarming area and per land use category
[ 6] A statement outlining proposed open spaces within the development site and a
description of the purposes they serve
(m} Review of illustrative site plan. 'Ihe ltlnstrative site plan, accompruriecl by any addftl01lal plans
and reports as required by this ordinance shall be reviewed to determine if the overall
development concept satisfies the provisions of this ordinance, in terms of the following items:
f l]'That the prepcsed anrottnts of the vmitm> land use categmies pet:utltte&irr the PEOO-l
district (offices, residential, retail-commercial, etc.) satisfy the minimum and maximum
amounts permitted prescribed by this ordinance
!2l That the locatlon iequiremen!s of various land use cJ!legmies as prescribed by this
ordinance are satisfied
[3] That the minimum requirements for open spaces, buffer areas and transition areas are
satisfied;
[4] That the uses, when !mown, are permitted with the PEDD-1 district
8
[51 That the proposed sylitem of roads throughout !he site are c:if suflicient design and
capacity to handle projected traffic flow throughout the site, as required by Section 8 of
this ordinance
f6l Thllt proposed aeress paints ta the site are c;f a desipr ta adeqnately offer safe in,gress
and egress to the development site;
[7] That the proposed collector roads accessing the site are of sufficient capacity to handle
the projected traffic volume generated by the site
[8] That the development site is adequately serviced or will be serviced by all public
utilities
[9] That the proposed development site by findings meets all community development
objectives as expressed in the purposes statement of this ardinance
6. Drafting Standards and Plan Requirements:
Unless exceeded or specifically excluded by this Ordinance the application and detailed plans for the
development site shall meet all applicable reqtttienrents as described in the foH.owi:n:i:. sections of the North
Huntingdon Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (#1011), as amended: 304. l; 304.3;
304.4; 304.5; 304.6. It is strongly suggested that prior to the submission af an application for a development
site in the applicant meet with the Planning and Zoning Director to detennine which sections are applicable
in the application.
7. Pnbl±c H~ amt Notification
(a) The Planning and Zoning Department shall forward the complete and accepted application for the
Planned Economic Development ta the following persens and al'!ieials: all members of the Ph!nnin:
Commission; all members of the Board of Commissioners; the Township Secretary; the Township Solicitor;
the Township Engineer; the Westmoreland County Department of Planning; the North Huntingdon
Township Municipal Anthmily. Additional copies of pl= shall remain orr file at tire affices of the~
and Zoning Department and shall be available for review during regular office hours.
(b) Notices to Neighboring Property Owners. In additian to the required posting of the property by the
appliClftlf; the'Fownship sha& make eveiy· passible effm1' w s~ notices· w ptoper!;r O'WllefS' witbm twO"
hundred (200) feet of the perimeter of the development site. Such notice sent to the most recent owner of
that property and shall include a brief descriptian of the application far development, a schedule of
scheduledmeetlt«s·and·theplaceand·timewhelrplansfur!hedevelepment emrbereviewed.
8. Review and Recommendations by the Planning Commission
{a} The P1anninj!; Cmmnissi<m shall' plaee the proposed devel""up""me..,n"'t p!m 011' its a$00<lfr al' its· next regular
meeting following the twenty-five (25) day submission requirement. The Planning Commission shall
review the plans, with consult from the Planning Director, the Township Solicitor and the Township
Engineer, anct shall·:malre1ecommendaticmfs'rin·wr.itin;gtcrtheBoan:tc:lf £ommissionm
(b) Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a complete application for tentative approval of a proposed
planned economic developmeut pursuant to this Ordinance (unless the time for the same be e>.iended
by llilltuai' agreement' between- the'l'<Jwnship arut!he"applieani); the Board' of Commissioners· sha&hold
a public hearing, pursuant to public notice. The Board of Commissioners may continue the hearing
from time to time and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report; pravided,
hawever, that in aey event !he"publicbearinf;ar hearings shafrbe eoneludedwithin sbqy f~}·dlll's after
the first public hearing, unless such time be extended by mutual agreement between fue tawnship and
the applicant.
9. Grant of denial or approval
(a) Action of the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners, within sixty ( 60) days following
the conclusion of the public hearing provided for in this Article (unless such time shall be extended by
mutual agreement between the Township aod the applicant), shall by official written communication to the
laodowner, either:
( 1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted
9
(2.) Grant tentative appruval subject to specified conditions not included in the development plan as
submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval of the development plan.
(b) Failure to act. Failure to act within said period or auy agreed extension thereof shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development as submitted.
( c) Approval with conditions. . In the event, however, that tentative appruval is zranted sul!ject to
conditions, the landowner may, within thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of the official written
communication of the Board of Commissioners notify the Board of Commissioners of his refusal to accept
all conditions, in which case the Board· of Commissioners shall have been deemed to have denied approval
of the development plan. In the event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify the governing
body of his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan, with all said
mnditions, shall stand as granted.
(d) Findings of Fact. The proposed planned economic development plan shall be approved if and ooly if it
meets the following criteria and standaids, which shall be part of the findings of fact in the decision on the
development plan by the Board of Commissioners:
{1) Comprehensive Plan: TI1e proposed development plan preserves the commrutltr development
objectives of this ordinance and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Variations. Where the proposed development plan departs from zoning and subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable to the sni?iect property, snch departures are in the public interest and pmsuant to
the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(3) Land Use Categories and Ratios. That the development plan includes uses as permitted by this
ur!litumce not exceeding the JIJllOIJJlts and mtios as permitted, and that l!1l proposed 111J1d uses to be
within the development plan are located in the appropriate planning areas as permitted by this
ordinance.
(4) Buffers and Transition Areas. That the development plan includes all of the required buffef!l, both
internal and external and transition areas for areas acljoining residential zoning.
(5) Common open space . The proposals for the provision, maintenance and conservation of the propose
common open space areas are reliable, and' the amount and· extent of inJ>rovements of such comman
open space are adequate with respect to the purpose, use and type of development proposed.
(6) Infrastructure. The physical design of the proposed development plan adequately provides for public
services, pedestrian and vehicle traffic facilities and )lMkil!,g, hptt, ail:, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(7) Neighborhood. The total enviromnent of the proposed development plan is complementary to and
consistent with the neighborhood ill which it is pr<p<JSed ID" be established.
(8) Environment. The proposed development plan will afford a greater degree of protection of sensitive
environmental areas and preventicm of landslides, erosion, siltation, and flooding, than if the subject
property were developed ill acmrdance willt the provisions of the zonins and subdivisi<m ordinances
which otherwise apply.
(9) Safety. The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be dangerous,
iajurious, or noxious ID" any other property or persons and shall comply with all of the performance
standards of this ordinance.
(I 0) Tinting of improvements and Tiers. In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years , the development plan will be developed consistent with the limitations of
minintum and maximum building of various land use categories as prescribed by this ordinance. For
each phase of development there shall be a sufficient portion of common qpen space, plaillled
facilities or amenities as required in this Ordinance to protect the interests of the public and the
residents and occupants of the development and in the integrity of the development plan.
(a) Tinting. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative aPPfoval, with or with<ltl! conditions,
the Board of Commissioners may set forth in the official written communication the time within which
an application for final approval of the development plan shall be filed, or in the case where a
development plan which provides for development over a period of years, the periods of time which
10
the a_pplicalions for each part shat! ·be filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so
established by between grant of tentative approval and application fur final approval shall not be less
than three (3) months, and in the case of development over a period of years, the time between
applications for final approval shall not be less than twelve ( 12.) months.
(b) Certification of communications. The official written communication provided for in this Ordinance
shall be certified by the Township Secretruy and shall be filed in bis office and a certified cop,y shall be
mailed to the homeowner. Where tentative approval has been granted the same shall be noted on the
Township Zoning Map, except that the official change of the zoning of that property shall not take
effect until each phase of the develqpment plan is ,granted final wovat
10, Effect of Tentative Approval and Revocation
(a) Recordins of Plats and Issuance af Permits. Tentative approval of a development _plan shall not
qualify a plat of the planned economic development for recording nor authorize the issuance of any
permits by the Township.
(b) Consent to Revoke. A development _plan which has been given tentative l!JW!'oval, as submitted or
which has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been accepted by the landowner
(and provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of tentative
approvaD, shall not be modified nor revoked or otherwise inlprired ey action of the township
pending an application or applications for final approval without the consent of the landowner,
provided that an application for final approval is filed, or in the case of development over a period of
years, provided that !!.PJ'lications are filed within the periods of time '!PCcified in the official written
communication granting tentative approval.
(c) Revocation of tentative approval. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon said development plan and
shall notify the Board of Commissioners in writing or in the event that the landowner shall fail to file
application(s) for final approval within the required period of time(s) as the case may be, the tentative
approval shall be deemed to be revoked, all that portion of the area included in the development plan
for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those township ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the
townshjp's zoning ma,p and on the records of the Township Secretaiy.
D. Final Approval
1. An application for final approval may be fur all land included in the develupment ylan, or to the extent
set forth in the tentative approval, for a section thereof.
2. An application for final approval for any phase shall be consistent with the tier requirements set forth by
this ordinance and detailed in the wri!!en communication of tentative ;tJ?prOVal of the development _plan.
3. An application that is not in compliance with these requirements will not be accepted, unless otherwise
modified under the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. An !!.PJ'lication shall be filed within the time specified by the written communication ~Sfalltin_,g final
approval and shall be accompanied by the required application fee as established by ordinance.
5, A public hearing on the application shall not be required, provided that the development plan or the part
thereof submitted is in coll!Pliance both with the development _plan $iven tentative a,pproval and with
any specified conditions thereof and no substantial revisions are proposed in the application for final
approval.
6. Applic.ation for iin;Jl apprpv,al sh;Jll pontain the following;mdadbere to the follow.lllgpro.cednr~
(a) The application for final approval shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners ·
(b) Submission for final a_pproval consideration containing twenty-five (25) eopies must be received by the
Planning and Zoning Department twenty-five (25) days prior to the next Planning Commission
meeting when the review is requested.
(c) Submission requirements for an application for final improval shall ioclude:
(1) A written report indicating the amount of the land use categories requested for development approval
for the proposed phase, consistent with provisions of the ordinance and the tentative approval. The land
11
use categories may be specified by building type or as parcels to be developed for that land use
category.
(2) All applicable plans and reports as would be required for final subdivision or land development
approval .per :the Subdiv.ision .and Land Developmen! Ordiuance. JlS indicated ID A1ti.c1e ill__ nf
1hat ordinance. In addition to fuose requirements, final development plans shall include 1he following
information:
I a ]The required transition areas for fue various land use categories included in 1he final
plan
[b]A detail on 1he plan of the proposed square footage of the various land use categories
included in the finalplau
[c]The location and design of fue proposed common open space, togefuer with the
proposed ownership aud maintenance arrangements for such open space.
I d]The location aud design of all recreation areas,,plazas aud conrtyards, walks, sidewalks,
trails and bikeways including detail and design and location of these areas at scale
sufficient to show the areas aud facilities proposed.
1"1"fhe location aud design of required bufferyards and landscaJJhtg, showiqg the hei_ght
and type of screening, including a detail of 1he proposed bufferyards and landscaping areas
at a scale sufficiently to show these areas.
J:UThe location aud dimensions of entrances, common areas,._parkin_g facilities, signs,
lighting facilities, fences and/or walls, fire lanes, aud other site improvements or
amenities, including a detail of each proposed site improvement or amenity at a scale to
sufficiently show the im,provernent or the ameney.
[g] Formal covenants to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings aud structures
[h) Final Stormwater Management Report prepared in accordance with the North
Huntin,gdon Townshi_p Sformwater Management Otdinauce
[i] A complete copy of the illustrative Site Plan as approved as part of the Tentative
Approval by the township so that such can be compared to the plan submitted for final
a_QPJ"ovat
[j]Engineering cost estimate of all required public improvements for implementation of
this phase
(k:) Any other !@Orts, docwnents or plans as fill'lCilled in the Tentative A,pproval
7. Final approval, if warranted, shall be given in accordance with the time limits (unless extended by
mutual consent) and,procedures set forth in Pennsylvania Munitjpalities P~g Code (Article VII).
8. Denial of Approval. Denial of approval shall, if warranted, be given in accordance with the time limits
(unless extended by mutual consent) and procedures set forth in the Peunsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Article VII)
9. Recording. A finally approved development plan shall be recorded at the Westmoreland County
Courthouse according to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
10. Approval procedures for Fmal Plans not Including Building Details. The approval of acy final plan that
does not include building details for lots or parcels to be developed shall require the submission of a site
plan for each proposed building, meeting all requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and applicable jltovisions of this Ordinance aud the Zoning Otdinauce. No site .plan shall be
approved for any building fuat is in any way inconsistent with terms of the Tentative Approval, unless the
Board of Commissioners has approved modifications under the provisions of this Ordinance.
11 Failure to deve!Qp. In the event that a develqpment_plan or section thereof, is _given final <!P.Pfoval and
thereafter the landowner abandons such plan or section thereof that has been finally approved and shall so
notify the Board of Commissioners in writing or in the event that the landowner shall fail to co=ence and
carry out the _planned economic develo_pment within the time periods set forth in Section 508 the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, no development of further development shall take place on fue property
until after said property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment of an amendment to the zoning
_provisions of the townshij) in a manner.prescribed for such amendments. These.provisions do not prevent the
landowner from transfurring the rights of development to anofuer landowner, provided fuat fue Township is
notified of such transfer and the Township Solicitor reviews the assurances that the new landowner will
complete all phases of the development plan with adequate financial guarantees.
12
E .Enforcement and Modifications
1. Enforcement and Modifications of Provisions of the Piao. To further the mutual interest of the
residents of the planned economic development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of
the develqpment plan as finally approved and to insure that modification in the development .Plan, if
any, shall not impair the reasonable reliance of said residents upon the provisions of the development
plan nor result in changes that would adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and
modification of the provisions of the develqpment plan as finally approve<\, whether they are recorded
by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the following provisions and procedures:
2. Provisions in favor of the township. The provisions of the development plan relating to the use, bulk,
and location of buildinzs and structures, the quantil.Y and location of common qpen wace and
bufferyards, and the intensity of use or density of residential and non-residential uses shall run in favor
of the township, and as provided by law, shall be enforceable in law, or in equity by the township,
without limitation of any powers ofre,gulation otherwise.granted the townshi,p 1zy law.
F. Modifications to the Tentative Approval
All those provisi00& of the development plan· authorized to be enforeed by the township under this ordinance
may 'be moailiea, removed or re1easedoy fue townsmp, except grants or easements reiating to fb.e seniice or
equipment of a public utility, subject to the following conditions and procedures for minor or substantial
revisions
1. Minor revisions. Minor revisions between the illustrative site plan and any final plan such as moving the
preliminaty locations ofbuildin_gs, within lhe :mproved_plannll!g areas andpQPOsin_g minor en_gineerin,g
acljustments to lot lines, bufferyards and other plan details shall not require a public hearing as part of
the application for final approval.
2. Any revision as listed below to the l!I!PfOved lllnstrative Site !'tao constitutes a substantial revision of
the Tentative Approval ·
(a) Any proposed changes in the approved square footage of any retail use categories of
the .. phase or awlicable tier of develqpmenf that cO!l!Ilrises an addition of 15,000
square feet or ten (10%) of the approved retail square footage whichever is greater.
(b) A change in the layout of the major street network and/or principal points of ingress
or i;gress
(c) Modification to the amount, design and layout of open space and bufferyard
( d) Other revisions consistent with above, determined to be substantial by the Zoning
Officer
3. No substantial revision, as defined above, to the tentative approval shall be approved as part of final
approval, except qpon findin,g by !he Board of Commissioners, followiqg a .. Public hearin,.g thereon
pursuant to public notice called and held with the provisions of this Ordinance, that the same is
consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the entire planned economic development
, does not adversely affect either the eajo.J'lllent of land abnttin_g l!J10ll or across lhe street from lhe
planned economic development or the public interest and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit
upon any person.
4. Al]y change of use of a lot or parcel or §Pace within an existinz buildinz or structure from any 'lJWTOVed
laud use category to retail use (other than specialty commercial-retail located on the first floor of a
building) that constitutes a ten (10%) or greater increase in the approved amounts of square footage for
wJail use for the entire deveicwment site shall be sxmject to J:he .l!j)prmr.al ofJhe;Boartl ,of .Commissioners
under the procedures of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and provisions of this
Ordinance.
5. No such modification, removal or release of the .. provisions of the develo,pment.plan by the municipality
shall affuct the rights of the residents of the planned economic development to maintain and enforce those
provisions, at law or equity, as provided in this section, unles< those provisions have been broken or not
enforced as per the original planned commercial and industrial development proposal.
6. Net modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan by the municipality shall
be permitted except upon the findings by the governing body or its designated agency, folloW:ing a public
hearing thereon pursuant to public notice called and held in accordance with the provisions of the
"Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code". These findings must indicate tbat 1'.he char\ges are
consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the entire planned commercial and industrial
development, do not adversely affect the enjoyment of land abutting across the street from the plam1ed
commercial and industrial development or the public interest and are not granted solely to confer a
special benefit upon any person.
G. Release of Rights:
1. Residents of the Planned Economic Development may, to the extent and in the manner expressly
authorized by the provisions of the development plan, modify, remove or release rights to
JOJJfurce the .provisions of .the development plan, bntJJO such J1ction.shalLaffect 1he .right of the
municipality to enforce the provisions of the development plan in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
Z. No release of rights shall accommodate the Planned Economic Develqpment where the Plalllled
Economic Development has been constructed as an entity and not snqject to the North
Huntingdon Township Subdivision Ordinance. Should this type of construction be found fuully
and in need of change, it shall be the responsibility of the PlannedEconomic Develqpment
residents and/or the Planned Economic Development owner to rectify any faulty construction
and the Township of North Huntingdon shall not be held responsible.
H. Penalties :
Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which has violated the Planned Economic Development
proll.isions of this ordinance or prior .lowmhip ordirumre; . shal!, lljlOllheingfouru!JiahleJher.eforin.a chill
enforcement proceeding commenced by a municipality, be subject to the penalties and provisions of Article 9,
Section 915 of this ordinance.
I. Com_pliance with other Ordinances
1. Except where specifically exempted by this Ordinance; or by formal action of the Board of
Commissioners, a planned economic develqpment shall comply with all other standards and
requirements of the North Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance (#765), the North Huntingdon
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (#1011) and all ordinances cross-referenced
in those ordinances incluc:linE all A.miendices thereto. The Board min' aJlPCOVe modifications or
changes in such standards subject to the waiver or modification provisions of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, where the applicant can demonstrate that a modification is consistent with the
purposes of this ordinance and is to acconru10date innovative site design.
J. Completion Guarantees
The Board of Commissioners shall, as a condition to any tentative or final approval, require that the
applicant file a certificate of corrwtetion of trrwrovenients, ljllP!OVed as to form qy the TownshW Solicitor,
for all conditions inlposed on a tentative or final approval. The Board of Commissioners shall also require
any applicant to execute a developer's agreement, approved as to form by the Township Solicitor, which
shall state all conditions and in:Jprovements which the iqJplicanf shall perform as ,part of a conditional
approval. In either case, the Board of Commissioners shall require financial security ·for the inlprovements
by the applicant in a form approved by the Township Solicitor and pursuant to provisions of Section 509 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, conditioned upon the completion of all required inlprovements and
fulfillment of all conditions of approval.
14
Section 4: PEDD Pianning Areas
A. Planning Areas. Development sites utilizing the PEDD I District is are comprised of the following
Plaiuriu,g Areas: Residential, Core Area, Commercial, Office and Redevelopment, which are defined by and
sn\!iect to ~" standards per the District desiglllllion as well as the general btilk standmdi; of PEDD 1 -
Planniog Areas. The types of land use categories permitted within each planniog area are included in Section
7, Table 2 of this ordinance. The amount of square footage permitted for the permitted land use categories
are listed in Section _ 7uf this ordinance.
1. Residential Planning Area - (Type 2 and Type 1 PEDD·l development sites over 50 acres)
The Residential Planning area shall consist of a· minimum of twenty (20%) percent and a maxi:lnmn of fifty
(50%) percent of the buildable area of !be total development site and shall permit 1he development of a
Planned Residential Development as a transition area per standards of Section 5 of this ordinance.
2. Commercial Planning Area (Type 2 PEDD-1 development sites}
(a) The Commercial Planning Area shall consist at a maximum of the areas ofland six (600) hundred feet
from abutting parcels which are commercially or industrially zoned and the land area six ( 600)
hundred feet from roadWays clasi.ifu:d' as prinuuy and secondaly arteriills.
(b) Within the commercial planning area any cumulative build out that constitutes a shapping center, per
ordinance #1033, shall be noted on the illustrative site plan; and shall be subject to !be standards of
that ordinance as part of the application process of the PEDD as well as any adc;litional standards
defined in this section, in which case the stricter of those standards shall apply.
3. Care Pfunnfug Area (Type 2 PEDD-1 devell!pment sites)
(a) The core planning area consists of the land remaioing after the designation of the aforementioned
planning areas located in a Type 2 PEDD-1.
(b) Large retail is not permitted in the core planning area, with the exception of the following uses:
Hotels and Conferenceffraining Center
4. Office Praonfug Area (fype 1)
The office planning area consists of the entire development site for a Type 1 PEDD of less than fifty ( 50)
acres, and that area other than the residential planning area for a Type 1 PEDD with fifty (50) acres or
greater.
5. Redevelopment Area (Type R)
The redevelopment area comprises the entire development site of a Type R PEDD-1
Section 5 : Development Standards for Residential Planning Area: Planned Residential Development
A An area of the development site for all Type 2 developments and Type 1 developments of fifty (50)
acres or greater shall be designated as a Pranned ResidentfulDevefopment (PRD) wfucli shall encompass no
less than twenzy (20%) percent and no more than fifty (50%) of the total buildable area of the development
site. Procedures for approval of the PRD shall follow requjrements of Article VIl of the Pennsylvania
Mumcipaiities Plaonfug Code and Section 503. 7 of the North Huntingdon Zoning Ordinance, unless
specifically modified by this Ordinance. The area for the PRD shall be delineated as follows:
(1) From all areas that are residentially zoned, a straight line of a minimum of one-hundred and fifty
(150') feet shall be drawn from the property line of the residentially zoned property aqjoining the
development and connected at that point to delineate 1he minimum planned residential development
area. (see Appendix B for example of delineation of PRD zone)
(2) Should this area total less than fue required mininnnn twenty (20"/o) percent of the total development
site, additional area shall be added to satisfy this minimum standard. The mll.limurn twenzy (20%)
percent area shall be contiguous.
15
B. Residential Planning Area Requirements for Contiguous PEDD Developments. In the event that a
developer receives approval for a Type I PEDD of less than 50 acres and subsequently an application is
filed fur a Type 1 PEDD that is contiguous to that site and in combination with the previously approved
Type 1 PEDD the total acreage wonld be fifty (50) acres or greater, the following reqnirements shall
apply:
( 1) The developer of the second FEDD shall be required to include a residential planning area, per
requirements of this section within the second PEDD I site being developed;
(2) In meeting the requirements of this section, the minimum area for the residential planning area
shall be determined by multiplying the total the sum of both development sites by twenty
(20%) percent
C. The internal road system of a PRD shall be designed to assure that projected street use will be residential
in nature and that traffic that does not have a destination within the PRD will not need to travel through the
PRD site. Appropriate traffic calming measures shall be utilized to accomplish this objective;
D. A PRD shall be designed for safe and convenient pedestrian movement. Vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be separated to the maximum extent possible;
E. A PRD is encouraged to contain a variety of dwelling unit types
F. Except as modified by this section, a PRD shall be in accordance with the design standards of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Township inclnding design and construction of streets,
sidewalks (waiver provisions shall not be applicable), utilities, parking, landscaping and other site
development standards.
G. The PRD shall include a minimum of twenty five (25%) percent of the total area designated as such in
open space. There shall be provided within this twenty five (25%) percent open space, no less than four
hundred ( 400) square feet of active recreation area for each dwelling unit contained in one-family; twofamily;
townhouses and not less than two hundred (200) square fuet of active recreation for each dwelling
unit contained in a multi-family apartment building. Such active recreation area shall be located in areas of
access to a public road and linked to residents of the development via sidewalks or trails. The Township
adopted Comprehensive Recreation and Open Space Plan shall be used as a guide to review active recreation
areas. H. Provisions for the continued maintenance of all open space located within a PRD shall be made
which are acceptable to the Township and which are in accordance with Section 705(f) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended from time to time.
I.. Permitted uses in a Planned Residential Development:
1. Single Family
2. Townhouse
3. Garden Apartment
4. Mid-Rise Apartment
5. High-Rise Apartment
6. Open Space
7. Parks and Recreation-Facilities
8. Essential Services
9. Home Occupations, per Section #814 of the Zoning Ordinance
10. Accessory Uses to Above
J. Determination of Density of the Planned Residential Development:
a. The density of the Planned Residential Development shall be determined according to the following
formula:
Table 1
1. Determine the area of the land designated as Planned Residential Development
2. Determine the area of land designated ESA
3. Subtract Line 2 from Line l
4.Determine the Zoning District(s) of the property
underlying the development site and llst the permitted base number of dwelling units permitted
16
(note: use the bonus density figure if 40% or more of the PRD site is designated as open space.
Acljoining Zoning Base DU/ Acre Bonus Density
(DU/ACRE)
R-1 6 7.2
R-lA 6 7.2
R-2 4 4.8
R-3 2 2.4
R-4 1 1.2
Other 6 7.2
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4 to determine base yield dwelling units for the PRD
K Rear and Side Setbacks and Buffer for Types of Residential Development located within the PRD
The location of any structure as listed below, shall be located no closer to any property line zoned residential
than the following schedule:
1. Single Family Dwelling
2. Townhouse
3. Garden Apartment
4. Mid-Rise Apartment
5. High Rise Apartment
L. Timing of Development of the PRD
Rear Setback of the host zoning district of the PEDD
Rear Setback of the host zoning district plus 3 5 feet
Rear Setback of the host zoning district plus 50 feet
Rear Setback of the host zoning district plus 75 feet
Rear Setback of the host zoning district plus 125 feet
The developer shall deed or lot off the required percentage of residential land area for the Planned
Residential Development at or before build-out of fifty (50%) percent of the non-residential area of the site.
No final approval shall be granted for any non-residential portion of the development site until this
requirement is met.
Section 6: TIERS AND PHASING REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE 2 PEDD-1 DEVELOPMENT
SITES
A. In order to provide for the opportunity for a landowner to gain approval for a portion of the
development as retail, prior to the development of other permitted uses, and to assure that the overall
development is balanced in its implementation of phases, the following regulations shall apply. Nothing
in this section shall preclude a developer from submitting final plans for the non-retail component of
the development site prior to the submission of final plans for the allowed retail component.
B. Report Requirements. Each year, based on the anniversary of the final approval, a report shall be filed
by the developer with the Township Planniog and Zoning Office showing that the structures as applied
for in the first year or period (or subsequent year or period) are completed as approved. The purpose of
such report is to verify that the approved plan is progressing with the conditions of approval . The
Township shall allow no further construction until the first (or prior) year's application has been
completed, according to the provisions of this section.
C. TIERONE:
Within the first tier, the landowner shall be permitted to submit final plans consistent with tentative
approval, provided that a maximum of thirty (30%) percent of the total approved square footage for the
development, as determined by the provisions of this Ordinance, may be designated as retail development
This first tier of development may encompass one or more phases.
17
D. TIER TWO
In order to proceed for additional retail within the development beyond the thirty (30%) percent maximum
allowed, the landowner shall be required to submit final plans that include an amount, equal to or greater
than the retail component consisting of office development. Any portion of office development that was
included during the first tier of development counts toward meeting this threshold requirement. This second
tier of development may encompass one or more phases. Credit shall be given to the landowner for approval
of final plaos for the residential portion of the development site at the rate of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet for each dwelling unit approved in meeting the threshold requirement.
E. TIER THREE:
Once the amount of square footage, as approved by :fioal plan, for office and retail development is at the
equal (up to the thirty (30%) percent initial retail approval), the landowner may submit final plans that
include up to fifty (50%) percent of the total approved square footage for the development designated as
retail development. This third tier of development may encompass one or more phases.
F. FINAL TIER
1. In order to proceed for additional retail within fue development beyond the fifty (50%) percent
maximum allowed, the landowner shall be required to submit final plans that include an amount, equal
to or greater than the retail component consisting of office development. Any portion of office
development that was included during the first tier of development counts toward meeting this
threshold requirement. Credit shall be given to the landowner for approval of final plans for the
residential portion of the development site at the rate of one thonsand five hundred (1.,500) square feet
for each dwelling unit approved in meeting the threshold requirement.
2. This final tier of development may encompass one or more phases. Once the landowner, through
approval of final plans, has met the threshold where office development is equal to or greater to retail
development, at the defined maximum, the landowner may complete the development site in one or
additional phases with no limitation or control on the percentages of retail or office development per
phase, except that the maximum amount of development, per type, shall be consistent with the square
footage approved as part of tentative approval.
G. MODIFlCATIONS TO TIERS FOR TYPE 2 PEDD-1
The landowner, as part of submission of final approval for any phase may seek a modification of
the tier development requirements for retail development as described. Such a modification shall be
considered a substantial revision, and shall be processed according to provisions of Section 4 (F) of this
Ordinance. Such modification shall be granted only by :findings of fact by the Board of Commissioners that
the proposed modification to the retail development tier is in the ptiblic interest and not harmful to the
public health, safety aod welfare of the citizens of the Township. In granting such a modification :findings of
the Board shall be consistent with the following:
1. the modification sought provides no greater traffic impact than the capacity of level of service to
roadways and intersections serving the development, or is accompanied by transportation improvements
as part of that phase to address traffic concerns;
2. the modification is necessary to the successful implementation of the development project as
demonstrated by the landowner that results in economic benefit to the Township;
H. Development of Planned Residential Development (PRD) within Type 2 and Type 1 (with more than
50 acres) PEDD Districts
The developer shall deed or lot off the required percentage of residential land area for the Plaoned
Residential Development at or before build-out of 50% of the non-residential area of the site. No final
approval shall be granted for any non-residential portion of the development site until this requirement is
met
18
Section 7: Permitted and Conditional Uses within the PEDD-1 District and Determination of
Permitted Building Areas
A. The tables contained in this section listed uses that are permitted within development sites and the
various planriing areas of the different types of permitted PEDD districts. This Ordinance in Table 1-
Autilizes the North American Industrial Classification System, adopted by the federal govermnent in 1997,
as published by the Office of Management and Budget, to define permitted uses, and shall be interpreted as
follows:
1. The interpretation of each industry's classification is based on the principal use of its establislunent
or physical location.
2. Only the sectors listed in Table 1-A constitute permitted uses, (unless otherwise listed as
conditional uses) inclusive of their subsectors.
3 . Where uses pennitted within Table 1-A conflict with other provisions of this or any Township
ordinance, the stricter standards and processes shall apply.
4. The codes within the proceeding tables are defined by the following:
C· Core Uses (Office, Manufacturing, and Public Uses)
R· Retail Oriented Uses
P - Permitted Use by Right
CU -Conditional Use - (Permitted in all Planning Areas as
Conditional Use)
Table 1-A
PERMITTED ACTIVITIES IN PEDD 1 PLANNING AREAS (PRO Uses listed in
section 5)
NAICS ACTIVITY USE
CODE CATEGORY
323 Printing and Related Support Activities C
334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing C
4413 Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores (uses of this type R
that include the servicing of vehicles are only permitted in the
Commercial Planning Area of a Type 2 PEDD-1 development)
442 Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores R
443 Electronics and Appliance Stores R
444 Building Material and Garden Equipment and Supplies Dealers R
445 Food and Beverage Stores R
446 Health and Personal Care Stores R
448 Clothing and Clothing Accessories Stores R
451 Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, and Music Stores R
452 General Merchandise Stores R
453 Miscellaneous Store Retailers except Manufactured (Mobile) Home R
Dealers
51 Information C
52 Finance and Insurance C
531120 Lessors of Nonresidential Buildings C
54 Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services C
551 Management of Companies and Enterprises C
561 Administrative and Support Services C
61 Educational Services C
6111 Elementary and Secondary Schools C
19
6112 Junior Colleges C
6113 Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools C
6114 Business Schools and Computer and Management Training C
6115 Technical and Trade Schools C
611511 Cosmetology and Barber Schools C
611519 other Technical and Trade Schools C
6116 Other Schools and Instruction C
62 Health Care and Social Assistance C
712 Museums, Historical Sites, and Similar Institutions C
71391 Golf Courses and Country Clubs R
71394 Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers R
71395 Bowling Centers R
72111 Hotels (except Casino Hotels) and Motels R
721191 Bed-and-Breakfast Inns R
722 Food Services and Drinking Places R
8111 Automotive Repair and Maintenance uses of this type that include R
the servicing of vehicles are only pennitted in the Commercial
Planning Area of a Type 2 PEDD-1 development)
8112 Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance R
812 Personal and Laundry Services C
813 Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional, and Similar C
. Organizations
92 Public Administration except Correctional Institutions c
B. Conditional Uses within the PEDD District:
All uses classified under NAICS sectors 31-33, 44-45, and 51-92 and not listed in Table 1-A as permitted
uses shall be classified as conditional uses, per Section 906 of the Zoning Ordinance and shall subject to the
performance standards in of this Ordinance. It shall be fue burden of the applicant to demonstrate the
compliance of the proposed use with the performance standards of the preceding section.
Table 1-B:
The purpose of Table 1-B is to list uses that are not specifically classified by NAICS category or classified
by use category, but are either permitted uses by right or conditional uses in all planning areas of the PEDD.
USES PERMIITED BY RIGHT OR CONDITIONAL USE1N ALL PLANNING
AREAS (Planned Residential Development uses listed in Section 5)
Townhouse
Garden Apartment
Mid-Rise Apartment
High Rise Apartment
Mineral Removal
Outdoor Recreation/Public Park
Essential Services
Open Space
ACTIVITY
Telecommunications Tower (per Ordinance# 927 and #936)
Agriculture
Forestry
Accessory Uses to any Permitted Use
Transit Terminals and Rights of Way
Parking Garages and Park and Ride Facilities
20
Type of Use
p
p
p
p
cu
p
p
p
cu
p
p
p
p
p
Table 2 - Uses by Planning Areas
The type of land use categories permitted within each planning area for the various types of PEDD-1
development sites, and the extent to which they are permitted are listed in the table and sections below:
Table2
Planning Area Mixed Large Small Ancillary Residential CUse
Use Retail Retail Retail Categories
Buildino:
Re•idential Planning Area AsPRDper
(Type 2 and Type 1 with Section
>50 acre•)
Core Planning Area (Type p p p P(max6 p
2) du/acre)
Commercial Planning p p p p P(max6 p
Area (Type 2) du/acre)
Office Planning Area p P,in p p p
(Type 1 with less than 50 mixed (max6
acres) use du/acre)
buildino:•
Office Planning Area p p p P (max6 p
(type 1 with 50 acres or du/acre)
morel
Redevelopment Planning p p p p P(max6 p
Area du/acre)
C. Calculation Formulas for Allowable Floor Area permitted by Land Use Categories for the various types
of PEDD districts
1. Type 1 (< 50 acres)
The total maximum allowable non-residential floor area an applicant may propose for a PEDD-1 (Type 1
with less than 50 acres) shall be calculated according to the table below:
TABLE 3 - CALCULATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA FOR A TYPE 1 PEDD-1
(less than 50 acres) DEVELOPMENT SITE
1. Total Area of the Site (acres)
2. Acreage of the Site Devoted to New Streets and Stormwater Detention
Facilities
3. Minimum Acreage for Open Space Area (25% times line 1)
4. Environmentally Sensitive Area (amount Line above 3 in acres)
5. Net Area of the Site (acres)(Line 1 minus the sum of Lines 2, 3, and4)
6. Square Footage Conversion (Line 6 times 43,560)
7. Floor Area Ratio
8. Total Square footage pennitted on site(Iine 8 times line 7)
21
9. Perntltted Artcillary Retail Percentage Squlli'e Footage
10. Total Square Footage Permitted as Ancillary Retail (Ll!ie s times Line 7)
11. Total Square Footage Permitted as Non-Retail
(Line 1 minus Line 10)
(c) The maximum total amount CJf permitted ancillary gross square fuotage, as indicated in Table 3, line
10, may be increased up to a ruaximum of thirty (30%) of line 8 of Table 3, provided that the additional
sqnare footage is located in a mixed use building that includes a minim1un of twenty five (25%) percent of
its total floor area for residential use. Small retail shall also be permitted in a mixed use building with the
above required residential component
( d) Residential Development Bonus: Developers that submit plans that include a minimum of twenty (20%)
of the total site area devoted for residential development (including mixed use buildings) shall be permitted
to apply a higher floor area ratio standard within Table 3, Line 7. The floor area ratio standard would be
sixty-five (.65) hundredths in this case.
2. Type 1 PEDD ( 50 acres or more)
The total maximum allowable non-residential floor area ao applicant may propose for a PEDD-1 (Type 1
with 50 acres or greater ) is as follows:
TABLE 4 - CALCULATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA FOR A TYPE 1 PEDD-1
reater than 50 acres) DEVELOPMENT SITE
l. Total Area of the Site (acres)
2. Acreage of the Site Devoted to New Streets and Storm water Detention
Facilities
3. Minimum Acreage for Open Space Area (25% times line l)
4. Envirorunentaliy Sensitive Area (amount Line above :i in acres)
5. M:inimUlll Acres fur Planned Residential Development
(Line 1 times 20%)
7. Net Area of the Site (acres)(Line l minus the sum of Lines 2, 3, 4 and 5)
8. Square Footage Conversion (Line 6 times 43,560)
8. Floor Area Ratio
9. Total non-residential Square footage permitted on site(line 8 times line 7)
10. Permitted Ancillary aod Small Retail Percentage
11. Total Square Footage Permitted as Ancillary and Small Retail (Line 8 times Line 7)
12. Total Square Footage Permitted as Non-Retail (not including PRD area)
(Line 1 minus Line 11)
(
22
(a) The maximum total amowit of permitted ancillary and small retail gross square footage, as indicated in
Table 3, line 10, may be increased up to a maximum of thirty (30%) of line 9 of Table 4, provided that the
additional square ibotage is located in a mixed use building that includes a minimum of twenty five (25%)
percent of its total floor area for residential use.
4. Type 2 PEDD.
The total maximum allowable non-residential floor area an applicant may propose for a PEDDl (Type 2) in
tentative approval shall be calculated according to the table below:
TABLE 5 - CALCULATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA FOR A TYPE 2 PEDD-1
DEVELOPMENT SITE
1. Total Area or the Site (acres)
2. Acreage of the Site Devoted to New Streets and Stormwater Detention
Facilities
3. Minimum Acreage for Open Space Area (25% times line 1)
4. Environmentally Sensitive Area (amount Line above 3 in acres)
5. Minimum Acres for Planned Residential Development
(Line l times 20%)
6. Net Area of the Site (acres)(Line 1 minus the sum of Lines 2, 3, 4 and 5)
7. Square Footage Conversion (Line 6 times 43,560)
8. Floor Area Ratio
9. Total non-residential Sqi:il1re footage pel'lllitted on s!te(liile 8 tlllles llfie 7)
10 .. Permitted Retail Percentage
11. Totai Square Footage Permitted as Retail (Line 8 times Line 7)
12. Permitted Large Retail Percentage
13. Total Square Footage Permitted as Large Retail (Line 10 times Line 9)
14. Total Square Footage Permitted as Non-Retail (not including PRD area)
(Line 1 minus Line 10)
(a) Under the provisions of this Ordinance large retail calculated in Table 5, line 12 shall only permitted
to be located in the Commercial Planning Area.
(b) Retail bonus in mixed use buildings: For the purpose of encouraging rrrixed-use development within
buildings, any retail located in a mixed use boilding that has a minimum of twenty five (25%) percent of its
gross floor area devoted to residential use, is not counted against the total amowit of retail permitted within
the site as calculated in Table 5, line 10.
( c) Hotels and Conference Centers are permitted to be located in the Core Planning Area The limitation in
terms of gross floor footage for individual retail uses in the core planniog area does not apply to these uses.
4. Type RPEDD
The total maximum allowable non-residential floor area an applicant may propose for a PEDDl (Type 2) in
tentative approval shall be calculated according to the table below:
TABLE 6 - CALCULATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA FOR A TYPE R PEDD-1
DEVELOPMENT SITE
1. Total Atea Of the Site (acres)
2. Acreage of the Site Devoted to New Streets and Stormwater Detention
Facilities
3. Minimum Acreage for Landscaping (20% times line 1)
4. Enviromnentally Sensitive Area (amount Line above 3 in acres)
5. Net Area of the Site (acres)(Line 1 minus the smn of Lines 2, 3, and 4)
6. Square Footage Conversion (Line 6 times 43,560)
7. Floor Atea Ratio
8. Total Square footage pennitted on site (line 8 times line 7)
(b) Floor Area Ratio Bonus: The FAR is increased to .60, provided that a minimum of twenty five (25%)
percent of the total uses located within the PEDD, Type R, as part of the Tentative Approval, are
categorized as "C" categories, according to Table 1.
Section 8: Development Standards
It is the intent of these regulations to allow flexibility in the intensity of various uses, in the size of
structures, and in the arrangement of structures and on their sites in accordance with the requirements
outlined hereunder. The allowable overall intensity of development within the PEDD-1 shall be established
at the time of Tentative Approval, in accordance with the following provisions:
A Lot Sizes: No minimum
B .. Setbacks for all yards:
1. Five (5) feet minimum, Thirty (30) feet when abutting an existing public rights-of-way or a
boulevard.
2. Tlrirty (30) feet minimum separation between buildings.
3. Zero lot lines are pennitted when structures are deeded separately and possess party walls.
4. The above stated minimum setback shall increase by one foot for every foot above three stories.
5. Fifty (50) feet maximum for all frontyards.
6. Buildings, which are part of shopping centers, shall be setback a minimum of one hundred and fifty
(150) feet from the boundary of adjacent residentially zoned properties
C. Maximum Coverage by Building Areas: Fifty (50%) percent in all non-residential building areas.
D: Height
Maximum Building Height: Five Stories or sb.t . y (60) Feet, whichever is less.
E. Off-Street Parking Requirements
24
1. It is the intent of these requirements to ensure that a sufficient number of off street parking spaces are
provided for each use in the district to accommodate the vehicles of employees, residents, visitors,
customers, clients or other people who may be present on the site at any one time. It is also the intent
of these requirements to discourage excessive and mrnecessary parldng and to thus reduce the area of
impervious surface coverage.
2. The requirements listed hereunder shall be minimal requirements.
3. Parking Requirements in PEDD Districts are subject to the requirements of Section 820 of the Zoning
Ordinance with the exceptions of Section 820.5 and 820.6.
4. Maximwn Provision of Parking Spaces. The maximwn amount allowed per use shall be equal to
125% of the minimum requirements as outlined in Table 3.
5. Any expansion in floor area, employment, dwelling units, or other index which is the basis for
calculation of required parking subsequent to the initial use or occupancy shall require the provision of
additional parking.
6. The Planning Conunission may recommend and the Board of Commissioners may approve departures
from fue parking requirements of this Ordinance and the applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance if
the applicant provides acceptable evidence that an alternative standard will achieve the intent of this
ordinance more clc>sely fuan the standards listed below .
Table 1 .Minimum Parldng Requirements.
Use
Office
Retail
Restaurant
Assembly
Production
Schools
Hotels
Hospitals
Minimum Requirements
1/300 gross square feet
1 /200 gross square feet
1 /1 DO gross square feet or one per 3 seats, whichever is greater.
One per each person for 25% of the estimated seating capacity.
1/500 gross square feet
One per 1 D students
One per Room, and one per employee on peak shift.
One per every three beds and one per employee on peak shift.
7. The Zoning Officer sball interpret fue minimwn and maximwn parking requirements based on Table 3.
In fue event that a propos.ed use cannot be entirely classified into one of the categories in Table 3, the
Zoning Officer shall interpret minimum and maximum requirements based on similarities of the uses or
parts of the proposed uses to those listed above. For example, sigoificant office uses, which are in and
of themselves principal uses, may be located within a production area. Each requirement then, would
be calculated based on fue use listed in Table 3, which applies. The Zoning Officer shall forward the
interpretation and recommendation to the Planning Conunission, which shall evaluate the
recommendation.
F. Off-Street Loading Requirements
1. The provision of off-street loading shall comply with Section 819 of the Zoning Ordinance, except thai
fue Planning Commission may recommend to fue Board of Commissioners that this requirement be
waived if the applicant presents evidence that the uses to be located within the structure would not
require said space. The waiver shall be approved with the condition that all future changes of use shall
be brought before the Planoing Conunission and the Board as a land development through Ordinance
# 10 ll, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. Bufferyards
1. Bufferyards. A variety of land uses are permitted in the various types of PEDD-1 districts within the
designated planning areas. Where there are different types of planning areas abutting each other, they
shall be separated by landscaped bufferyards according to the following standards, for the various
types of PEDD-1 districts. The provisions of this section may be modified by the Board upon
25
1. It is the intent of these requirements to ensure that a sufficient number of off street parking spaces are
provided for each use in the district to accommodate the vehicles of employees, residents, visitors,
customers, clients or other people who may be present on the site at any one time. It is also the intent
of these requirements to discourage excessive and mmecessary parking and to thus reduce the area of
impervious surface coverage.
2. The requirements listed hereunder shall be minimal requirements.
3. Parking Requirements in PEDD Districts are subject to the requirements of Section 820 of the Zoning
Ordinance with the exceptions of Section 820.5 and 820.6.
4. Maximum Provision of Parking Spaces. The maximum amount allowed per use shall be equal to
125% of the minimum requirements as outlined in Table 3.
5. Any expansion in floor area, employment, dwelling units, or other index which is the basis for
calculation of required parking subsequent to the initial use or occupancy shall require the provision of
additional parking.
6. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of Commissioners may approve departures
from the parking requirements of this Ordinance and the applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance if
the applicant provides acceptable evidence that an alternative standard will achieve the intent of this
ordinance more closely than the standards listed below.
Table 1 Minimum Parking Requirements.
Use
Office
Retail
Restaurant
Assembly
Production
Schools
Hotels
Hospitals
Minimum Requirements
1/300 gross square feet
1/200 gross square feet
1/100 gross square feet or one per 3 seats, whichever is greater.
One per each person for 25% of the estimated seating capacity.
1 /500 gross square feet
One per 1 O students
One per Room, and one per employee on peak shift.
One per every three beds and one per employee on peak shift.
7. The Zoning Officer shall interpret the minimum and maximum parking requirements based on Table 3.
In the event that a proposed use cannot be entirely classified into one of the categories in Table 3, the
Zoning Officer shall interpret minimum and maximum requirements based on similarities of the uses or
parts of the proposed uses to those listed above. For example, significant office uses, which are in and
of themselves principal uses, may be located within a production area. Each requirement then, would
be calculated based on the use listed in Table 3, which applies. The Zoning Officer shall forward the
interpretation and recommendation to the Planning Commission, which shall evaluate the
recommendation.
F. Off-Street Loading Requirements
1. The provision of off-street loading shall comply with Section 819 of the Zoning Ordinance, except that
the Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners that this requirement be
waived if the applicant presents evidence that the uses to be located within the structure would not
require said space. The waiver shall be approved with the condition that all future changes of use shall
be brought before the Planning Commission and the Board as a land development through Ordinance
#1011, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. Bufferyards
1. Bufferyards. A variety of land uses are pennitted in the various types of PEDD-1 districts within the
designated planning areas. Where there are different types of planning areas abutting each other, they
shall be separated by landscaped bufferyards according to the following standards, for the various
types of PEDD-1 districts. The provisions of this section may be modified by the Board upon
25
recommendation of the Planning Commission in the event that natural topography serves the same
purpose of separating potentially conflicting land uses.
2. Bufferyards Types and Specifications
(a) Bufferyard A: Forty ( 40) Feet
(b) Bufferyard B: Thirty (30) Feet
(c) Bufferyard C: Twenty (20) Feet
3. Each required Bufferyard shall provide landscaping at one of the following ratios for every thousand
(l,000) square feet of buffer area required:
(a.) Fifty (50) low level plantings, Two (2) Ornamental Trees
(b.) Fifty (50) low level plantings, one (1) high level tree.
( c.) Variations and substitutions of the above shall be acceptable providing they meet the
following ratios:
(1) One (1) high level tree is equal to two (2) ornamental plantings.
(2) One (1) high level planting is equal to twenty (25) low level Plantings.
(3) One (1) ornamental planting is equal to ten (10) low level plantings
4. Bufferyard Tables
(a) Required Bufferyards for PEDD, Type 1: (less than 50 acres)
Existing Right of Adjoining
Way Residential
Office Planning Area B A
(b) RequiredBufferyards for PEDD, Type 1: (50 acres or more)
Existing Right of Residential
Way Plannin" Area
Office Planning Area B B
Residential Planning Area B --
(c) Required Bufferyards for PEDD, Type 2:
Existing Right of Residential
Wav Planning Area
Core Planning Ar<;a B B
Commercial Planninl! Area B A
Residential Planning Area B -~~~
(d) RequiredBufferyards for PEDD, Type R:
Existing Right of Adjoining
Way Residential
Revitalization Planning Area B A
5.Standards for all Bu:fferyards:
26
Aqjoining
Non-Residential
c
Adjoining
Non-Residential
c
A
Adjoining
Non-Residential
c
c
A
Adjoining
Non-Residential
c
(a) No structures or uses, including but not limited to buildings, accessory structures, parking spaces, and
curbs shall be pennitted within any bufferyard Access drives and lighting devices may be located in
any required bufferyard except that access drives and signs may be located in the bufferyard
intersecting the main access point to the PEDD, if otherwise in accordance with applicable setback
requirements.
(b) Any existing trees within the required bufferyard which are a minimum offonr (4) inches in diameter
at a point three (3) feet above the groUlld shall be preserved and shall count as a required tree within
the bufferyard. At no point, however, shall any existing trees and required trees be separated at a
distance greater than the distances specified in the required bufferyard.
(c) Bnfferyards shall be provided and improved by the developer when constructiOll or uses are initiated
and shall be completed prior to issuance of occupancy permit for any use.
( d) It shall be the responsibili!y of the owner to insure the continued growth of all required landscaping
located within a bnfferyard and/or to replace the same in the event of freezing or drought, vandalism,
disease or other reasons for the discontinued growth of the required trees and shrubs.
6. In addition to the requirements of this section, a row of low-level evergreen shrubs or hedges or earthen
mounding shall be installed or constructed in the bufferyard These aforementioned 'requirements shall
provide a year roUlld visual screen. Hedges or shrubs shall be at least three feet in height at planting.
Earthen moulding shall be at least four ( 4) feet in height. Planning Commission may recommend alternative
millimum or maximum height requirements as long as the visual barrier suffices to block direct light from
vehicles and equipment circulatiog through the adjacent use.
H. Landscaping Standards in addition to Bnfferyards.
1. Each improved lot shall comply with the standards of this section. Typicals and details of required
landscaping are located in Appendix D of this Ordinance
2. In addition to requirements in required bufferyards, laodscaping shall be required within the
development site according the following standards and requirements. Planting located in required
bnfferyards, cannot be .substituted for any required planting mandated by this section.
3. Parking Lot Areas:
Interior landscape islands shall be provided in the parking area at a minimum of ten (10) feet wide with a
total area of at least one hnndred eigh!y (180) square feet. One (1) internal landscape island shall be
provided for every twenty (20) parking spaces. Each landscape island shall provide at least one deciduous
tree on that island. No more thao twenty (20) parking spaces shall be provided in an unbroken row without
the provision of interior landscape islands. Alternative design of landscape islands may be proposed by the
developer that accomplish the similar objectives as above.
4. Service structures.
All service structures shall be fully screened. For the purposes of this subsection, service structures shall
include propaoe tanks, dumpsters, air conditioning units and condensers, electrical transformers aod other
equipment or elements providing service to a building or a site. Location of screening. A continuous
planting, hedge, fence, wall or earth mound shall enclose aoy service structure on all sides unless such
structure must be frequently moved, in which case screening on all but one (1) side is required The average
height of the screening material shall be one ( 1) foot more than the height of the enclosed structure, but shall
not be required to exceed eight (8) feet in height.
5. Perimeter Laodscaping:. Landscaping around the perimeter of buildings, wallcways, , and plazas shall
be provided at the following rates:
(a) Trees shall be required along all new streets according to the provisions of Section 8 N of this ordinaoce.
27
(b) A mh..-ture of high level planting, ornamental trees and low level landscaping . All high level planting
and ornamental trees shall be interspersed with low level landscaping
6. Landscaping Requirements for Type R PEDD development sites.
No less than twenty (20%) of the total development site shall be landscaped according to the provisions and
specifications of this ordinance and those of Section 516.4 of Ordinance #1011, Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
I. Performance Standards for Uses. All permitted uses shall comply with the following standards.
L Activities resulting from production or manufacturing within a structure shall not be audible outside of
the structure.
2. Deliveries and shipments using vehicles greater than one ton shall be limited to ten trips per day.
3. No loading shall take place on public rights-of-way.
4. A use shall not produce toxins as a result of the production process, which are stored, released on, or
shipped off site.
5. Any equipment used in the production process shall not be visible or apparent from the e"1erior of any
bullding
6. Emissions of smoke or exhaust resulting from any production process are prohibited.
7. In consideration of the above statements and of the District's statements of purpose, all uses sball be
compatible with the general purposes of the District and have an impact which is not detrimental to the
property value and daily functioning of surrounding uses both within and adjacent to the District.
J. Mixed Use Building Standards
L The following are performance standards, which shall define the classification of a structure as a Mixed
Use Building.
(a) The building shall have at least two stories.
(b) Each 50 foot section of a building's perimeter shall possess at least one entrance. At least two
adjoining sides of the building shall be designed in this manner.
( c) Sidewalks shall be located around the perimeter of the building and shall be integrated with adjoining
pedestrian corridors. ·
( d) Retail components of the building shall constitute no more than 50% of the gross floor area of tlie
building. Retail activity accessory to approved office uses are not counted toward the total amount of
retail activity permitted on the site accordini; to the formula contained in Section 7 of this ordinance.
(e) No drive-through facilities shall be located within a mixed use building.
(f) Mixed use buildings must include a minimum of twenty-five (25%) percent of its gross floor area as
residential use in order to be eligible for increases in the retail allocation within the development site,
per Section 7 ( C) of this ordinance.
K. Signs
L All provisions of Section 8 in Ordinance #1033 Shopping Center Ordinance_. shall apply to signage
within the Commercial Planning Area.
2. All provisions of Section 8 in Ordinance #1033 Shopping Center Ordinance shall apply to signage
within the Mixed Use Core Area with the following standards superceding any conflicting statements
within the aforementioned section.
(a.) The size of freestanding signs is limited to 20 square feet.
(b.) The height of freestanding signs is limited to eight feet. (The copy area of the sign may extend to
the grolllld level.)
(c.) Wall Signs shall be located only on the wall area housiog the first story of a principal structure.
28
3. The applicant shall submit an illustrative sign plan detailing a common scheme of signs to be erected
within the PEDDl with the application for Final Approval. Although, the precise location of all signs
may not be anticipated, the applicant shall present details of common color and material schemes, along
with covenants enforcing the proposed provisions, to be approved by the Planning Commission.
L. Lighting
1. Illumination shall not exceed one (1) foot-candle at all property boundaries. The one (1) footcandle
illumination shall be measured horizontally on the ground surface and vertically at a five (5')
foot height at the property lines.
2. All parking areas and sidewalks shall be suitably illuminated for night use.
M. Open Space, Environmental Protection and Development Areas
L In order to protect areas identified as environmentally sensitive and provide for the open areas of land
that complement the areas of the development site occupied by structures, a minimum of twenty-five (25%)
of the total development site shall be required to be designated as open space, according to the standards and
requirements included in this section. The standards established under this ordinance have been done to
support the natural resource conservation and enviromnental protection objectives of the Township
Comprehensive Plan, while accommodating new growth and development The purposes of these standards
are:
(a) To allow for flexilillity in lot design which directs buildings, site disturbance and activities to the most
suitable locations with respect to the natural conditions of the development site.
(b) To protect, as much as practicable, unique features of the Township, such as aquifers, water bodies,
floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from disturbance.
( c) To minimize visual impact upon the scenic character of the Township by :fitting new construction
harmoniously into the natural landscape, and;
(d) To provide an opportunity for creative, varied and env!romnentally sensitive and economical
development within the PEDD-1 district.
2. Areas to be included as Open Space: The minimum requirements for open space within the development
site shall be comprised of all envlromnentally sensitive areas plus any percentage of secondary
enviromnentally sensitive areas, plazas and passive recreation areas to meet the minimum required open
space.
3. In order to determine those areas that are to be included within the required open space, the applicant
shall submit an existing resources/site analysis plan of the development site which shall identify
elements of the natural landscape, including those features of environmental, historic, or scenic value,
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Wetlands*
(b) 100 YearFloodPlain*
(c) Slopes of25% or Greater*
(d) Slopes of 15% to 24%**
(e) Mature Woodlands**
(f) Active Agricultural Areas**
(g) Any historic, archeological, and cultural features (i.e., old structures, ruins, stone walls, burial grounds,
etc.)**
(h) Significant views into and out of the site**
(i) Drainageways and other bodies of water**
* Environmentally Sensitive Areas
** Secondruy Environmentally Sensitive Areas
29
4. Environmentally Sensitive Areas: The environmentally sensitive areas on the site are those lands that
display extremely sensitive environmental constraints. These areas are to remain undeveloped and preserved
in the district's open space. All buildable land within the development site will be those areas not limited by
the basic constraints of the environmentally sensitive areas.
5. Secondary Environmentally Sensitive Areas. The secondary environmentally sensitive areas are those
lands having features of lesser environmental sensitivity as the environmentally sensitive areas. These areas
may be developed on a limited basis, but are preferred to be preserved as part of the open space. The features
included within these areas are: Listed in Section 8 (M) (3) of this ordinance.
6. Passive Recreation Areas: Functional open spaces reqnired by this ordinance to serve the needs of the
residents of the district, which shall include plazas, trails, vistas, bikeways, and natural habitat protection
areas.
7. The calculation of open space shall specifically not include streets, parking areas, rights-of-way,
detention ponds, access roads to detention ponds or required bufferyards.
8. Effect of Open Space Areas on Building Site Location.
(a) In the planning for the development of the site, as environmentally sensitive areas and secondary
environmentally sensitive areas shall be identified along with areas that have limited environmental
restrictions. The locations of building sites shall primarily be in areas with limited environmental
restrictions, with limited intrusion into secondary environmentally sensitive areas, and in no case be
shall buildings be located within environmentally sensitive areas. Passive recreation areas shall also be
integrated into the development site to serve their appropriate functional purposes.
(b) Building sites shall be located within the development areas in a manner that maximizes the number of
buildings enjoying direct views and access to the district's open space lands. When siting the buildings
within the district, consideration shall be made to minimize the visibility of the buildings from points
outside the district by means of utilizing topography and other natural features that may be present on
the site. To accomplish these objectives, the following standards shall be utilized:
(1) Buildings shall be clustered within the development site
(2) Care should be taken not to locate buildings within secondary environmentally sensitive areas. It shall
be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate the need to develop within the secondary environmentally
sensitive area.
(3) Buildings shall be located around passive recreation areas, particularly required plazas
9. Design Guidelines for Environmentally Sensitive Areas
(a) Consistent with the intent of the district, and to maximize the amount of undisturbed open space, the
Board shall ensure that this disturbance of the environmentally sensitive areas is kept to the absolute
minimum necessary, according to the following standards:
( 1) The environmentally sensitive areas may only be disturbed when the disturbance is
necessary for the placement of the logical access and roadway network, stormwater
detention facilities, utility lines, utility structures, and walking and bikeway networks.
(2) Removal of dead or diseased trees is permitted within the environmentally sensitive
area
(3) The following disturbances may occur on up to fifty (50%) percent of the
Environmentally Sensitive Areas. The Township desires to preserve at least one half
of these areas in a purely natural state.
[a ]Removal of trees less than four ( 4) inches in caliper at the breast height.
[b]Trimnring of vegetation and underbrush
30
(4) Fragmentation of the environmentally sens1t1ve areas and secondary environmentally
sensitive areas shall be minimized so that these areas are not divided into numerous small
parcels located within the various parts of the development site.
(5) Open space areas with sensitive environmental features, shall be designed as part of larger
continuous and integrated open space systems, including resource protection, passive
recreation areas and trails and pedestrian networks.
10. Passive Recreation Areas within the Development Site
As part of the required twenty five (25%) percent open space, Type 1 and Type 2 PEDD development sites
shall include passive recreation areas, as described below:
(a) Type 1 Development Sites:
Plazas shall be included in the office plaoning area, the cumulative total of which, equals one ( 1) acre of
plaza for every five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area constructed, with a
minimum of one (1) acre for sites with less than 500,000 feet of gross floor area ..
(b) Type 2 Development Sites:
Plazas shall be included in the core planning area and conunercial planning areas, the cnmulative of which,
equals one (1) acre for every five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area constructed
within the, with minimum of one (1) acre for sites with less than five hundred thousand (500,000) feet of
gross floor area. A minimum of twenty five (25%) of the total required plaza area or one-half acre,
whichever is greater, shll be located within the cmnmercial planning area.
(1) The minimum acreage for plazas may be provided as one Plaza or in multiple Plazas, provided that the
no plaza is less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
(2) The plazas shall serve the purpose for areas of congregation and recreation as a developed public space
designed to be integrated with the various uses on the development site. The plazas may include features
such as green spaces, lakes, fountains, sitting areas and gazebos. Plazas of one (I) acre or larger may include
active recreation areas such as court games.
(3) Sidewalks shall be installed within the plaza and shall provide for the following:
(a) The safe movement of pedestrians from all buildings surrounding the plaza to other both other buildings
surrounding the plaza and to points on the opposite side of the Plaza.
(b) A design which creates a central focus throogh the intersection of one or more sidewalks of the Plaza's
central point.
(c) Internal sidewalks and the perimeter shall be landscaped per the standards H (5) of this section,
Perimeter Landscaping.
( 4) Lighting. The plaza shall provide lighting in accordance with Section (L) , Lighting Standards.
(5) The Plaza shall be fronted upon by at least two separate principal structures.
11. Open Space Dedication, Mainteoance, and Preservation. Any Land classified as Open Space is sul:!ject
to the fulfillment of the following requirements, which shall constitute conditions of :final approval for
respective phases:
(a) The open space shall be dedicated or otherwise preserved and maintained so as to always remain open to
the public. The open space, including all facilities and improvements, shall be offered for dedication for
public use to a public body which agrees to accept, operate and maintain the dedicated lands and facilities.
However, if the public body elects not to accept the dedicated land, and appropriate maintenance or
31
ownership mechanism must be in place prior to the final plan approval or prior to final plan approval for
Phase I, if the project is developed in phases. The applicant/developer must provide for and establish for the
ownership and maintenance of open space and that such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise (except to a successor organization conceived and established
to own and maintain the open space)., without first offering to dedicate the same to the public.
(b) Covenants restricting the use and activities of the Open Space. Covenants shall require the preservation
of Environmentally Sensitive Areas per requirements ofthis section (e) below and shall be noted on the
deeds of all properties dedicated as Open Space and noting the Township as a party to the enforcement of
the cm,enants.
( c) An association agreement which details maintenance of the approved landscaping, sidewalks, and other
amenities noted on the final plan. Said agreement shall include, as members, property owners within the
Planning Area of which the Open Space is a part The agreement shall also note the right of the Township to
nter upon and maintain the property per Section 704(f) of thePennsyJ;vania Mimicipalities Planning Gode;
and to assess the members of the Association for the costs of such maintenance.
( d) Land consisting of Environmentally Sensitive Area and Secondary Environmentally Sensitive Areas,
which fue developer may choose to preserve as such, shall comply with fue provisions of the preceding
section or may be classified as a conservation easement on the Final Plan Said easement shall grant fue
Township fue right of access over fue easement and enforcement of fue conservation elements of fue
easement
N. Traffic Circulation
I. The road system providing access to the development site shall be capable of handling fue existing
traffic and that traffic generated by the development at a minimum PA nor level of service "C" as
approved by fue Township and PA DOT. The approving authorities may require mitigation of traffic
impacts of the proposed development or reduction of development intensity to achieve acceptable levels
of service on access roadways within the site and immediately adjacent to fue site, but applicant shall
not be responsible for correcting existing deficiencies. Such determinations shall be made by PENN
DOT in accord with required traffic studies and reports of this Ordinance and those required specifically
by PENN DOT.
2. Ingress and egress for fue site shall be designed so as not to constrict fue flow of traffic on the public
road.
3. No approval shall be granted without permit approval from applicable state or county transportation
agencies.
4. Traffic circulation shall not adversely impact neighboring residential streets such that their classification
may require their designation as a collector street.
5. Traffic through existing residential neighborhoods, generated by non-residential portions of fue PEDD,
is to be discouraged
6. Street Design and Traffic Control Standards
Within fue applicable PEDD-1 development sites, fue following street standards shall apply in addition to
those outlined in Article 4 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, where applicable. The
standards are selected which are sufficient for the anticipated traffic volumes to maintain fue required level
of service as detennined by the Traffic Impact Study required to be submitted in the Tentative Approval
application.
(a) Boulevard. (Applicable to Type 2 PEDD-1 and Type 1 PEDD-1 of 50 acres or greater) The main street
entering a PEDD that leads to fue Core Area shall be of a boulevard design, as shown in Appendix C and
designed according to the following standards.
32
(1) Typical Boulevard: A boulevard is a collector street which conveys traffic without generating cross
traffic conflicts . The boulevard is intended to provide for a greater degree of mobility than for land
access, and to serve motorists and pedestrians between local, access, and arterial streets, as shown in
Appendix C. A boulevard design is required when a proposed street generates six thousand (6,000)
average daily trips or greater.
(2) Median width. The median shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width at the entry point as it
e>.1ends to the core planning area. The median shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width within
the core planning area and planted with grass and other landscaping material.
(3) Median Landscape Plantings. The grass area shall be planted with street trees, a type from the list in
Appendix Ca minimum of30 to 50 feet on center (depending on the type of tree) in order to maintain a
continuous canopy along the length of the median. Ornamental trees shall be used to provide an
uuderstory layer for the overhead canopy of major street trees. In addition, the ornamental trees shall be
used to define the entry points along the boulevard and provide opportunities for color, variety and
forms and as an accent or major focus.
( 4) Pavement width. The pavement width shall be a minimum of 11 feet for a single lane of traffic.
(5) Design speed. Design speed should range between 30 and 35 miles per hour.
(6) Parking Lane. A 10 foot parking lane shall be provided along the length of the boulevard.
(7) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the Boulevard. Sidewalks shall be a minimum
of 5 feet in width, with additional width in heavy-pedestrian traffic areas desired.
(8) Planting strip. A minimum of 7 feet shall be provided between the curb and the sidewalk along the
length of the boulevard. (Except where design dictates that the sidewalk e>.1end from the building
setback line to the curb)
(9) Street Trees. Street trees, a type from the list in Appendix A, shall be planted a minimum of 30 to 50
feet on center (depending on the type of street tree) within the planting strip. The intent is to provide a
continuous strip along the boulevard.
(b) Collector Street. The collector street provides for equal amounts of mobility and land access. These
roadways generally serve as major circulation routes. See Appendix C. A collector street design is required
when a proposed street generates greater than two-thousand (2,000) average daily trips and less than six
thousand (6,00()) average daily trips.
(1) Pavement width. The minimum pavement width shall be 11 feet for a single travel lane.
(1) Design speed. Design speed should range between 30 and 35 miles per hour.
(2) Parking Lane. A 10 foot parking lane shall be provided along the length of the collector street.
(3) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the collector street. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of five (5) feet in width.
(4) Planting strip. A minimum of seven (7) feet shall be provided between the curb and the sidewalk along
the length of the collector street.
(5) Street trees. Street trees, a type from the list in Appendix A, shall be planted a minimum of thirty (30)
30 feet on center (depending on the type of street tree) within the planting strip. The intent is to provide
a continuous canopy along the collector street.
(b) Typical Local Street. A local street is designed to provide immediate access to adjoining properties and
land uses. Local roads are intended to provide transportation access within a particular neighborhood or
to provide access to an arterial, collector or access drive. A local street design is required when a
proposed street generates less than two thousand (2,000) average daily trips, except for designated
access drives, as described below ..
( l) Pavement width. The minimum pavement width shall be 10 feet for a single travel lane.
(2) Design speed. Design speed should range between 20 and 25 miles per hour.
(3) Parking Lane. A 10 foot parking lane shall be provided along the length of the local street.
(4) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the collector street. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of 5 feet in width.
(5) Planting strip. A minimum of 7 feet shall be provided between the curb and the sidewallc along the
length of the collector street.
33
(6) Street trees. Street trees, a type from the list in Appendix A, shall be planted a minimum of 30 feet on
center (depending on the type of street tree) within the planting strip. The intent is to provide a
continuous canopy along the local street.
(e) Typical Access Drive. An access drive is intended to provide immediate access to adjoining uses within
the non-residential areas of the PEDD.
(1) Pavement width The minimum pavement width shall be 8 feet for a single travel lane.
(2) Design speed. Design speed should range between 15 and 25 miles per hour.
(3) Parking Lane. A 10 foot parking lane shall be provided along the length of the local street.
( 4) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the collector street. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of 5 feet in width.
(5) Planting strip. A minimum of 7 feet shall be provided between the curb and the sidewalk along the
length of the collector street.
(6) Street trees. Street trees, a type from the list in Appendix_, shall be planted a minimum of 30 feet on
center (depending on the type of street tree) within the planting strip. The intent is to provide a
continuous canopy along the access drive.
7. The development site shall be so designed as to not provide for direct access to local residential streets
outside of the plan from the PEDD-1 development, except for emergency access areas.
0. Building Design and Fa9ade Treatments.
1. Every portion of any exposed exterior wall surface shall be composed of brick, stone,
decorative split-face block, glass, or maible, with wood used for trim only, except as
provided herein.
2. The Board of Commissioners may approve alternative materials only if such material is
detennined to be equal or superior compared to approved material.
3. Buildings Less than Three Stories or 35 Feet in Height.
(a) Maximum Horizontal Wall Dimension of All Walls Facing a Front Yard. But1ding elements shall have
a wall surface no longer than one hundred (100) feet without a break. A break shall consist of (1) a
recess or offset measuring at least twenty feet in depth or one-quarter of the building in length or (2) a
series of recesses or offsets, at intervals of not more than forty feet, that vary the depth of the building
wall by a minimUlll of four feet. Not less than twenty-five percent of the building wall shall be varied in
this way. The objective of this standard is to avoid large, undifferentiated wall surfaces.
(b) Buildings with flat roofs shall have mansard roof facades or gabled roofs over the required offset areas.
(c) A minimum of 50% of the facade of any structure shall be composed of brick, decorative split-face
block or stone. ·
4. Buildings Greater than Three Stories or 35 Feet in Height.
(a) Regardless of the nUlllber of stories, buildings over 35 feet in height shall include architectural
features that mimic two story structures, such as windows or similar components.
5. Maximum Horizontal Wall Dimension of All Walls Facing a Front Yard shall be 200 Feet in
conformance with 3 (a) of this section.
Section 9: Revisions to Ordinance #765, North Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance
The following sections of Ordinance #765 are hereby repealed, replaced or modified by this Ordinance.
Article 3, Section 302 Definitions:
14
The following definition shall be deleted by the above section:
Plmmea Eeeoomic Develof>menl (FEDD 1 PEDD 2) l\n area of land eoooolle<I by a lan<lowuer, to be
devoloj3ea as a single ea!itty fer eommereial and inE!astrial uses or fur a eeminatioo thereef, fue Eiel•el0j3mea!
j3la!Her whieh elees oot neeessarily earre913011El ill lat siiie, bulk, t}pe af Elweliffig, or ase, Eleasity or intensity,
lot oo;•erage er reqaaired fllleB Sf*iee le the regalatiem established in aay ene mstriet under fue f>Fe'/iskms ef
!he-ffleil!g er<li!lauee, Planned Eeeaemie Develepmea!s shall be regalateel as set fertll ill Artiele S, Seetiea
~
The following definitions shall be added to Article 3, Section 302:
Planned Economic Development 2 (PEDD-2) - An area of laod controlled by a laodowner, to be developed
as a single entity for industrial uses or, the development plan for which does not necessarily correspond in
lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage or required open space to the
regulations established in any one district uoder the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Planned Economic
Development 2 shall be regolated as set forth in Article 5, Section 503.13.
Planned Economic Development 1 (PEDD-1) - An area of land controlled by a landowner, to be developed
as a single entity for office, limited manufacturing, retail , poblic and semi-public uses and residential in
various combinations thereof, depending upon the type of PEDD-1 proposed, the development plan for
which does not necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot
coverage or required open space to the regulations established in any one district under the provisions of
this zoning ordinance. Planned Economic Developments shall be regulated as set forth in Ordinaoce
Article 5, Section 503.13
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
Planned Economic Development Districts+-aad-2 (PEDD 1 aad PEDD 2)
Article 5, Section 503.13, Paragraph 1.
The following. text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
These- This Elis!riets district provides for a wide range of. . .. Compahble with existing resisidential uses
Article 5, Section 503.13, Paragraph 2
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
PEDD-2 Lot and Area Requirements and Special Provisions:
PEDD 1 andPEDD-2 Lot and Area Requirements and Special Provisions
Article 8, Section 810.2
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
Exterior Wall Surfaces in Commercial, Industrial, PEDD 1 and PEDD 2 Districts
Article 8, Section 810.2, Paragraph 1
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
No building shall be erected in District C, Cl, C-lA, C-II, FEDD 1 aod PEDD 2 that has ~ny part ...
Article 8, Section 820.4
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
Commerciai PBIJD 1, PEDD-2 and Industrial Standards
Article 9, Section 904.4
The following te>..i, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
Procedure for rezoning requests, PEDD 2 requests and amendments
Procedure for rezoning requests, PBOO 1 and PEDD 2 requests and amendments
Article 5, Section 503.9, Paragraph 2, Subparagraph 5
The following text, as indicated as strikethrough, is removed from this section:
Building Height maximum 3 stories
Building Height maximum 8 staFies 3 stories
Article 6, Table 5
L Remove the entire column for fue PEDD-1 district.
2 Make the following changes to the Table 5.. Commercial/Industrial Uses table for the following uses: .
USE c C-1 C-lA C-2 PEDD-2 I
Multiple Dwelling Unit p p p
rr ow-Rise) c
High Rise Multiple G c
Dwellin£ Unit
Hio:h Rise Office Units G c c c
Section 10: Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect fue validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutioruil or invalid
Section 11: Inclusion of Aj1pendices
The appendices cited within this ordioance as Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D are
attached to this Ordinance and shall be considered an integral part thereof.
36
DULY ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being
present this ..Z.o ..IA day of /iJrverr, 200l(
I
Attest:
(SEAL)
37
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
TOWNSHJP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
By~-4,,,,,_,_,__,,.;
APPENDIX A
APPROVED TREES
APPROVED STREET TREES AND PLANT MATERIALS. The following plant materials are approved for
use with the TOWNSHIP provided the specific SITE is suitable. The DEVELOPER may propose alternate
species, suQject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP.
1) Large Trees.
a) Fraxinus americana - While Ash
b) Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata - Green Ash
c) Gleditsia tricanthos inermis -Thornless Honey locust
d) Liguidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
e) Liriodendron tulipera - Tulip Tree.
f) Phellodendron amurense - Amur Cork Tree
g) Plantanus acerifolia - London Plane Tree
h) Quercus alba - White Oak
i) Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak
j) Quercus phellos - Willow Oak
k) Robina pseadocacia inerrnis - Thornless Black Locust
I) Tilia - Linden
m) Zelkova serrate - Japanese Zelkova
2) Small Trees (Ornamental Trees)
a) Acer ginnala - Amur Maple
b) Comus florida -Flowering Dogwood
c) Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington Hawthorn
d) Gingko biloba - Gingko (male only)
e) Prnnus kwanzan - Kwanzan Cherry
SophoraJaponica- Japanese Pagodatree
38
APPENDIX B
illustration of Planning Areas - Type 2 PEDD-1
{<,E:SiO~l Pl!WIJLIJ& M-e:A
Cot.e
f LANN1JJC::r
A£fft
,, -
CO/rltr7€f.C<4L
f'l;4..IJ /J i/.J ('.,.._
RR.ef't
COfflrrJf..RC(/:JL Z.o tJIN G
(ex: C- l)
38
1-..
.
<
•
J
l..1
APPENDIXC
Typical Design of Boulevard and Collector Streets
_\-' Boulevard
-----Sidewalk
---Planting stnp with shade trees
Parking lane ·
~-----Two-way traffic
---Mediian with shade &
omamen1al trees
\.. \, .14 ~1~ 5' 10' 10·- o· 22'- O"
MIN. MIN. MIN. MIN:
'!.
i'. '·""
l .
;. Collector Street
.-~--------Sidewalk
Planting stlip with shade lrees
.------Parking lane
s o·- o 1 o·- a·
MIN. MlN. MIN.
22'- O"
MIN.
39
Two-way traffic
APPENDIX ilJJ
The following pages provide concepts and a
basic selection of plant materials that may be
applied to the described bufferyards and parking
lots.
As provided for in this chapter, the Township
of North Huntingdon encourages creative
interpretation and welcomes an innovative
approach to site enrichment with the use of
plants and land forms
APPENDIX
0
"
SHADE TREE SELECTED FROM PARKING LOT ISLAND LIST
+ +
--
+ +
9' ~~ (TYPICAL)
.,
DEEP CONCRETE CURB-----;
+ +
CONCEPTUAL PARKING LOT ISLAND PLANTER PLAN
FOR ISLANDS 10' W X 40' L :
APPENDIX 'A' ·
2.5'
MINIMUM
.,
'-'~I'-- GRADE VARIES
5' MINIMUM
20·
VARIES
G) PROPERTY LINE
BUFFERYARD 'C' CONCEPTUAL SECTION
TWENTY FEET WIDE
l~
~~;.rw-
"'t0M
5'-
20'
PROPERTY LINE CJ)
APPENDIX 'A'
2.5"
MINIMU
2.5'
MINIMUM r--
G;;;DEP . '
:VARIES
5' MINIMUM
30'
VARIES
8 PROPERTY LINE
BUFFERYARD 'B' CONCEPTUAL SECTION
THIRTY FEET WIDE
5'--•
30'
PROPERTY LINE G)
APPENDIX 'A'
~ ---
MINIMUM 2.5'
0
0::
<( >-.
0:: w
LL
LL
:::J
(!) .
1- :z:
w
u
<( -,
0
<(
8
40'
ADJACENT BUFFERYARD ..
5' MINIMUM
SHADE TYPE TREE
0
"<t
·I EVERGREEN OR DECIDUOUS ORNAMENTAL TREE .,
MEDIUM I TALL SHRUBS
BUFFERYARD 'A' CONCEPTUAL PLAN
FORTY FEET WIDE
APPENDIX 'A'
NOTE A
NOTE B
+
AVERAGE MINIMAL SPREAD FOR SPREADING, SEMI-SPREADING OR GLOBE SHAPED EVERGREEN SHRUBS.
THE HEIGHT VARIES.
AVERAGE MINIMAL HEIGHT FOR CONICAL AND BROAD UP-RIGHT EVERGREEN SHRUBS.
THE SPREAD VARIES.
30"
SEE NOTE 'A'
VARIES
+ +
+ + . ll +- ll +-
"\_.,_ ,_,_ ~~
u~ 't ~ ['" ),~ g
:':> ~ * ., n<:>-tp.t;
+
ROOT BALL\ l:::i
~
0
~
\
14" r-1
1~-~f
3.5'
SINGLE ROW EVERGREEN HEDGE PLAN
AND MINIMUM EVERGREEN SHRUB STANDARDS
. APPENDIX 'A'
Shee(1
Bufferyard rv1inimal Plant Quantities
Buffe ard A
per 400 L.F. Average per 100 L.F.
1 O shade trees 2.5
20 conifer or deciduous ornamentals 5 ( 3 conifer f 2 deciduous)
96 medium I tall plants 24
B uffe rya rd B
per 400 L.F. Average per iOO L.F.
8 shade trees 2
16 conifer I deciduous ornamentals 4 ( 3 conifer f 1 deciduous)
84 medium I tall shrubs 21
Bufferyard C
::ier 400 L.F. * Average per iOO L.F:<*
3 shade trees 2
12 conifer I deciduous ornamentals 3 ( 2 conifer j 1 deciduous)
i2 medium f tall shrubs 13 .
12 evergreen shrubs 8
'Per '8000 square feet for additional landscape area per Section 906. 7. 6 .J
'Per 2000 square feet for additional landscape area p~r Section 906.7.6.J
''
Ornamental Deciduous Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Hedge Maple Acer campestre
Amur Maple Acer ginnala
Japanese Maple Acer pa/ma tum
*Shadblow Serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis
*Apple Serviceberry Amelanchier x grandifloria
*River Birch Betula nigra
Pyramidal European Hornbeam Carpinus betu/us fastigiata
*Gray Dogwood Camus racemosa
Chinese Dogwood Camus kousa
*Flowering Dogwood Comus florida
*Ohio Pioneer Dotted Hawthorn Crataegus punctata 'Ohio Pioneer'
*Winter King Hawthorn Crataegus viridis 'Winter King'
Star Magnolia Magnolia stellata
·sweetbay Magnolia Magnolia virginiana
Snowdrift Crabapple Ma/us 'Snowdrift'
Sugar Tyme Crabapple Ma/us 'Sugar Tyme'
- *American Hophombeam Ostrya virginiana
... Sourwood Oxydendron arboreum
Evergreen Trees for Bufferyards A, Band C
Concolor Fir Abies concolor
American Holly /lex opaca
Norway Spruce Picea abies excelsa
White Spruce Picea alba
Serbian Spruce Picea omorika
*Eastern White Pine Pinus strobus
Scots Pine Pinus sylvestris
Douglasfir Pseudotsuga menziesi
·canadian Hemlock Tsuga canadensis
•Indigenous species in Eastern United States
. i
' '
. .
Shade Type Trees for Island Planters in Parking Lots
Common Name Scientific Name
"Green Mountain Sugar Maple Acer saccharum 'Green Mountain'
·Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
'Thornless Honeylocust Gleditsia tria. inermis
Columbia London Planetree Platanus x acerfo/ia 'Columbia'
Liberty London Planetree Platanus x acerfolia 'liberty'
Special Interest Tree Species
Katsuratree Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Maidenhairtree Gingko biloba (male)
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia glyptostroboides
English Oak Ouercus robur
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
•Indigenous species in the Eastern United States
APPENDIX 'A'
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. i 1 OF 2004
ORDINANCENO. 2018
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON,
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 765, TO INCLUDE
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AS A PERMITTED USE IN THE PEDD-1, PEDD-2,
AND INDUSTRIAL (I) ZONING DISTRICTS.
BE IT DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, that the Township Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 765, is amended as
follows:
(1) Amendment to Article V, Table 5 (Item #90, Municipal Buildings)
Table 5 Commercial/Industrial District
Permitted Uses
c C-1 C-IA C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 1
90. Municioal Buildin~s p p p p p p p
NOTE: The affect of this amendment is to add Municipal Buildings as a permitted use in
the PEDD-1, PEDD-2, and Industrial (I) zoning districts.
(2) All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
(3) If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this ordinance is for any reason found to
be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections or parts of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of
the Board of Commissioners that this ordinance would have been adopted has
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof
not been included herein.
DULY ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this 19th day ofMay, 2004.
ATTEST:
(SEAL)
Bruce Dice, Solicitor
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
~L~ Thomas L. KeriJel')rreSiClellt
Board of Commissioners
OFFICIAL
TOvVNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. _ll_ of 2006
ORDINANCE NO. 2093
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON,
COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND AND COl\1MONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 765 TO PROVIDE A
TEXT AMENDMENT TO AMEND SECTION 503.3, 2 (6) SIDE YARD
WIDTH MINIMUM R-Al ZONING DISTRICT.
WHEREAS, The Plam1ing Commission of the Township of North Huntingdon has
recommended to the Township ofNorth Huntingdon a zoning change concerning a text amendment
to a111end Section 503.3, 2 (6) Side Yard Width Minimum R-Al Zoning Distiict; and
WHEREAS, The Planning Commission of the Township of North Huntingdon has
recommended approval of the zoning amendment on the 2nd day of May, 2005; and
Vi1HEREAS, the Township Commissioners have held a public hearing, pursuant to the
Municipalities Planning Code, on November 15, 2006; and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners deem it in the health, safety and general welfare
to enact an Ordinance amending the present Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 765, and Zoning Map
to reflect the requisite changes as described herein below.
NOVi' THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township ofNorth Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Co111111011wealth of
Pem1Sylvania, as follows:
SECTION I. After a Public Hearing held on November 15, 2006 at 6:30 P .M., the Board of
Commissioners of North Htmtingdon Township hereby amends Ordinance
No. 765 to provide for a text amendment to Section 503.3, 2 (6) side yard
width minimum of ten (10) feet minimum side yard setback for one story and
two story dwelling units.
- 1 -
SECTION 2. The requisite Township officials are hereby directed to amend the official
Zoning Map and other official documents of the Township of North
Huntingdon to reflect the within zoning changes/amendments.
SE CTI 0 N 3. Any Ordinance or portions of Ordinances in which are inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section or paii of this Ordinai1ce is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Co111111issioners that this
Ordinai1ce would have been adopted had such tmconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full
quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 15th day of November, 2006.
ATTEST:
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
- 2 -
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
By: __ -L..::.=."""'q....::u=~sw..""'""~Richard
G. Gray, President
Board of Commissioners
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. JQ_ of2010
ORDINANCE NO. 2151
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSIDP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON AMENDING ORDINANCE 765 (ZONING
ORDINANCE) PROVIDING FOR TEXT REVISIONS TO
TABLES IN SAID ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, the Township Planning Commission has recommended to the Township
of North Huntingdon to revise certain text provisions of its Zoning Ordinance related to the C-
1 A Zoning District; and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners have held public hearings on the proposed
revisions pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code on July 21 and September 15, 2010;
and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners deem it in the best interests of the public's
health, safety and welfare to enact an Ordinance amending the present Zoning Ordinance,
Ordinance No. 765, to reflect the changes as follows.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, at a meeting assembled, by and with the authority of the
same as follows:
SECTION 1. Article V, Table 2 - Rear Yard Setback Requirements is
replaced with a revised Table 2, attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and made part of this
Ordinance.
- 1 -
SECTION2. Article V, Table 5 - Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted
Uses is replaced with a revised Table 5, attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and made part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION3. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township
Commissioner that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 20th day of October, 2010.
ATTEST:
lv'1. Shepherd, -Township Secretary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSI NERS
- 2 -
EXHIBIT "A"
TABLE2
District Abutting Zoning Districts
Where (Distance in Feet)
Site is
Located R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3 R-4 PRD c C-1 C-lA C-2 I
R-1 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-1A 30* 30 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-2 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-3 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-4 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
c 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30 30
C-1 30* 30* 40* 40* 40* 40* 30 20 20 20 20
C-1A 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30 20 20 20 20
C-2 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 20 20 20 20
I 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 30* 30 30 30 30
* Buffer Zone required - 10 foot planting (see definition).
+ Additional rear yard setback required in the C-lA zoning district for buildings in excess of
three stor~es; 10 feet additional setback for every story over three stories.
Exhibit A
Section 8.1 B
EXHIBIT "B"
Page 1
Exhibit B
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
s
p
p
p
102. Printin , Pub!ishin & Re roduction Establishments p p p p p
Page 2
132. Wool Pullin or Scour!n : manufacturin
133, Wool or Bone Dis Hatlon
134. Yards tor Stora e and Re air
·Any commercial or Industrial ectivilY or eruerprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 ani:l 1s subject to consideration
under a Special Exception.
Page 3
p
p
p
p
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. _lL OF 2010
ORDINANCENO. 2152
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON,
COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND AND COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA PROVIDING FOR AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE NO.
765 PROVIDE FOR TEXT CHANGES TO THE LANGUAGE OF SAID
ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, the Township Planning Commission has recommended to the Township of
North Huntingdon to make the herein below text changes to its Zoning Ordinance on the 30th day of
August, 2010; and
V\IHEREAS, the Township Commissioners have held a public hearing pursuant to the
Municipalities Planning Code on the 14th day of October, 201 O; and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners deem it in the health, safety and general welfare
to adopt text changes to Ordinance No. 765, and said text changes are set forth and described herein
below.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township ofNorth Hm1tingdon, County ofWestmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. After a Public Hearing held on the 14th day of October, 2010 at 6:45 P.M.,
the Board of Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township hereby anlends
Ordinance No. 765 to provide for the following text changes to said
Ordinance:
A. Section 823.4 is amended as follows:
Section 823.4 Signs Pem1itted in Commercial and Plam1ed Economic
Development Districts:
- I -
I. In all Commercial and PEDD Districts, business signs,
excluding advertising signs and billboards, shall be a pem1itted use subject to
the following:
(1) Apennit ......
2. Advertising signs or billboards may be permitted in any
Commercial or PEDD district by special exception. A billboard shall be a
principle use on any lot and shall be subject to the same restrictions set forth
in Section 823.4.1.
B. Section 823.5 Permitted Signs in an Industiial District is amended as follows:
I. Signs on awnings ...
2. Advertising signs or billboards may be pennitted 111 any
Industrial I District by special exception. A billboard shall be a principle use
on any lot and shall be subject to the same restiictions set forth in Section
823.5.].
C. Table 5 shall be modified to read as follows:
I. Commercial/Industrial Districts pem1itted uses to divide the
use category for signs into two (2) categories: "Signs-Business" and "SignsAdvertising
and Billboards". "Signs-Business" would be permitted uses in all
Commercial, PEDD and Industrial Districts. However, "Signs-Advertising
and Billboards" shall be considered special exceptions in all Districts.
SECTION 2. The requisite Township officials are hereby directed to amend the official
Zoning Ordinance to reflect the text changes as set forth hereinabove.
SE CTI ON 3. Any Ordinance or po1iions of Ordinances in which are inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Commissioners that this
- 2 -
Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pe1111sylvania, a full
quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 17thday of November, 2010.
ATTEST:
SEAL
S'OLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
- 3 -
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
BydJ~
Lee D. M~sident
Board of Commissioners
OFFICIAL
TOvVNSI-IIl' OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. _8_ OF 2011
ORDINANCENO 2163
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROVIDING FOR AN
AMENDMENT TO ORDINANCE NO 765, THE ZONING ORDINANCE, TO PROVIDE
REGULATION OF OIL AND GAS WELL DRILLING AND ANCILLARY OPERATIONS OF
SHALLOW OIL AND GAS WELLS AND FROM WELLS TO SHALE RESERVOIR OR
SOURCE ROCK (drilled deeper than the base of the Elk Sandstone or its stratigraphic equivalent).
WHEREAS, North Huntingdon Township has the power to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
people and property in the Township;
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon ToM1ship Board of Commissioners believe that it is in the best
interest of the residents and citizens that the ToM1ship be provided certain infomrntion prior to
commencement of oil and gas drilling operations; and
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon Board of Commissioners wish to amend Zoning Ordinance No. 765
that provides for oil and gas development.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED and it is hereby ordained and enacted by
the Board of Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION 1: Purpose
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to declare the development of oil and gas as a
Permitted Use in ce1tain zoning districts for shallow wells, and as a Conditional Use for deep wells in
certain zoning dish·icts. North Huntingdon Township recognizes that the regulation of oil and gas
operations is the primary responsibility of the regulatory agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
but that the Township maintains it's zoning powers as set forth in Pennsylvania Statute Title 53,
Municipality Planning Code ("MPC") and through tbe North Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance.
It is in the Township's best interest to detennine the zoning distr·icts where such activities will be
permitted and to have infomrntion concerning oil and gas exploration, development, and production
laking place within the Township and to ensure certaii1 security and safety measures are in place related to
oil and gas well drilling.
SECTION 2: Definitions
As used in this ordinance, the following tern1s shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
Oil and Gas Development or Development. The well site preparation, well site consh-uction and
excavation, drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with an oil and gas well of
any depth; water and other fluid storage, irnpoundment and transportation used for such activities; and
the installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and
structures whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction, installation,
maintenance and repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and
activities associated with the exploration for, production and transportation of oil and gas other than
natural gas con1pressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities JJerforn1ing the equivalent
functions that operate as n1idstrean1 facilities.
Tow11ship: North Huntingdon Township, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
Oil and Gas. Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other
constitLtents or similar substances that are produced by drilling a well of any depth into, tlu-ough, and
below the surface of the emih.
Operator. Any person, partnership~ con1pany1 coqJoration and its subconh·actors and agents who has an
interest in Teal estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas.
Protected Structure. Any residential dwelling Ltnit, commercial business, school, religious institution or
other public building located within 500 feet of the surface location of a well ( l 000 feet for deeper shale
reservoir or source rock extraction) that may be impacted by noise generated from drilling or hydraLtlic
fracturing activity at a well site. The tenn shall not include any structure owned by ai1 oil and gas lessor
who has signed a lease with the Operator granting surface rights to drill the subject well or whose owner
has signed a waiver relieving the Operator from implementation of the measures established in paragraph
Section 4, Paragraph 17 of this Ordinance for the owner's benefit.
Well Site. The well site shall consist of the area occupied by the facilities, structures, and equipment
necessary for or incidental to the construction, drilling, fracturing, prodLtction, or operation of an oil or
gas well. If multiple areas are used, then the total combined areas shall be considered the well site area.
Natural Gas Compressor Station. A facility designed and consh·ucted to compress natural gas that
originates from an oil and gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for
delive1y of oil and gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing plant or
underground storage field, including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes,
valves, tanks and other equipment.
Natural Gas Processing Plant. A facility designed and constructed to remove materials such as ethane,
propane, butane, and other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to
be of sLtch quality as is required or appropriate for h·ansmission or distribution to commercial markets but
not including facilities or equipment that are/is designed and consh·ucted primarily to remove water, water
vapor, oil or naturally occmTing liquids from natural gas.
SECTION 3: Permitted Districts
The Township of North Huntingdon hereby designates the following zoning districts within the Township
in which oil and gas development may be pennitted by right or as a Conditional Use. In either case, it
must meet all conditions and standards contained in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
l. Oil and Gas Development Shallow wells: oil and gas development for shallow wells are
permitted uses in the following zones: FEDD 1 and 2, C-1, all Industrial zones, open space, and
residential zones excluding the R-1 and R-lA zones. Areas within a permitted zone that border
and are located within 200 feet of au RI and RlA zone are excluded from oil and gas
development. All access roads and site development must be at least 200 feet from a protected
structure, unless a waiver is granted by the properl)' owner.
2. Oil and gas development for deep wells from shale reservoir or rock within the Township is
permitted by Conditional Use in zones PEDD 1 and 2, C-1, all industrial zones, open space, and
residential zones excluding R-1 and R-lA provided they are not bordering and within 500 feet of
an exclLtcled zone. All access roads must be 200 feet from a protected structure and site
2
development must be 500 feet from a protected structure, unless a waiver is granted from the
property ov•,rner.
3. Oil and gas development shall not be permitted in areas not identified in l and 2 above. No
development is pennitted in the R-1 and R-lA zones.
SECTION 4: Conditions and Standards
Oil and gas development may be a Permitted Use or Conditional Use, subject to the following standards
and conditions:
1. Operator shall submit an application for well drilling to the Township. Applicant will also be
required to submit a Site Development Plan to the Township Engineer for approval for the site in
accordance with Township regulations for site development. The Applicant will be required to
pay fees for application and review in accordance with the existing fee structure for plan reviews.
Operator shall comply with all applicable codes of the: Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance; the Grading, Excavation, and Fill Ordinance; the St01111water Ordinance; Floodplain
Ordinance; and other relevant ordinances. No site work shall occur prior to the approval by the
Township Engineer. Any modification to an existing and pem1itted site that materially alters the
site development plan or midstream facility will require a revised submittal and approval from the
Township. ·
2. Operator will be responsible for costs and fees in accordance with the Township fee sh·ucture. In
addition, any direct costs associated with the review of an application or related studies will be
paid by the applicant. This includes any direct costs associated with hiring a third party to assist in
the review of the application and related documents. Unpaid costs will be a basis for the
Township to deny future applications for that Operator.
3. Operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding and permitting requirements for
Township roads that are to be used by overweight vehicles and equipment for development
activities. For state and county roads located within the Township, Operator shall provide a copy
of the Highway Occupancy Permit for overweight vehicles to the Township. Operator shall
provide a transportation route map which depicts the roads to be utilized in the Township. The
Operator shall inventory the condition of the roads and provide video and photo documentation to
the Township. The Operator shall also submit at the time of application a road restoration plan
that indicates how the Operator plans to address damage to Township roads during construction
and after construction is complete. Prior to the commencement of any activity at the site, the
Operator shall enter into a township roadway maintenance and repair agreement with the
Township, in a fom1 acceptable to the Township regarding maintenance repair and bonding of
Township roads before, during, and immediately after drilling operations. Corrective action shall
be taken by the Operator as directed by the Township.
4. Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the Township roads utilized remain free
of diri, mud and debris resulting from development activities and shall ensure such roads are
promptly (within 24 hours) swept or cleaned of dirt, mud and debris. Ingress and egress points
shall be located to comply with PA Code 67 Chapter 441 PaDOT Design Manual 2, and shall meet
transition grades, turning radii, and accommodate traffic capacity to provide for efficient
111oven1ent.
5. Operator shall take all necessary precautions \o ensure the safety of persons in areas established
for road crossing and/or adjacent to roadvvays (for exan1ple; persons vvaiti11g for public or school
0 -'
transportation). V..'here necessary and per111itted, during periods of anticipated heavy or frequent
truck traffic associaLed with development, Operator shall provide flagmen to ensure the safety of
children at or near schools or school bus slops and include adequate sir,~1s and/or other warning
measures for trnck traffic and vehicular traffic.
6. Operator shall not clear brnsh or trees by way of burning. However, Operator shall be permitted
to, consistent Vl'ith any relevant outdoor burning ordinance(s), laws a11d regulations) bL1111 any
brush, trees, or stumps that have been removed from the ground and collected into a pile or piles
on the properties where the Operator is engaging in development.
7. Prior to development, Operator shall provide to the Township three (3) copies of an approved
Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency ("PPC") Plan. The Plan shall comply with PaDEP
Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of Environmental Emergency Response
Plans or the most recent applicable guidance document. Additionally, the Operator shall identify a
third party or company emergency responder.
8. Before any development activities, the Township shall ascertain whether the Township's Police
and Fire Departments have secured adequate infomrntion to deal with any potential dangerous
conditions that may result due to development activities. First responders shall, upon request from
the To,M1ship and at the Operators sole cost and expense, have an on-site orientation providing
adequate awareness infomrntion prior to drilling of an Oil and Gas well. T11e Operator will provide
at least fifteen (15) days' notice of an on-site orientation. Such site orientation shall be made
available immediately after any substantial modification to the development or well site, or not
less than annually during the period when the Operator anticipates drilling activities in the
Township. .
9. Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure appropriate dust conh·ol measures are in
place.
10. Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities is an important and integral part
of oil and gas development, as part of the planning process, Operator shall consider the location of
its temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to minimize
interference with To"o1ship residents' enjoyment of their prope1ty and future To"~1ship
development activities. The To"o1ship Engineer will review the site plan with consideration of
private property usage and future development.
11. Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is essential to the safety of those involved in
the development of oil and gas, the Operator shall take steps, to the extent practicable, to direct
site lighting downward and inward toward the drillsite, wellhead, or other area being developed by
shielding so as lo minimize light leaving the site and towards public roads and adjacent buildings.
12. At least two (2) weeks prior to any development activity at an oil or gas well location, the Operator
shall provide the following information to each property owner within tvio thousand five hundred
(2,500) feet of the planned surface location of the well(s):
a. A copy of the well survey plat showing the location(sJ of the planned well(s);
b. A general description of the planned operations at the planned well(s) and associated
equipment to be used in the development of the well(s);
c. The contact inforn1ation for the Operator. including a 24-hour en1ergency nun1ber.
4
d. The availability of the Operator to meet with residents and businesses to present
Operator's plans for the well(s) and lo allow for questions and answers.
13. The Operator shall provide to the Township Engineer a Site Development Plan in accordance with
Township requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, in addition to:
a. A map showing the planned access route to the Well Sites on public roads,
b. Infom1ation on the statcts of State and County road bonding.
c. Identification of all slrnctui-es within 750 feet of limits of the disturbed area,
d. The well survey plat showing the planned surface location(s) of the well(s), and site
facilities for oil and gas development, including an off site transmissions plan.
e. Operator shall comply with the Township floodplain requirements and stom1water
management requirements outlined in Ordinance 2011. No drilling or facilities are
permitted within the floodplain, except where no other area provides access to the oil
and gas deposit and this is thoroughly documented. In such cases, no storage of
chemicals shall be pem1itted and only needed structmes which shall be designed to
withstand a l 00-year sto1111 event will be permitted in the floodplain. A qualified
Engineer must certify that any development and structures do not cause additional
flooding impacts. Exemption from the chemical storage restriction may be granted at
the discretion of the Township where it is necessary and where no environmental risk
would occur.
f. A general description including: identification of water withdraw method and treatment
and disposal of water; location and means for site storage and disposal of hazardous and
nonhazardous waste products; and sun1111ary environmental data that includes anticipated
impacts and any proposed mitigation measures.
g. The contact information for the Operator with 24-hour emergency number.
h. Provide list of addresses, delivery date and method of delivery for each resident
within 2,500 feet of the well as required in Section 12. A map showing structures where
residents were notified and a copy of the notice and delivery method will be accepted.
Submittals for shallow wells should include four (4) paper copies and one (1) digital copy of the
land development application and drnv.~ngs for site plans. Deep wells from shale reservoir or
source rock require ten (J 0) paper copies of the application and drawings are required along with
one digital copy. Applicable fees for oil and gas operations are for major developments. The
Township will have up to 90 days for review.
14. At least ten ( 1 0) days prior to commencement of drilling the Operator shall provide lo the
Township Zoning Officer a copy of the drilling permit issued by the Permsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection ("DEP"). Revocation of any federal, state, municipal, or oilier required
approvals applicable to the use shall constitute an automatic revocation of the site development
approval.
15. In addition to the requirements in the subsections above, the Operator shall:
a. Fence all water impoundments with a minimum thickness eleven (11) gauge chain link
fence. al least six (6) feel in height, meeting OSHA requirements around any pits that
contain or could contain water or other liquids at depths b'Teater than two feet. Fence
support posts shall be sel in concrete and embedded into the ground for stability. Tension
5
rods shall be 3/8 inch round steel bolt. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness 114
x 3/4 inch. Adjustable tighteners should have a 6 inch minimum take-up.
b. Install a gate at the access road. Gates shall be not less than 12 feet wide of two gates
(minimum 6 feet) or 12 foot sliding gate. A combination catch and Jocking attachment
shall be provided and kept locked when no one is working on the site.
c. Install warning signs providing notice of the potential dangers at the perimeter of the well
site. These should be at least every three hundred feet and more frequent in areas where
sight distance is limited.
d. Install a pem1anent Operator Sign posted at the gate and access road to include company
name, emergency contact information, street address (to be established by Township),
and Township Police number for emergency purposes. The sign must be all weather
material and with a minimum four (4) inch lettering and should be located near and
visible from the public road.
e. Provide at least one security guard at all times when a drilling rig or hydraulic fracturing
equipment is on the well site and in use.
16. Prior to the commencement of drilling activity, no construction activities involving excavation of,
alteration to, or repair work on any access road or Well Site shall be perfonned during the hours of
9:00 p.111. to 7:00 a.m.
17. The Township recognizes and acknowledges that oil and gas development is accompanied by
inherent noise. However, the Operator shall take the following steps to minimize, to the extent
practicable, the noise resulting from the Development:
a. Prior to the drilling of an oil and gas well and/or the installation of any midstream
facility, compressor or gathering facility, the Operator shall identify a third party entity
for acoustic analysis. The Operator shall establish a background dBA Leq (Laeq) noise
level at fifty (50) feet from the nearest protected structure as measured to the closest
exterior point of the building. In lieu of establishing the above Laeq noise level, the
Operator may assume and use, for the purposes of compliance with this ordinance, a
default background noise level of 55 Laeq daytime and 45 Laeq nighttime. The sound
level meter used in conducting any evaluation shall meet the American National
Standard Jnstitute's standard for Type II sound meters or greater accuracy which will
provide equivalent data. The Township, at its discretion, may require noise monitoring
during initial drilling and prior to receiving any complaints. The Township, at its
discretion, may also require a Noise Analysis at the Operators expense.
b. The Operator shall provide documentation of measured background noise levels (Laeq)
to establish a background noise level greater than 55 Laeq (daytime 7:00AM-9:00PM) 45
Laeq (nighttime 9:00PM-7:00AM) to the Township's Zoning Officer within three (3)
business days of such a request from the Zoning Officer. Operator shall provide a copy
of recent (within one year) calibration laboratory certification. Also meters must be field
calibrated and documented before and after each set of measurements. Eight
measurements should be taken over a two to tlu-ee hour period and arithmetically
averaged to identify the Laeq. All data should be reported. Daytime readings should be
taken in both the AM (10AM-12PM) and PM (4PM-6PMJ and be the basis for daytime
operations. C>perations that n1ay involve nightt1111e \vork require both daytin1e and
nightti111e n1easuren1ents. Readings should be 5 feet above ground and at an exterior site
6
to the protected structure to obtain adequate data that is not compromised by proximity to
a structure or features that would skew the data or results. The location of all noise
measurements will be shown relative to nearby features via a sketch including
dimensions to nearby features. Any unusual noise events or site features should be noted.
c. The noise generated during construction, drilling and hydraulic fracturing activities, or
from compressors or midstream facilities is to be measured fifty (50) feet from the nearest
protected sb·ucture. The monitoring site should be between the noise source and protected
sa·ucture. The noise levels shall not exceed the background noise level (as determined by
noise monitoring) or the default level, whichever is higher:
1. during drilling activities by more than seven (7) decibels during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.;
11. dming drilling activities by more than five (5) decibels during the hours of 9:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m.; or
iii. By more than ten (1 OJ decibels during hydraulic fracturing operations.
The Operator shall infonn the Township of which level (background existing monitored
noise level or default level) is being used. Measurements to determine compliance with
the ordinance will be dBA Leg (Laeq) for a period of 15 minutes during any part of the
day or night at the discretion of the Township.
d. Noise Almlysis -At the discretion of the Township, a Noise Analysis will be required
prior to any site development activity. In areas where there are likely to be noise
concerns the Township may require a noise analysis to develop an understanding of noise
impacts and allow time for noise attenuation measures to be adequately evaluated. The
analysis must determine expected uncontrolled noise levels at locations designated by the
Township. If it is detem1ined that nnconb·olled noise levels will exceed levels in 4. l 7c,
the analysis must include expected noise levels with noise controls in place. The analysis
must include specifics on the noise conb·ols that will be installed. The analysis must be
developed from lmown noise levels from similar sites and predictions (graphical or
numerical) of expected noise levels dete1111ined at locations designated by the Township.
These requests are for those areas likely to have noise impacts. Noise mitigation
measures will be required if dete1111ined by the Township to be feasible. The Noise
Alrnlysis shall be approved by the Township.
e. If a complaint is received by the Township from any person, whether a resident or
otherwise using the protected sbucture as defined herein for any lawful purpose,
regarding noise generated: during consb·uction drilling: or hydraulic fracturing activities;
or for compressors or rnidsa·eam facilities, the Operator shall, within twenty-four (24)
hours of receipt of the complaint from the Township, monitor noise at a point which is
nearest to the well site or equipment generating the noise, and (50) feet from the
Protected Structure to avoid reflective noise from the sa·ucture. Complaints from
residents or otherwise not using a protected structure, but in proximity to the noise source
shall require a noise analysis if determined by the Township to be wmrnnted.
f. If the Operator engages in any noise monitoring or analysis as required by this
Ordinance, it will provide preliminary data to the Township no later than three (3)
business days following completion of the noise monitoring or analysis. Once the
monitoring is complete. Operator shall meet with ToM1ship representatives and affected
7
residents to discuss \·Vhether possible noise abaten1ent n1easures are wa1Tanted, if the
pe1111itted levels set forth herein were exceeded. Township will detennine whether noise
abaten1ent n1easures are feasible. Operator \Vill be required to talce corrective action if
mitigation is feasible. Ifno mitigation is feasible then the noise analysis is complete and
no mitigation is required. The mitigation analysis should identify various mitigation
measures and provide a detailed explanation to the feasibility of the noise abatement
measure(s). The feasibility should address whether an abatement measure can actually be
implemented and provide an appropriate noise reduction and pose no safety, engineering,
or access restrictions problems. It should also address the cos! and level of attenuation to
be provided so that the mitigation can be properly evaluated. ]\l[easures to be evaluated
should consider best available control technology and include but are not limited to:
temporary barrier construction; acoustic blankets; enclosing all or portions of the noise
source; limiting noise source operations to daytime or other limits; relocating drill site;
providing motel accommodations for impacted residents; and other measures that
individually or in conjunction with each other provide a feasible noise mitigation plan.
g. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used in connection 'O~th the
drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment or used in Development shall
not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with (i) an exhaust muffler or (ii)
an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be consh·ucted of non
combustible materials designed and installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations.
Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be maintained
in good operating condition according to tl1e manufacturer's specifications.
h. All work over operations shall be restticted to the hours of7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.rn., except
in the extent of an emergency, as reasonably dete1111ined by the Operator. "Workover
operations" shall mean work perfom1ed in a well after its completion in an effmi to
secure production where there has been none, restore production that has ceased, or
increase production. The Township is to be notified of all such emergencies.
18. Operator shall take all reasonable measures to prevent the emission of offensive odors from
the development.
19. Shallow oil and gas development sites shall provide a two hundred (200) foot setback area
from district boundaries or areas that are excluded zones for oil and gas development. No sh·uctures
shall be permitted within this setback area. Deep wells from shale reservoir or rock shall have a 500
fool setback from boundaries of excluded zones.
10. All pe1111anent facilities shall be painted an earth tone color to blend in with the sunounding area. The
Township may require fencing and or landscaping to buffer the facilities from adjacent prope1ties.
SECTION 5: Penalties
Any Operator or person perforn1ing work at their direction that violates or permits a violation of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable, pay a fine of not more than $500 per incident, plus all costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees incuned by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Appeals can be made by written request to the
Township and an appeal will be heard by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Township may choose a civil
enforcement proceeding connnenced before a Magisterial District Judge. A person who violates this
Ordinance shall also be responsible for the Township's attorney•s fees, engineering fees, expe1i fees and
court costs associated \:vith enforce1nent.
8
The Township may seek injunctive relief in accordance with Section 53 Pa CSA 10515.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code which states, "Jn addition to other remedies, the municipality may institute
and n1aintain appropriate actions by lavv or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate violations, ... "
SECTJ ON 6: Natural Gas Compressor Stations, Natural Gas Processing Plants, metering Station,
Gathering System and other production of development facilities. These facilities require a Noise
Impact Analysis and shall comply with the noise criteria in Section 17.
1. Natural Gas Compressor Stations shall be allowed as Conditional Uses in the Industrial District
2. Natural Gas Processing Plants shall be listed as Conditional Uses in Industrial District
3. Metering Stations shall be allowed as Conditional Uses in the Industrial District
Supplemental Controls:
Compressors are required to be enclosed in a building with doors and meet noise and odor requirements.
The building and roofing color is required to blend into the site. The Township requires restoration of the
site within one year of production termination or nonuse.
SECTION 7: Repealers
Township Ordinance No. 18of1998, Ordinance No. 952
SECTION 8: Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after passage.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED into law this 15th day of __J_u _n_e ___, 2011.
HUNTINGDON
Board of
ATTEST:
.1
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice
9

1
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, and may be cited as "The NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE".
REPEALS
102.1 Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the SUBDIVISION Regulations of the TOWNSHIP of
North Huntingdon adopted as Ordinance #81, October 11, 1956, as amended, are hereby repealed.
102.2 Section 914 of Ordinance #765, the Zoning Ordinance, which includes the submission requirements for SITE
PLANS shall be repealed upon the adoption of this Ordinance.
103 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
103.1 Authority. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and
amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as subsequently amended, 53, P.S. 10101 et seq. ("MPC") enables and authorizes
governing bodies of municipalities to enact a SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE to
regulate SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS situated within the TOWNSHIP.
103.2 ZONING ORDINANCE control of PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS. In the case of any DEVELOPMENT
governed by the PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE, the applicable provisions of this ordinance shall be as modified by the
ZONING ORDINANCE, and the procedures which shall be followed in the approval of any PLAT and the rights and
duties of the parties thereto shall be governed by the ZONING ORDINANCE.
103.3 The PLANNING COMMISSION is hereby designated as the reviewing authority of and for the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP, and is charged with the duty of making investigations,
REPORTS and recommendations on the design and improvement of proposed SUBDIVISIONS and LAND
DEVELOPMENTS; and shall submit such REPORTS and recommendations to the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
for action on the APPLICATION.
104 PURPOSE
104.1 This SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To assure SITES suitable for building purposes and human habitation and to provide for the harmonious
development of the TOWNSHIP.
B. To guide the future growth and development of the TOWNSHIP in accordance with the adopted and amended
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
C. To assure coordination of existing STREETS and highways with proposed STREETS or other features of the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the TOWNSHIP.
D. To assure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air and for proper distribution of population,
thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens.
E. To secure equitable treatment of all LAND DEVELOPMENT and SUBDIVISION PLANS by establishing
definitions, design standards, PLAN requirements and conditions of acceptance of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS by
the TOWNSHIP.
F. To protect the environment of the TOWNSHIP and reduce the maintenance costs of PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS by promoting efficient DEVELOPMENT, maintaining minimum standards and regulating
DEVELOPMENT in identified FLOODPLAIN areas.
2
G. To make adequate provision for transportation, water flowage, water supply, DRAINAGE, sanitation,
educational opportunities, recreation, protection of the tax base, securing economy in governmental expenditures
and the protection of both urban and non-urban needs.
H. To provide opportunities for flexibility within the prescribed design standards consistent with the purposes of
preservation of natural resources , topography and hillsides , provision of open spaces for ACTIVE and PASSIVE
RECREATION assuring the integrity, stability, and beauty of the TOWNSHIP and the economic value of the land.
I. To maintain the highest level of quality DEVELOPMENT within the TOWNSHIP through the establishment
of reasonable standards of design.
J. To establish provisions consistent with those authorized by the Pennsylvania MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING
CODE to require DEVELOPERS to pay fees, furnish land and/or establish mitigation measures to ensure that the
development provides its fair share of capital facilities needs generated by the DEVELOPMENT.
105 INTERPRETATION
105.1 In the interpretation and application of this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, the
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
Conflict with other public provisions. Where any provision of the Chapter is in conflict with any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the most restrictive provision or that provision imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
105.3 Liability. The review or approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT by the TOWNSHIP in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall not constitute liability upon the TOWNSHIP, its officials, or
employees.
105.4 This ordinance shall not apply to any LOT or LOTS forming a part of a SUBDIVISION created and recorded
prior to the enactment of this ordinance nor is it intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those inconsistent with these regulations,
or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the TOWNSHIP is a party.
106 JURISDICTION
106.1 The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the area within the boundaries of NORTH HUNTINGDON
TOWNSHIP,Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
107 COMPLIANCE
107.1 No SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT of any LOT, or PARCEL shall be made; no STREET,
sanitary SEWER, STORM SEWER, water main or other IMPROVEMENTS in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for PUBLIC use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of BUILDINGS
ABUTTING thereon, except after approval of PLATS in accordance with the provisions of this SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
107.2 On and after the effective date of this ordinance, no LOT or LAND in a SUBDIVISION may be sold, no permit
to erect any BUILDING in a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT may be issued unless and until a
SUBDIVISION PLAT has been approved and recorded, and until the IMPROVEMENTS required herein in connection
therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as required by this ordinance.
3
107.3 Nothing in this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE shall be deemed to require the
approval of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS for the division of land for agricultural purposes in PARCELS of more
than ten (10) acres, not involving any new STREET or EASEMENT of ACCESS.
108 COMPLIANCEWITH OTHER CODES AND REGULATIONS
108.1 In addition to complying with the provisions of this ordinance, all SUBDIVISIONS and LAND
DEVELOPMENTS within the TOWNSHIP shall comply with all applicable TOWNSHIP Ordinances as adopted or
amended, as referenced herein and comply with applicable TOWNSHIP, COUNTY, STATE or Federal. Compliance
with said regulations shall be a requirement for any approval under the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
108.2 Any violation of applicable TOWNSHIP, COUNTY, STATE or Federal regulations or permits shall be deemed
a violation of this ORDINANCE and shall be subject to enforcement procedures authorized by this ORDINANCE.
109 SEVERABILITY
109.1 Should any section or provision of this ORDINANCE be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such DECISION shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof,
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
110 ENACTMENT OF SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
110.1 The TOWNSHIP BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may from time to time amend, add to, change, or repeal in
its entirety this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. Such amendments shall be enacted in
conformance with Section 505 and Section 506 of theMPC.
110.2 From the time an APPLICATION for approval of a PLAT, whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as
provided in the SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, and while such APPLICATION is
pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning, SUBDIVISION or other governing ordinance
or plan shall affect the DECISION on such APPLICATION adversely to the APPLICANT and the APPLICANT shall
be entitled to a DECISION in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or PLANS as they stood at the
time the APPLICATION was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary APPLICATION has been duly approved, the
APPLICANT shall be entitled to FINAL APPROVAL in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary
APPLICATION as hereinafter provided. However, if an APPLICATION is properly and finally denied, and subsequent
APPLICATION shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
110.3 Where the DEVELOPER has SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED the required IMPROVEMENTS as depicted
upon the FINAL PLAT within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the
PRELIMINARY PLAT shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved FINAL PLAT pertaining to zoning
classification or density, LOT, BUILDING, street or utility location.
111 APPENDICES
111.1 Attached to this ORDINANCE are appendices detailing specifications and checklists. These appendices may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS as conditions and accepted engineering
practices warrant.
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
201 INTERPRETATION
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the words
"used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed", or "arranged to be used" or "occupied", and certain terms
or words shall be interpreted as defined in 202, Definitions below.
4
202 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ORDINANCE, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
90-DAY REVIEW PERIOD: The period of time, established by the STATE MPC for in which the review and
communication of the decision of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall be made for any APPLICATION. The 90-
DAY REVIEWPERIOD commences with the OFFICIAL FILING DATE.
ABUTTING - Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an ALLEY or
EASEMENT.
ACCESS - A means of vehicular approach or entry to or exit from a LOT, a SITE or a PARCEL.
ACCESS POINT - Any vehicular entrance or exit to a street. The distance between such ACCESS POINTS shall be
measured from the termination of one CURB cut to the establishment of an adjacent CURB cut.
ACTIVE RECREATION- Recreation that requires construction of fields, courts, and other facilities or any type of
recreation that substantially impacts the initial, natural state of a SITE or one which adversely impacts
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE areas.
ALLEY - An ALLEY is also a PRIVATE or PUBLIC STREET primarily designed to serve as secondary ACCESS to
the side or rear of LOTS whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPLICANT - An OWNER or DEVELOPER who has filed an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, including his
heirs, successors and assigns, as the case may be.
APPLICATION- The APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT - Every APPLICATION, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and
approved prior to the start of CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT, including but not limited to an APPLICATION
for the approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT or for the approval of a PRELIMINARY PLAN or
FINAL PLAN.
APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL - The APPLICATION for FINAL APPROVAL of a DEVELOPMENT to
be submitted by a DEVELOPER to the TOWNSHIP.
APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL - The APPLICATION for PRELIMINARY APPROVAL to be
submitted by a DEVELOPER to the TOWNSHIP.
ARTERIAL ROAD - A PUBLIC ROAD intended to provide for high- speed travel between or within communities or to
and from COLLECTOR ROADS. ACCESS is controlled so that only regionally significant land uses may take direct
ACCESS to these streets.
AUTHORITY - A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164) known as
the Pennsylvania "Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945".
BICYCLE LANE - A lane at the edge of a ROAD reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH - A pathway usually separated from the ROAD, designed specifically to satisfy the physical
requirements of bicycling.
BLOCK - A tract of land or PARCEL entirely surrounded by PUBLIC highways, STREETS, streams, railroad
RIGHTS-OF-WAY, cemeteries, public parks, shore lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the TOWNSHIP
of North Huntingdon or a combination thereof.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS- The Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon.
BUILDING - A structure or appendage to a structure intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual,
animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature, which is permanently affixed to the land; has one
or more floors or stories; and is bounded by either LOT LINES or yards. A BUILDING shall not include such structures
5
as billboards, FENCES, or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible to human use, such as gas tanks,
grain elevators, coal bunkers or similar structures. A BUILDING may accommodate more than one family and have
more than one dwelling unit any may be used for residential, commercial, public, or industrial purposes.
CALIPER - A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured four and one-half (4.5) feet
above natural GRADE.
CAPPED SYSTEM - A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put in place for future use, contingent upon
expansion, rather than to meet immediate DEVELOPMENT needs.
CARTWAY - That portion of a street or ALLEY intended for vehicular use. It includes the actual ROAD surface area
from CURB to CURB, which may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where
there are no CURBS, the CARTWAY is that portion between the edges of the paved or hard surface width.
CHANGE OF USE – Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a BUILDING or land. The North
American Industry Classification System shall aid in the determination of whether a change of use is substantially
different from the previous use.
CHANNEL - The bed and banks of a natural stream which convey the constant or intermittent flow of the stream.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE - A triangular-shaped land area of unobstructed vision established at STREET
intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the
SIGHT DISTANCE of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. This area is regulated as lines of sight between
points on the STREET CENTER LINES of intersecting STREETS at a given distance from the intersection as defined
by PAMotor Vehicle Code Section II.
CODE – The Code of the Township of North Huntingdon as amended.
COLLECTOR STREET - ROADS connecting residential STREETS to the ARTERIAL STREETS or providing
ACCESS to NON-RESIDENTIAL USES and STREETS. COLLECTOR STREETS form barriers between
neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The overall policy guide for the physical DEVELOPMENT of the TOWNSHIP consisting
of maps, charts, and textual matter in accordance with theMPC.
CONSTRUCTION - The CONSTRUCTION, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or
relocation of a STRUCTURE, including the placement ofMOBILE HOMES.
COUNTY - The COUNTY ofWestmoreland, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALKS - A RIGHT-OF-WAY, municipally authorized, which cuts across a BLOCK to furnish access for
pedestrians to adjacent STREETS or properties.
CURB - A vertical or sloping edge of a ROAD, such as a Belgian Block CURB, Barrier CURB, MOUNTABLE CURB
or bituminous wedge CURB.
DBH- Diameter at Base Height. The diameter of a tree’s trunk at its breast height.
DECISION - Final adjudication of the ZONING HEARING BOARD by reason of jurisdiction under the ZONING
ORDINANCE of the TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon or of appeals from determinations. Decisions shall be
appealable to the Court of Common Pleas ofWestmoreland County.
DEDICATION - The transfer of property interests from private to PUBLIC ownership for a PUBLIC purpose. The
transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of a less than fee interest, including an EASEMENT.
DEP- The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DETAILED CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS- Drawings that show a level of detail such that they may be reviewed
for compliance with all codes and standards adopted and used by the TOWNSHIP or any of its representatives.
6
DETENTION BASIN - A basin designed to retard STORM WATER runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate. A DETENTION BASIN can be designed to drain completely after a storm event.
DETERMINATION - The final action by the ZONING OFFICER of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP appealable to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
DEVELOPED OPEN SPACE- OPEN SPACE, some of which is developed for ACTIVE RECREATIONAL uses or
requiring regular maintenance of landscaping and lawns.
DEVELOPER - Any OWNER, agent of such OWNER or tenant with permission of such OWNER, who makes or
causes to be made an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT - The agreement between the TOWNSHIP and the DEVELOPER which is required
for FINAL APPROVAL of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT and which shall state all conditions for
DEVELOPMENT and shall establish the responsibilities of the parties to the agreement including PERFORMANCE
GUARANTEE, sequencing, scheduling, methods of construction and provision of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
required prior to release of the PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
DEVELOPMENT - The division of a PARCEL of land into two (2) or more PARCELS; the CONSTRUCTION,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any BUILDINGS; any use or change in
use of any BUILDINGS or land; and extension of any use of land or any clearing, GRADING, or other movement of
land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this ORDINANCE.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for DEVELOPMENT, including PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT, a PLAT of SUBDIVISION, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of BUILDINGS and
other structures, intensity of use or density of DEVELOPMENT, STREETS, ways and PARKING AREAS, OPEN
SPACE and PUBLIC facilities.
DRAINAGE - The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, GRADING, or other means.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM - The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, waterbodies
andWETLANDS.
DRIP LINE- The area covered by the overhang of a tree’s branches.
DRIVEWAY- An area capable of providing or intending to provide vehicular access from a STREET to a
BUILDING on a LOT.
DRY LINES - See CAPPED SYSTEM.
EASEMENT - Authorization by a LOT OWNER of the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated
part of his LOT.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to
IMPROVEMENTS and may require conservation measures or the employment of creative DEVELOPMENT
techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require limited DEVELOPMENT, or in certain instances
may preclude DEVELOPMENT. This includes all features in the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE - Any area within a SITE that reasonably reflects areas incorporated into the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY- A mapped area, compiled and maintained by the Planning and
Zoning Department, the boundaries of which are composed of STEEP SLOPES, WETLANDS, FLOODPLAINS,
and POOR SOILS; and which is regularly updated in accordance with approved PLANS and challenges to the map
per section 304.7 of this ORDINANCE.
EROSION - The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water,
wind, ice, or gravity.
7
ESCROW- A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a third PERSON to be held by the third PERSON
and released to the grantor only upon the fulfillment of a condition.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Any public utility corporation or municipal authority including those providing natural gas,
electricity, water sewage, telephone or cable to the citizens of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT - The government of the United States of America.
FEE SCHEDULE- The current Township of North Huntingdon Fee Ordinance as adopted and amended.
FEMA - The Federal EmergencyManagement Agency.
FENCE - A fabricated barrier used to enclose an area of land, a LOT or SITE.
FILL - The depositing of land, whether submerged or not, and, gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition
whatsoever, as approved by TOWNSHIP engineer.
FINANCIAL SECURITY - An irrevocable letter of credit, bond, cash deposit or ESCROW account established to
guarantee the completion and maintenance of required IMPROVEMENTS. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE and
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE are types of FINANCIAL SECURITY.
FINAL APPROVAL - The ultimate approval of a DEVELOPMENT granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
which follows PRELIMINARY APPROVAL and filing of the FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN, all granted in
accordance with Article 3 of this ORDINANCE.
FINAL PLAN - The final map of a SUBDIVISION which is submitted for approval by the Board of Commissioners and
which, if approved, will be filed with the COUNTY Recorder of Deeds or the final LAND DEVELOPMENT map
officially recognized as the approved PLAN by the Board of Commissioners.
FINAL PLAT - See FINAL PLAN.
FLAG ACCESS STRIP – That portion of a FLAG LOT that provides vehicular access to the buildable portion of the
LOT, which by its characteristic is narrow and less than the minimum LOT FRONTAGE requirements established
within the ZONING ORDINANCE. The area contained within the FLAG ACCESS STRIP is not counted toward
meeting the minimum lot size requirements of the ZONING DISTRICT.
FLAG LOT - A type of LOT (commonly flag-shaped in configuration) and often called a rear lot subdivision, in
which STREET FRONTAGE is provided by a strip of land which is narrow in relation to the remainder of the LOT
which extends from the main body of the lot to the street. The purpose of which is to provide for habitation or use or
a rear portion of a LOT which otherwise would not meet the minimum STREET FRONTAGE requirements of the
ZONING DISTRICT requirements as stated in the TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE.
FLOOD - A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA - A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
FRONTAGE- The ABUTTING of a LOT LINE onto a STREET.
GRADE - The slope of the ground surface, SIDEWALK, or STREET specified in percentage (%) terms.
GRADING - The act of changing the natural contour of the land in any way.
GRADING PLAN - A plan to be prepared where a DEVELOPER con-templates removal, modification or destruction of
existing STRUCTURES and/or GROUND COVER and which shall be submitted with an APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT in accordance with this ORDINANCE or the GRADING ORDINANCE.
GROUND COVER - A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a dense mat covering the surface of the
land, preventing soil from being blown or washed away.
8
GUTTER - A shallow CHANNEL usually set along a CURB or the pavement edge of a ROAD for purposes of catching
and carrying runoff water.
HIGH LEVEL PLANTING - Consists of trees of a deciduous nature with a minimum height of six feet at planting
and a CALIPER of two (2) inches at planting and trees of an evergreen nature with a minimum height of six feet at
planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the American Standards for Nursery Stock
published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - The area of a LOT or SITE occupied by BUILDINGS, ROADS, parking areas, outdoor
storage areas and other paved surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT - Any man-made, immovable item which becomes a part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate
and which is necessary to produce usable and desirable LOTS from raw acreage including, but not limited to,
GRADING, pavement, CURB, storm and sanitary SEWERS, GUTTER, drains, and betterment to existing water
courses, SIDEWALKS, STREET SIGNS, CROSSWALKS, shade trees, GROUND COVERS, sodding or seeding,
STREET name SIGNS andMONUMENTS.
INTERIOR PEDESTRIAN WALKS - Sidewalks not ABUTTING the CARTWAY of a STREET.
ISLAND - A raised area in a STREET, usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes, or used for
landscaping, SIGNS or lighting.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - Any of the following activities:
A. The IMPROVEMENT of one LOT or two or more contiguous LOTS, tracts or PARCELS of land for any purpose
involving:
1) A group of two or more residential or non-residential BUILDINGS, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single non-residential BUILDING on a LOT or LOTS regardless of the number of occupants or
tenure; or
2) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of STREETS, COMMON AREAS, leaseholds,
condominiums, BUILDING groups or other features.
B. SUBDIVISION of land.
C. The following shall not be considered a LAND DEVELOPMENT:
1) The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling into not more than three (3) residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
2) The addition of an accessory BUILDING, including farm BUILDINGS, on a LOT or LOTS subordinate to an
existing principal BUILDING; or
3) The addition or conversion of BUILDINGS or rides within the confines of an enterprise which would be
considered an amusement park. For purposes of this exemption, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly
acquired acreage by an amusement park until the initial PLANS for the expanded area have been approved by the
municipality.
LANDSCAPE PLAN - A LANDSCAPE PLAN prepared by a landscape architect identifying each tree and shrub by
size, type and scientific name, B & B or bare root, location together with a planting diagram and such other diagrams or
REPORTS necessary to show method of planting, staking and mulching, grass seeding specifications and mixtures.
LATERAL - Pipes for utilities connecting individual BUILDINGS to larger pipes called MAINS, trunks or interceptors
that usually are located in STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
9
LIGHTING - Artificial illumination as of walks, PARKING AREAS, STRUCTURES and outdoor features.
LIGHTING is defined and regulated in terms of the following characteristics:
A. Candlepower - the amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot distant from a light source to an intensity of
one foot candle. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source
or luminaire.
B. Cutoff - the point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or luminaire are completely eliminated
(cutoff) at a specific angle above the ground.
C. Cutoff angle - the angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line
perpendicular to the ground from the light source, above which no light is emitted.
D. Cutoff-type luminaire - a luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors or fractor panels which direct and cut
off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than ninety degrees.
E. Foot-candle - a unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point
source of one cancel.
F. Glare - the brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
G. Luminaire - a complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and
decorative parts.
H. Maximum permitted illumination - the maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at the interior
BUFFERYARD line at ground level in accordance with the standards of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
LOT - A designated part of a SITE or a PARCEL, tract or area of land that is legally established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used or built upon as a unit. A SITE or PARCEL may include more than one (1) LOT, but a
LOT cannot include more than one (1) SITE.
LOT, CORNER - A LOT ABUTTING two or more STREETS having an angle of intersection of not more than 135
degrees.
LOT LINE - A line bounding a LOT which divides one LOT from another or from a STREET or any other PUBLIC or
private space.
LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a LOT which extends along an existing or dedicated PUBLIC STREET, or
where no public streets exist, along a STREET.
LOT LINE, REAR - That boundary of a LOT which is most distant from, and is most nearly parallel to the FRONT
LOT LINE.
LOT LINE, SIDE - Any boundary of a LOT which is not a FRONT or REAR LOT LINE.
LOT, THROUGH – LOTS having FRONTAGE on two STREETS, which are approximately parallel to one another
when ABUTTING the LOT.
LOT WIDTH - The distance between the SIDE LOT LINES measured at the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY line or along
the front BUILDING line of the LOT on cul-de-sacs, as determined by the prescribed FRONT YARD requirements.
LOT, ZONING - A LOT, unoccupied or occupied by a main structure, with or without accessory structures, fronting on
a PUBLIC STREET or a street in a SUBDIVISION approved by the TOWNSHIP and having thereon such open areas
as are required by this ordinance for one (1) of the uses permitted in the ZONING DISTRICT in which it is located.
LOW-LEVEL PLANTING -- Consists of shrubs and any other plant species that is greater than two feet in height at
planting and less than six feet in height at planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the
American Standards for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington,
D.C.
10
MAIN - In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be connected.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE - A guarantee, in the form of FINANCIAL SECURITY, of facilities,
IMPROVEMENTS or work to insure the correction of any failures of any IMPROVEMENTS required pursuant to this
ORDINANCE and any other North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP regulation, or to maintain the same.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION – A major SUBDIVISION as defined in Article 3 or this ORDINANCE.
MANHOLE - An inspection chamber whose dimensions allow easy entry and exit and working room for a PERSON
inside.
MARKER - A metal pipe or pin installed to delineate a specific location within a PARCEL of land or
DEVELOPMENT.
MINOR SUBDIVISION - A minor SUBDIVISION as defined in Article 3 or this ORDINANCE.
MONUMENT - A concrete post installed to delineate a specific location within a parcel of land or DEVELOPMENT.
MOUNTABLE CURB - A low CURB with a flat slope designed to be crossed easily without discomfort.
MOVING LANE - Any traffic lane where traffic movement is the primary if not sole function.
MAWC -Municipal Authority ofWestmoreland County.
MPC - PennsylvaniaMunicipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
NHTMA - North Huntington TOWNSHIPMunicipal Authority.
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE - Any use other than a RESIDENTIAL USE.
NOTICE, PUBLIC - See PUBLIC NOTICE.
OCCUPANCY - The physical possession upon, on or within any LOT or STRUCTURE for a use.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT - A permit for the use or OCCUPANCY of a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or LOT indicating
compliance with all provisions of the BUILDING code, ZONING ORDINANCE, and this ORDINANCE.
OFFICIAL FILING DATE –Upon the determination by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR that an
APPLICATION is complete, per standards established Article III of this ORDINANCE, the date in which the 90 DAY
REVIEW PERIOD commences. That date shall be either the date of the first regular PLANNING COMMISSION
meeting following the determination that the application is complete, or thirty (30) days after that determination,
whichever comes first.
OFFICIAL FORM- The standard forms, as amended and altered, distributed by the TOWNSHIP or any of its
representatives, requesting information associated with an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, its approval,
and post-approval requirements.
OFF-SITE - Located outside the SITE that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE - The disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary sewer system served by a central sewage
treatment plant approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
OFF-LOT - Located outside the LOT that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA - Any area arranged, designed, used or intended for use of parking and located within
the boundaries of a LOT or SITE.
ON-LOT - Located on the LOT in question.
ON-SITE - Located on the PARCEL or LOT that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
11
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM- The disposal of sewage by use of septic tanks or other safe and healthful
means within the confines of the LOT in which the use is located and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - A FLOOD that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100)
years (i.e., that has a one percent (1%) change of occurring each year, although the FLOOD may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE - Land set aside for public use as recreational sites, FLOOD PLAIN AREAS, nature trails, historical sites
or other areas where BUILDING is hazardous such as slide areas, undermined areas and other areas as designated by the
federal, state or TOWNSHIP agencies. Also common greens, yards, or other open areas intended for the sole use of the
residents and their guests provided in connection with PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS or with
residential buildings occupied by more than two (2) families per LOT. A LOT, PARCEL, or parcels of land or a body of
water, portions thereof or a combination thereof within a DEVELOPMENT SITE for the use and enjoyment of residents
of a DEVELOPMENT, not including STREETS, OFF-STREET PARKING areas, and areas set aside for PUBLIC
FACILITIES.
ORDINANCE - The NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE adopted as Ordinance #1011, on August 16, 2000
OWNER - The PERSON or PERSONS having the right of legal title to, beneficial interest in, or a contractual right to
purchase a LOT or PARCEL of land.
PARCEL - Any designated piece or tract of land located in the TOWNSHIP established by a PLAT or otherwise as
permitted by law.
PARKING SPACE - A portion of a PARKING AREA not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long,
exclusive of driveways designed for the parking of only one (1) vehicle which is accessible from the street.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMPREHENSIVE PLAN- A detailed plan assessing the future recreation needs and
plans of the TOWNSHIP written in accordance with standards defined in Section 503 of theMPC.
PASSIVE RECREATION- Any type of recreational activity, including hiking trails, picnic areas, etc., which does
not require the substantial alteration of the natural state of a SITE or any ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
areas of the SITE.
PAVING - Concrete or bituminous wearing surfaces with appropriate base consistent with sound engineering practices.
"PAVING" shall not include tar and chip and other similar practices.
PERCOLATION TEST - A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water, and used to determine the
suitability of a soil for DRAINAGE or for the use of an ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE - A FINANCIAL SECURITY to insure that all IMPROVEMENTS, facilities, or
work required by this ORDINANCE will be completed in compliance with the ORDINANCE, regulations, and the
approved PLANS and specifications of a DEVELOPMENT. Such FINANCIAL SECURITY includes a deposit of
cash, surety bond, certified check, negotiable securities, or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan
institution provided by the DEVELOPER and as required in the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
PERSON - An individual, partnership, PUBLIC or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit, PUBLIC utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
PHASING PLAN - A PLAN showing the boundaries of each phase of DEVELOPMENT, planned dates for
constructing the proposed phases, and any other required information.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN – A plan showing the locations, areas, and intensity of illumination of all proposed
LIGHTING on a PLAN.
PLAN – Drawings according to the provisions of this ORDINANCE prepared by a STATE registered surveyor,
engineer or landscape architect for approval of a SUBDIVISION or a LAND DEVELOPMENT.
12
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT - PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT.
PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - An area of land, controlled by a OWNER, to be developed as a single
entity for commercial or industrial uses or a combination thereof, the DEVELOPMENT PLAN for which does not
necessarily correspond in LOT size, bulk type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, LOT coverage and required open
space to the regulations established in any one district under the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - An area of land, controlled by a OWNER, to be developed as an single
entity for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and NON-RESIDENTIAL USES the
DEVELOPMENT PLAN for which does not necessarily correspond in LOT size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density,
or intensity, LOT coverage and required OPEN SPACE to the regulations established in any one district under the
provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR- The appointed Planning and Zoning Director of the Township of North
Huntingdon.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The PLANNING COMMISSION of the TOWNSHIP of North Huntington.
PLANNING MODULE COMPONENTS (PMC) - The APPLICATION for sewage facilities planning for all LAND
DEVELOPMENT requiring revision of the TOWNSHIP Comprehensive Official Sewage Facilities Plan which is
submitted to the DEP, NHTMA, and the TOWNSHIP Planning Agency in compliance with PA Chapter 71 as revised
and with the PA Clean Streams Law and the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan
PLAT - A map, layout or PLAN of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, whether preliminary or final,
prepared in accordance with the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional Engineers
Registration Law".
PLAT, FINAL - The final map of a SUBDIVISION which is filed for PLANNING COMMISSION
CONSIDERATION and BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS FINAL APPROVAL and, which if approved, shall be filed
with theWestmoreland County Recorder of Deeds and NHTMA.
POOR SOILS- The following soil associations according to theWESTOMORELAND COUNTY SOIL SURVEY:
A. Mine Dump Series;
B. Upshur Series;
C. Upshur-Gilpin Series;
D. Made Land Series.
E. Strip Mine Spoil Series.
F. Mine Wash Series
PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE - A required meeting between the DEVELOPER, contractor,
CONSTRUCTION inspectors and TOWNSHIP representatives prior to the initiation of CONSTRUCTION for the
purposes of reviewing conditions, regulations and methods of CONSTRUCTION.
PRELIMINARY PLAN or PLAT - The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of a
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT which is filed for PLANNING COMMISSION consideration and
preliminary approval by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. A PLAN as required by and meetings the standards of
Article 3 of this ORDINANCE.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS - All STREETS, walkways, GUTTERS, CURBS, SEWERS, water lines and other
utilities or related facilities, but not including DRIVEWAYS and PARKING AREAS, to be operated and maintained by
private entity, but which must be constructed in accordance with the TOWNSHIP ordinances.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY - The area dedicated to the use of a PRIVATE STREET or other private purposes for the
use of OWNERS, residents or visitors of a PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT, or LOT.
PRIVATE STREET - A STREET, including the entire PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY, which is intended for private use
and is a PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT.
13
PUBLIC - Of or pertaining to land, BUILDINGS, structures, uses or activities owned, operated or controlled by the
TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon, the Norwin School District, or other government agencies, federal, state or local
other than a detention facility.
PUBLIC HEARING - A formal meeting before the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, PLANNING COMMISSION, or
ZONING HEARING BOARD held pursuant to PUBLIC NOTICE, which requires sworn testimony of all witnesses and
transcribing of all testimony. The intended purpose is to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in
accordance with theMPC (Act 247), as amended.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS - All STREETS, walkways, GUTTERS, CURBS, SEWERS, water lines and other utilities
or related facilities to be dedicated to or maintained by the PUBLIC; and, if dedicated to and maintained by the
TOWNSHIP, must comply with the TOWNSHIP ordinances.
PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3,1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the
"Sunshine Act".
PUBLIC NOTICE - A notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the TOWNSHIP. Such notice shall state the time and place of the PUBLIC HEARING and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the PUBLIC HEARING. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30)
days or less than seven (7) days from the date of the PUBLIC HEARING.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE - Land designated as OPEN SPACE which is owned by the TOWNSHIP or other governmental
agency and which is set aside for use by the general populace.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - The area dedicated to and accepted by the TOWNSHIP, COUNTY of the Commonwealth
for a PUBLIC STREET and other PUBLIC PURPOSES.
PUBLIC STREET - A paved STREET, thoroughfare or highway, including the entire PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY,
which has been dedicated and accepted by the appropriate governmental body.
REAR BUILDING LINE - See BUILDING LINE, REAR.
REAR LOT LINE - See LOT LINE, REAR.
REAR YARD - See YARD, REAR.
REPORT - Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any body, board, officer or
consultant other than a SOLICITOR to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such REPORT in the rendering of any DECISION or determination. All REPORTS shall be deemed
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency. Any REPORT used, received
or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or DECISION shall be made available for
inspection to the APPLICANT and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided
at cost of reproduction.
RETAININGWALL - A STRUCTURE erected between land of different elevation to protect STRUCTURES and/or to
prevent the washing down or EROSION of earth from the upper slope level.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - Land occupied or intended to be occupied by a STREET, CROSSWALK, railroad, utility, PUBLIC
facility and/or other special use.
ROAD - The entire right-of-way of the public street or highway.
SECRETARY; TOWNSHIP SECRETARY - The Secretary of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP, Westmoreland
COUNTY, Pennsylvania.
SEDIMENTATION - A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or
other natural means as a product of EROSION.
SEO - The designated SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER of North Huntingdon Township.
14
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-LOT - An installation on an individual LOT which utilizes an aerobic
bacteriological process for the elimination of solid wastes and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent,
subject to the approval of the SEO and issuance of permit and as permitted by the DEP.
SEWER - Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away SEWAGE or storm water runoff from the generating source
to treatment plants or receiving streams.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) - The North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Sewage Enforcement Officer
(SEO), certified by the Department of Environmental Protection and appointed by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
SHOULDER - The graded part of the RIGHT-OF-WAY that lies between the edge of the paved CARTWAY and the
curbline.
SIDEWALK - A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a ROAD or TREE LAWN
within the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
SIGHT DISTANCE - The maximum distance of unobstructed vision in a horizontal or vertical plane from within an
automobile located at any given point on a STREET.
SIGHT TRIANGLE - See CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE.
SITE - A PARCEL which is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
SITE AREA - The total PARCEL area in a SITE as determined by a SURVEY prepared by a registered surveyor or
Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer.
SOLICITOR - The SOLICITOR of the TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon.
STAFF CONFERENCE - An initial meeting between DEVELOPERS and TOWNSHIP staff which affords both parties
the opportunity to identify and prepare for the probable requirements of a DEVELOPMENT proposal prior to
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN preparation and engineering.
STEEP SLOPES - Areas of existing topography where, in over a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, or where the
difference in elevation is over twenty (20) feet, the slope equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) from the top
to bottom of the break in grade.
STORM WATER- the runoff of water from a SITE, as generated and impacted by a SITE.
STORM WATER DETENTION - The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of runoff entering the natural drainage
pattern or storm DRAINAGE SYSTEM by temporarily holding it in surface or subsurface area such as DETENTION
BASINS, reservoirs, rooftops, streets, parking lots, or within the DRAINAGE SYSTEM itself, and releasing the water at
a desired rate of discharge.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT or STORM WATER PLAN- The plan for managing storm water runoff from a
specific SITE.
STORM WATER RETENTION - The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of runoff entering the natural drainage
pattern or storm DRAINAGE SYSTEM by temporarily holding it in surface or subsurface areas such as retention basins,
or reservoirs and allowing the runoff to percolate into the ground.
STORM SEWER- A sewer that carries intercepted surface water runoff, excluding domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STREET - An avenue, boulevard, ROAD, thoroughfare, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct, and any other ways
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians but; not including driveways or PARKING AREAS. A STREET shall include
the following:
A. ARTERIAL STREET - ROADS intended to serve large volumes of traffic for long distance and high-speed travel
between or within communities or to and from COLLECTORS. An ARTERIAL STREET is aMAJOR STREET.
15
B. COLLECTOR STREET - ROADS which carry considerable volumes of local traffic and connect RESIDENTIAL
STREETS to ARTERIAL STREETS or to provide ACCESS to NON-RESIDENTIAL USES, Community Facilities and
ABUTTING properties, and which has direct ACCESS limited to only NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
C. MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS - COLLECTOR STREETS which primarily function to provide direct ACCESS
to NON-RESIDENTIAL USES and which therefore carry traffic at lower speeds, connecting RESIDENTIAL
STREETS and COLLECTOR STREETS.
D. RESIDENTIAL STREET - A STREET which primarily functions to provide direct ACCESS to ABUTTING
RESIDENTIAL USES.
E. HALF OR PARTIAL STREET - A ROAD, generally parallel and adjacent to a property line, having a lesser rightof-
way than normally required for satisfactory IMPROVEMENT and use of the STREET.
F. A MARGINAL ACCESS STREET - A local service STREET that is parallel to a higher order STREET which, for
safety, provides ACCESS to ABUTTING PARCELS and separation and protection from through traffic. A
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET may be designed as a RESIDENTIAL STREET or aMINOR COLLECTOR ROAD.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC - A STREET with only one outlet and having the other end designed and constructed for the
reversal of traffic movement. A cul-de-sac is a DEAD-END STREET terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET, LOOP - A STREET that has its only ingress and egress at two points on the same MINOR COLLECTOR
ROAD or COLLECTOR ROAD.
STREET CENTER LINE - A line which is usually at an equal distance from both street lines, or right-of-way lines.
STREET, PRIVATE - A street, including the entire private right-of-way, which is intended for private use and is a
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT.
STREET, PUBLIC - A paved STREET, including the entire right-of-way, which has been dedicated and accepted by the
appropriate governmental body.
STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in LOTS or water, whether or
not affixed to the LOT. STRUCTURE includes but is not limited to BUILDINGS, garages, carports, FENCES, SIGNS,
or walls. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, OCCUPANCY or ornamentation whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of land or water is also a STRUCTURE.
SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a LOT, tract or PARCEL of land by any means, into two (2) or more
LOTS, tracts, PARCELS or other divisions of land, including changes in existing LOT LINES for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership or
BUILDING or LOT DEVELOPMENT; provided, however, that the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into PARCELS of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new STREET or EASEMENT of ACCESS or
residential dwellings shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED - Where, in the judgment of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, at least 90% (based on
the cost of the required IMPROVEMENTS for which FINANCIAL SECURITY was posted pursuant to section 305.1)
of those IMPROVEMENTS required as a condition for FINAL APPROVAL have been completed in accordance with
the approved PLAN, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEY - A precise legal description of a LOT and the graphic delineation of precise LOT boundaries; LOT
dimensions and areas; all EASEMENTS and PUBLIC and private RIGHTS-OF-WAY; and north point and graphic
scale, affecting the LOT, prepared by a professional land Surveyor licensed and registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP - The First Class TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP.
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY - A study completed by a traffic engineer or planner, as required by this
ORDINANCE which evaluates the impacts a DEVELOPMENT will have on the transportation system. Specifically, the
study determines the amount of traffic to be generated by the DEVELOPMENT; the capacity of the existing ROAD
16
network and intersections to handle the increased traffic; and IMPROVEMENTS necessary to bring ROADS and
intersections up to the preferred level of service to accommodate such traffic.
TREE LAWN - The area in which trees, required by the standards of this ordinance are to be planted. Unless
otherwise approved, the TREE LAWN shall be located between property line of each lot and the SIDEWALK and
and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN- The plan showing all locations and information required in section 516.3 of this
ORDINANCE which is used to evaluate the number of trees credited to the DEVELOPER and the corresponding
number to be planted per regulations of the aforesaid section.
TRIP - A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. TRIPS can be added together to
calculate the total number of vehicles expected to enter and leave a specific SITE over a designated period of time.
UNDEVELOPED OPEN SPACE- OPEN SPACE which is left in or restored to its natural state, including that used
for PASSIVE RECREATIONAL purposes, and requiring little regular maintenance.
WESTMORELAND COUNTY SOIL SURVEY - The most recent survey utilized by the COUNTY and the
Westmoreland County Conservation District.
WETLANDS - All areas regulated as wetlands by DEP or FEDERAL agencies.
WOODLANDS OVERLAY -A mapped area, maintained by the TOWNSHIP, of continuous forest coverage, which
is updated using approved landscaping and TREE PRESERVATION PLANS per section 516 of this ordinance.
WWMA -WesternWestmorelandMunicipal Authority.
WYE - Point of connection of sanitary lateral sewer with the main collection line.
YARD - An area on a ZONING LOT which is regulated by the ZONING ORDINANCE so as to be unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky.
YARD, FRONT - A YARD established by the FRONT SETBACK extending along the full length of the FRONT LOT
LINE between the SIDE YARDS.
YARD, REAR - A YARD established by the REAR SETBACKS extending along the full length of the REAR LOT
LINE between the SIDE LOT LINES.
YARD, SIDE - A YARD established by the SIDE SETBACKS extending along the SIDE LOT LINES from the
FRONT YARD to the REAR YARD.
ZONING APPROVAL - Approval under the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE certifying that an
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT or APPLICATION for OCCUPANCY PERMIT has fulfilled the requirements
of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
ZONING HEARING BOARD - The Zoning Hearing Board of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP
ZONING OFFICER - The person delegated by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS to administer the ZONING
ORDINANCE.
ZONING DISTRICT - An area of the TOWNSHIP in which regulations under the ZONING ORDINANCE uniformly
apply.
ZONING ORDINANCE - The North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE 765 as
enacted and amended.
ARTICLE 3 – APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
17
301 GENERAL
Whenever a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT within the TOWNSHIP is desired, an APPLICATION shall
be submitted to the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR who shall submit the APPLICATION, once it is
determined complete, according to Section 303.3 (c ) of this Ordinance to the PLANNING COMMISSION with a
REPORT on conformance with TOWNSHIP Ordinances. The PLANNING COMMISSION shall review and make a
recommendation on the APPLICATION and submit the APPLICATION and recommendation to the BOARD of
COMMISSIONERS. The BOARD of COMMISSIONERS shall take action to approve, approve with conditions or deny
the APPLICATION pursuant to this ORDINANCE.
302 CLASSIFICATION OF APPLICATIONS:
APPLICATIONS for SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be classified based upon the following criteria
and definition, and shall be processed according to the provisions contained within this Section.
302. 1 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS - A SUBDIVISION that includes either one or more of the following
characteristics:
A. Multiple phasing of the PLAN.
B. Containing PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, including one or more of the following: STREETS, STORM
WATER DETENTION and STORMWATER RETENTION facilities and public utilities.
C. Location within an area defined within the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY
D. Proposes ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM(S).
302.2 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS: A SUBDIVISION not including any of the characteristics included in the MAJOR
SUBDIVISION category. In general, a MINOR SUBDIVISION involves the adjustment of LOT LINES for existing
LOTS and/or the creation of new LOTS that are already serviced by a PUBLIC ROAD, public utilities, a previously
approved on-LOT septic system and are not located in the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
302.3 MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS: A SITE plan for a new non-residential DEVELOPMENT located on
one (1) LOT, including a CHANGE OF USE from an existing BUILDING or land area to a NON-RESIDENTIAL
USE that also affects the land area in one or more of the following ways:
A. Additional parking requirements, not currently being met on the site;
B. New or improved STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS;
C. Change in ingress, egress or traffic circulation;
D. Required landscaping and buffer IMPROVEMENTS necessitated by the development.
302.4 MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS: A SITE PLAN for a new NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
located in two (2) lots or more, and all multi-family developments on one (1) LOT or more. Any LAND
DEVELOPMENT that includes the construction of new public or PRIVATE STREETS and/or is located within an
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA shall be categorized as aMAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
302.5 PRELIMARY and FINAL APPROVAL. The APPLICANT shall be required to submit a
PRELIMINARY PLAN APPLICATION for all projects categorized as MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS and MAJOR
LAND DEVELOPMENTS. The APPLICANT may elect to combine the PRELIMINARY and FINAL APPROVAL
procedures for one approval process by meeting submission requirements for PRELIMINARY and FINAL
APPROVAL. Based upon the review of this submission, the PLANNING COMMISSION may grant FINAL
APPROVAL, provided that the APPLICATION meets all the prescribed requirements of this section for granting of
approval.
APPLICATIONS classified as MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS or MINOR SUBDIVISIONS may be granted
FINAL APPROVAL without submission requirements needed for PRELIMINARY APPROVAL, with the
exception that the PLANNING COMMISSION in their review of the MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT or MINOR
SUBDIVISION may require additional information of the APPLICANT before acting on FINAL APPROVAL.
302.6 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATIONS PER CLASSIFICATION. Based upon the
classification of the APPLICATION, the APPLICANT Table, below, shall be used as a guide in determining
application requirements:
Table I
18
Minor
SUBDIVISION
Minor LAND
DEVELOPMENT
Major
SUBDIVISION
Major LAND
DEVELOPMENT
Sections 303.3;
304.1, 304.6
X X X X
Sections:
304.2;304.3; 304.4
X X
Section 304.5 X X
This table serves as a guide only. Any questions on the applicability of any of the submission requirements for a
particular APPLICATION, shall be determined by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR who should be
contacted prior to the submission of the APPLICATION.
303.i PRE APPLICATIONMEETINGS
303.1 STAFF CONFERENCE
Prior to submitting any APPLICATION, whether PRELIMINARY or FINAL, the APPLICANT is encouraged to attend
a STAFF CONFERENCE with the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR. The purpose of the STAFF
CONFERENCE is to obtain all necessary APPLICATION forms, requirements and ordinance information from the
TOWNSHIP prior to the APPLICANT incurring substantial expenses of SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT
PLAN preparation and to determine the classification of the APPLICATION, whether it be a MINOR or MAJOR
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
19
303.2 ADVISORY MEETING WITH PLANNING COMMISSION
APPLICANTS are encouraged to discuss SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS with the PLANNING
COMMISSION prior to the formal submission of PRELIMINARY or FINAL APPLICATIONS. Prior to submitting
any APPLICATION, the DEVELOPER may participate in an ADVISORY MEETING with the PLANNING
COMMISSION held during a regular meeting of the PLANNING COMMISSION. The purpose of the ADVISORY
MEETING is to review the proposed DEVELOPMENT and DEVELOPMENT SITE to identify issues which should be
addressed in the APPLICATION. The ADVISORYMEETING affords an opportunity to both the APPLICANT and the
PLANNING COMMISSION to discuss the proposed project on an informal basis. At the ADVISORY MEETING the
APPLICANT may discuss applicable regulations governing the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT of the
property and the feasibility and timing of the APPLICATION. THE PLANNING COMMISSION may comment upon
the proposed APPLICATION. No approval or disapproval of the APPLICATION shall be given. The request for an
advisory meeting hall not constitute an APPLICATION and shall not trigger the required time period review as specified
in the MPC. An APPLICANT desiring to participate in an ADVISORY MEETING shall submit the official form with
required information to the PLANNING DIRECTOR within two (2) weeks of the regular PLANNING COMMISSION
meeting.
303.3 GENERAL APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCESSING
A. All APPLICATIONS for a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be submitted on official forms
prepared by the PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT.
B. All APPLICATIONS shall be submitted to the PLANNING AND ZONING OFFICE in accordance with the
submission schedule as set from time to time by the PLANNING AND ZONING OFFICE. [Amended 1-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2241]
C. Upon submission, the APPLICATION shall be reviewed by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR or
his or her delegate to determine its completeness. In order for the APPLICATION to be determined to be complete
and considered placed on the PLANNING COMMISSION agenda for ACCEPTANCE, it shall include: [Amended
1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2241]
1) The correct number of copies of all plats and REPORTS, as referenced in this article.
2) Meet all requirements for submission based on the classification of the plan, as indicated in Table I, per its
classification. The review of the submission requirements shall not include a review of the correctness of the
PLAN, but rather a review that the required items for review have been submitted.
3) Include the appropriate APPLICATION fee, per the current TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon Fee
Ordinance 2164, as adopted and amended.
4) Include all original signatures of all property OWNERS or agents for property OWNERS involved in the
APPLICATION;
5) Evidence of filing of all necessary permits from any regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the project.
D. OFFICIAL FILING DATE: When the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR’S initial review has
determined that the APPLICATION satisfies the requirements applicable thereto and, with the exception of
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT approval, is in full compliance with this chapter the
APPLICATION shall be accepted. Such acceptance shall establish the APPLICATION'S OFFICIAL FILING
DATE and will be placed on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled PLANNING COMMISSION meeting. The
90-DAY REVIEW period shall start at the first regular meeting of the PLANNING COMMISSION. Provided that
said meeting should occur more than 30 days following the OFFICIAL FILING DATE of the APPLICATION, the
90 DAY REVIEW PERIOD shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the APPLICATION has been
determined to be filed.
E. If the APPLICATION is determined to be incomplete, per the standards contained in Section 303.3 (c) of this
Ordinance, the APPLICANT shall be notified in writing and all submitted documents shall be returned to the
APPLICANT, including the APPLICATION fee with a letter indicating the APPLICATION deficiency (s). The
APPLICATION shall not be considered by the PLANNING COMMISSION until it is filed with all required
components, and shall not constitute the starting of the 90 DAY REVIEWPERIOD.
F. APPLICATIONS determined to be complete shall be reviewed for compliance with all applicable TOWNSHIP
Ordinance requirements by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, who shall also forward copies of the
APPLICATION and PLANS to the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, NHTMA and WESTMORELAND COUNTY
PLANNING DEPARTMENT for their review comments. The COUNTY shall submit its review comments within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the PLAN to the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR. The NHTMA and
20
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall submit review comments within fifteen (15) days of PLAN receipt to the
PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR.
G. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR shall submit a REPORT to the PLANNING COMMISSION
listing any review comments and questions on the APPLICATION prior to the regularly scheduled PLANNING
COMMISSION meeting. A copy of this REPORT shall also be sent to the APPLICANT.
H. After presentation of the APPLICATION at its meeting by the APPLICANT, the PLANNING COMMISSION
shall forward its recommendations in writing to the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and the APPLICANT. Any
PLAN recommended with conditions shall include a listing of those conditions. In cases of a recommendation for
denial, PLANNING COMMISSION shall cite reasons from the TOWNSHIP ordinances and other applicable
codes.
I. The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall render its DECISION to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the APPLICATION taking into consideration the recommendations of the PLANNING COMMISSION and the
COUNTY Planning Department. Such DECISION shall be communicated to the APPLICANT not later than ninety
(90) days after the APPLICATION is filed with the PLANNING COMMISSION.
J. The DECISION of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the
APPLICANT personally or mailed to him/her at his/her last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following
the DECISION.
K. TIME EXTENSION. If during the review of the PLAN, the PLANNING COMMISSION or the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS desires additional time to consider the APPLICATION FOR a PRELIMINARY APPROVAL
or FINAL APPROVAL, the APPLICANT may waive the ninety (90) day time limitation established by law, and
grant the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS an additional review period for a time prescribed by the APPLICANT.
This extension shall be accomplished only in a signed, written agreement on the part of the APPLICANT. In the
event that no such time extension is offered by the APPLICANT and it is determined that the APPLICATION does
not meet requirements prescribed in this ORDINANCE, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall deny the PLAN
according to procedures established herein.
L. PUBLIC HEARING. Before acting on any APPLICATION, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may hold a
PUBLIC HEARING after PUBLIC NOTICE.
M. Approval with Conditions. An APPLICATION may be granted PRELIMINARY APPROVAL or FINAL
APPROVAL subject to specific conditions. These conditions shall be included in the written communication to the
APPLICANT. In addition, such written communication shall include notification that unless the APPLICANT
agrees to the conditions, then the APPLICATION is denied in accordance with this ORDINANCE. Said notification
shall be mailed to the APPLICANT’S last known address within 15 days of the granting of APPROVAL with
conditions by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The APPLICANT shall notify the TOWNSHIP in writing of
his or her acceptance or rejection of the conditions of approval. If the APPLICANT does not so notify the
TOWNSHIP within 15 days, the APPROVAL shall automatically be rescinded without written notice to the
APPLICANT.
N. PLANS gaining only PRELIMINARY APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS will require
FINAL APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS through the filing of an APPLICATION meeting all
requirements of the ordinance for FINAL APPROVAL and satisfying any conditions attached to the
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
O. Failure of the TOWNSHIP to render a DECISION and communicate it to the APPLICANT within the time and
in the manner required herein shall be deemed a PRELIMINARY APPROVAL or a FINAL APPROVAL for all
APPLICATIONS already granted a preliminary approval and for all MINOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND
DEVELOPMENTS. Approval of the APPLICATION in terms as presented shall be assumed unless the
APPLICANT has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of the presentation of
the DECISION, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation shall have like
effect.
304 DRAFTING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
21
304.1 All APPLICATIONS for SUBDIVISIONS or LAND DEVELOPMENTS for all APPLICATIONS
submitted shall adhere to the following standards and specifications. Any PLAN submitted on multiple sheets shall
include these drafting standards on all sheets, as applicable.
A. Completed and Signed APPLICATION Forms
B. Fourteen (14) copies of the PLAN or record for a SUBDIVISION or the master PLAN for a LAND
DEVELOPMENT. Three (3) copies of PLAN detail sheets and other detailed PLANS (EROSION and
sedimentation; utilities; STORM WATER management; landscaping, etc.) The number of copies required may
be adjusted by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR as part of the application form.
C. Application Fee, per TOWNSHIP FEE SCHEDULE, as amended.
D. The PLAN shall be drawn at a scale of 1”=10’, 1”=20’ , 1”=30’ , 1”=40’, 1”=50’ or 1”=100’
E. Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets. Sheets shall be
24” x 36”. Plats to be recorded at the Westmoreland County Courthouse shall be 18” x 24” and meet other
applicable standards of the Westmoreland County Recorder’s Office
F. Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to
two decimal places with the bearing placed in a counterclockwise direction around the proposed LOT or LOTS.
G. The PLAN shall bear a legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
H. The PLAN shall include the names, COUNTY deed book references, and ZONING DISTRICT of all
adjoining property OWNERS.
I. The boundary line of the SUBDIVISION shall be shown as a heavy dashed line. The pattern of the dashed
line shall be shown as one long dash followed by two short dashes. The boundary line of the PLAN shall
include the entire area of all parcels involved in the PLAN.
J. A graphic scale, north arrow and date shall be shown on all PLANS.
K. A title block containing the proposed name of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, the project
number assigned by the firm that prepared the PLANS, the PLAN date and dates of all PLAN revisions.
L. SITE location map, taken from a USGS quadrangle map. The location map shall be at scale and size
sufficient to show clearly where the project is.
M. The existing platting of land ABUTTING SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. All existing
BUILDINGS, SEWERS, water mains, fire hydrants, CULVERTS, petroleum or high-pressure gas lines and
other utilities on or within 200 feet of the SITE shall be shown.
N. EASEMENTS and locations, widths and purposes.
O. All existing streets, on or adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way width and CARTWAY width
shall be shown.
P. If applicable, a notation on the plat that ACCESS to a State highway shall only be authorized by a highway
occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation under Section 420 of the State
Highway Law (P.L. 1242, No. 428 of June 1, 1945).
Q. The location of allMONUMENTS and LOTMARKERS as regulated in section 515 of this ORDINANCE.
R. A place on the PLAT for approval by the PLANNING COMMISSION, the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS and review by the Westmoreland County Planning Department, and place on the PLAN for
seals of the professional preparing the PLAN, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, the Westmoreland County
Planning Department; the Recorder of Deeds
22
S. Certification by a registered Surveyor to the effect that the PLAT represents a SURVEY made by him, and
that all MONUMENTS indicated thereon actually exist and their location, size and material are correctly
shown. And that all engineering requirements of this ORDINANCE have been fully complied with.
T. The name and address of the DEVELOPER and, if the DEVELOPER is not the OWNER, the name and
address of the OWNER
U. The source of the title to the land as shown on the books of the County Recorder
V. The name, address, certification and seal of the registered engineer and/or Surveyor, or landscape architect
who prepared the PLAT and the professional registered Surveyor who did the SURVEY shown on the PLAT.
W. Schedule of ZONING DISTRICT requirements, including area and bulk regulations, BUILDING and yard
requirements, and zoning of the parcel(s) to be developed and adjoining properties. FRONT SETBACKS as
required by the ZONING ORDINANCE. ZONING DISTRICT for the subject tract and all adjoining properties.
X. Variances or other zoning approvals which have been requested or have been granted by the TOWNSHIP.
Y. A copy of the deed for the subject tract and/or an option agreement, lease-purchase agreement or other such
document or instrument conveying to the APPLICANT a right of possession to or an interest in the property
within the proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
Z. Utility Feasibility: REPORTS from all utilities expected to service the proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT, which at a minimum shall include a letter as to whether the utility has the capability and
facilities to serve the proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
AA.For APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT of SITES along the municipal boundary, information
pertaining to zoning in the adjacent municipality. Approval may be required by the adjoining municipality if the
DEVELOPMENT is partially located in that municipality.
BB. Digital Files. Submitted PLATS must also be submitted in a digital format such that they may be directly
imported into the TOWNSHIP’S geographical information systems in a manner consistent with the standard
outlined in Appendix B of this ORDINANCE.
304. 2 APPLICATION Requirements for MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENTS.
In addition to the requirements stated in Section 304.1, the following submission requirements in Sections Three and
Four shall apply for MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS:
304.3 EXISTING CONDITIONS
If applicable, the boundaries of the TOWNSHIP’S ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY and the
following information within those boundaries:
A. Contours, shown at two foot vertical intervals or ten foot intervals where slopes exceed 40%. Show
existing contours with dashed lines and number clearly. State location and elevation of datum to which contour
elevations refer. Datum used shall be a known, established benchmark. Contours plotted from U.S.G.S.
quadrangle maps shall not be acceptable. The benchmark used shall be cited and labeled with the elevation and
the northing and easting coordinates on the State Plane coordinate system.
B. Delineation of STEEP SLOPE area(s), with categories of slope oriented as follows: (1) 25 to 40 percent;
(2) over 40 percent, accurately depicted and noted on the plat.
C. Identification of soil series as shown in the SOIL SURVEY OF WESTMORELAND COUNTY. Plot soil
limit lines on the base map.
D. If any part of the site lies within a flood plain, as indicated on a certified FEMA map, plot the floodway and
100-year flood plain boundary on the map and reference the community panel number, map name, date and
map panel numbers.
23
E. All WETLANDS as delineated in the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY and/or otherwise
classified as such by STATE or Federal Agencies.
F. Potentially hazardous features, including quarry sites, surface and subsurface mines and undermined areas,
including location of all areas of subsurface mining on the site with less than one hundred (100) feet of cover.
G. Significant cultural features, including cemeteries, burial sites, archaeological sites, historic buildings,
structures, plaques and MARKERS, or MONUMENTS.
H. Existing surface water resources such as watercourses, streams and ponds, and other natural drainage
features.
304.4 PROPOSED CONDITIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
A. The proposed STREET layout in the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT including STREETS,
ROADS, ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, or other means of ACCESS located on the site. The PLAT
must include name, jurisdiction of ownership, width, type and location of right-of-way, and existing grades and
types of CURBS.
B. The layout of LOTS (showing scaled dimensions), LOT numbers in sequence, and the areas of LOTS in square
feet.
C. Portions of the SITE or PARCELS proposed to be reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or other PUBLIC,
semi-public or community purposes and all proposed IMPROVEMENTS for these portions.
D. Proposed EASEMENTS, locations, widths and purposes.
E. Proposed PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The size of each shall be shown and the locations or distances to each
existing utility indicated.
F. Tabulation of SITE data, total acreage of land to be subdivided, the number of LOTS, the acreage of individual
lots, the acreage of the SUBDIVISION and the acreage of proposed OPEN SPACE and recreation areas.
G. Four (4) sets of DETAILED CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS for PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS prepared by a
registered Professional Engineer. Such drawings shall:
1) Be drawn at a scale cited in 304.1 (D) of this ORDINANCE on sheets of twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36")
inches. More than one (1) sheet may be used for large parcels, but each sheet shall be properly indexed.
2) Be designed in conformance with the design standards established in this ordinance and in other applicable
TOWNSHIP, COUNTY, STATE and Federal codes and regulations.
3) Include a plan and profile of each STREET within the SITE and at least two hundred (200) feet beyond the
edge of the SITE, including labels showing the SIGHT DISTANCE at each intersection.
4) Contain at least three (3) cross sections at intervals not to exceed one hundred (100) feet and extending fifty
(50) feet on each side of the STREET CENTER LINE or twenty-five (25) feet outside of the STREET
RIGHT-OF-WAY, whichever is greater.
5) Complete curve data for all curves included in the PLAN.
6) Indicate the location of all necessary SEWERS,MANHOLES and catch basins.
7) Show DRAINAGE EASEMENTS over private property and label them as PUBLIC or private.
8) Show the top and invert elevation of each inlet and MANHOLE, together with the GRADE of each SEWER
line.
24
9) Show the GRADE line, material, distance and pipe size of each line in the storm DRAINAGE SYSTEM
within the plan and any storm DRAINAGE SYSTEM immediately adjacent to the SITE. Show the permit
number if connections are made to PADOT STORMSEWERS.
10) Show the location of eachWYE as proposed for installation.
304.5 ADDITIONAL ITEMS REQUIRED FOR MINOR AND MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS. The
APPLICANT may request waivers from the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR for any of these requirements
who may determine them to be inapplicable for submission in the APPLICATION.
A. The location and dimensions (in square feet) of planned principal and accessory buildings, including basement
area, loading and unloading areas. If the calculation of PARKING SPACES required, per the ZONING
ORDINANCE is a function of square footage of the proposed use, a detailed floor plan shall be submitted.
B. The proposed use, location, area, height, and bulk of all proposed structures and dimensions of all yards.
C. Patterns of pedestrian and vehicular circulation on-site and on adjacent STREETS to show ingress, egress, and
circulation in and out of the SITE.
D. Provisions for OFF-STREET PARKING AREA to include the layout of parking areas and a computation of the
number of PARKING SPACES to be provided.
E. Provisions for off-street loading facilities.
F. Proposed planting and landscaping with specific locations, sizes, species and quantities; proposed open space
and buffers; and screening and fencing for storage and dumpster areas, as required by this Ordinance and the
ZONING ORDINANCE.
G. Location and specifications for lighting of parking areas and walkways, including lighting detail and a
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN.
H. Any other requirements for that specific ZONING DISTRICT, pursuant to the ZONING ORDINANCE.
I. Location, size, and specifications for PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS, such as curbs, SIDEWALKS,
DRIVEWAYS, parking areas, fencing, signs, landscaping, planters, outdoor lighting and wheel stops.
J. Proposed fire lanes.
K. Location, size and specifications for PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
L. Location, size and specifications for storm sewers, STORM WATER MANAGEMENT facilities, sanitary
sewers, water lines, and fire hydrants.
M. Elevation drawings for all proposed BUILDINGS.
N. A plan drawn to scale showing the front, rear and side perspectives of proposed BUILDING(s) shall be
submitted. Such plan shall include the BUILDING'S architectural features, exterior BUILDING materials, first floor
elevations, the height of the BUILDING in feet, the number of stories, and the BUILDING'S relationship to the
finished GRADE immediately surrounding the BUILDING.
304. 6 REPORTS AND PERMITS FORMAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENTS
Unless exempted by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, the following REPORTS and permits shall be
required as part of the submission of an APPLICATION:
A. A STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, per requirements of this Ordinance and the STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Ordinance # 820, as amended of the TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon.
B. An EROSION and Sedimentation Plan approved by the WESTMORELAND COUNTY
CONSERVATION DISTRICT. APPLICATIONS at a minimum shall require submission of the PLANS
submitted to the Conservation District with a dated letter of transmittal.
25
C. ROAD and GRADING PLANS, and phasing and engineering information deemed necessary for consideration
of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, if applicable.
D. A PHASING PLAN and schedule shall be required for all DEVELOPMENTS proposed for
CONSTRUCTION in stages. This schedule shall include a proposed schedule for the filing of APPLICATIONS
FOR FINAL APPROVAL for each phase.
E. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS STUDY which details the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
features on the SITE and provides information on how the DEVELOPMENT is planned not to interfere with these
features and/or how all applicable local, state and federal regulations are being complied with;
F. Sewerage feasibility study, PERCOLATION TESTS and other evaluations of the SITE'S suitability for
ON-SITE sewage disposal as required by Section 509.2 of this ORDINANCE.
G. Other studies authorized by TOWNSHIP Ordinances and deemed necessary by the PLANNING AND
ZONING DIRECTOR, THE TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or the PLANNING COMMISSION at the ADVISORY
MEETING;
H. Other studies required by State or COUNTY regulations or which are deemed necessary under such
regulations by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, THE TOWNSHIP ENGINEER , or the
PLANNING COMMISSION at the advisory meeting.
I. TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY (TIS): Per requirements of Section 416 of this Ordinance.
J. Water quality and adequacy evaluations as required by Section 509.2 of this ORDINANCE.
K. The executed AGREEMENT with the NHTMA Municipal Authority or the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County or the LETTER OF APPROVAL from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection indicating approval of private water supplies.
L. PLANNING MODULE COMPONENTS submission to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
for all sanitary SEWERS;
M. Roadway OCCUPANCY submissions to State, COUNTY or TOWNSHIP as required to provide SITE
ACCESS and service;
N. Permits or permit submissions required by TOWNSHIP Ordinances or which are deemed necessary by the
PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR or PLANNING COMMISSION at the STAFF CONFERENCE or
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE;
O. Permits or permit APPLICATION submissions required by Federal, STATE or COUNTY regulations or which
are deemed necessary under such regulations by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR or PLANNING
COMMISSION. Such permits and APPLICATIONS include but are not limited to those required for Flood Plain
Management, STORM WATER Management, Clean Streams Law Permit, NPDES (National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System) permit, and DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) Planning
Module permits and NHTMA permits.
304. 7 EXEMPTIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES ANDWAIVER PROVISIONS
A. Exemptions Based On Plan Characteristics. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR may waive the
submission of an ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS STUDY and documentation of natural features per the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY for PLANS that involve a boundary line revision creating no
additional lots or a LAND DEVELOPMENT involving a CHANGE OF USE. Said waiver may be granted
provided that the areas of the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY lying within the PLAN’S SITE are
in no way adversely impacted by effects of the proposed DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION.
B. Waivers. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR may waive APPLICATION requirements per the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY based on a demonstrated degree of absence of all features
constituting the OVERLAY. The APPLICANT shall provide information demonstrating the absence or the degree
of absence of said features at the STAFF CONFERENCE or prior to the OFFICIAL FILING DATE of the
APPLICATION. The waiver, a zoning determination, shall be final but may be appealed to the ZONING
HEARING BOARD under the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
C. Reclassification of Application Type. If the aforementioned waiver of APPLICATION requirements per the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY is granted, a reclassification of a MAJOR SUBDIVISION or
MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT as a MINOR SUBDIVISION or MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT may be
granted by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR if no other criteria in the APPLICATION would classify
the PLAN as aMAJOR SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
304.8 ITEMS EXEMPTED FROM PLAN SUBMISSIONS WHERE APPLICANT SEEKS ONLY
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. In the event that an APPLICANT elects only to seek PRELIMINARY
APPROVAL of a SUBIDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, the following items shall be exempt from the
submission requirements of PLANS submitted with the intention of receiving only preliminary approval.
26
A. FINAL PLAN for recording
B. DETAILED CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
C. Final Permits from STATE or Federal Agencies.
D. The PLANNING COMMISSION may require additional information on all aspects of the PRELIMINARY
APPLICATION in order to recommend approval of the plan and/or impose conditions on requiring more
information and permit approvals in order to gain FINAL APPROVAL.
305 POST-APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
305.1 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE AND FINANCIAL SECURITY
A. No PLAN shall be recorded or permits issued until as a condition for the approval of a FINAL PLAT, the
DEVELOPER shall provide, for deposit with the TOWNSHIP, a PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE in the form of a
FINANCIAL SECURITY. The amount of the FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be sufficient to cover the costs of
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and common amenities including, but not limited to ROADS, STORM WATER
DETENTION and/or RETENTION BASINS, and other related DRAINAGE FACILITIES, recreational facilities,
open space IMPROVEMENTS, landscaping, and buffers or screen plantings which may be required, by this
ORDINANCE and/or as shown on the FINAL PLAT.
B. The amount of FINANCIAL SECURITY to be posted for the completion of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the DEVELOPER. The amount of the FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be based on a cost estimate
submitted by the DEVELOPER or be prepared by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER at the DEVELOPER’S request.
The cost estimate shall be certified as being “a fair and reasonable estimate” of the cost of PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
C. The FINANCIAL SECURITY shall provide for, and secure to the PUBLIC, the completion of any PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS as required in the FINAL APPROVAL within twenty-four (24) months of the approval, or
within another time period, mutually agreed upon by the DEVELOPER and the TOWNSHIP. In those
circumstances separate bonds shall provide for those PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS with a longer time period. The
amount of the FINANCIAL SECURITY may be adjusted annually in accordance with Section 509 (f) of the
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
D. Federal or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and
restrictive or ESCROW accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable forms of FINANCIAL
SECURITY. Such FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be posted with a bonding company or a federal or
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania chartered lending institution chosen by the party posing the FINANCIAL
SECURITY, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct business within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. At the request of the APPLICANT, the TOWNSHIP shall furnish the APPLICANT with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the APPLICANT’S FINAL PLAT contingent upon the obtaining of a
satisfactory FINANCIAL SECURITY. The FINAL PLAT shall not be signed by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS until a satisfactory FINANCIAL SECURITY is presented.
F. The DEVELOPER shall also pay the required inspection fee, per Section 602.2 of this Ordinance, and the
fee for required fire hydrants and street signs prior to the release of the PLAN for recordation.
305. 2 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, shall require that the DEVELOPER execute a DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT with the TOWNSHIP prepared by the TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR at the expense of the
DEVELOPER. Such DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT shall contain provisions that are reasonably required to
guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval, if any, and to guarantee the proper installation of ON-SITE
and OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS related to the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. Said
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT shall be executed; the required PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE shall be posted;
and all required fees shall be paid before the TOWNSHIP approves and signs the FINAL PLAT for recording
purposes. No PLAN shall be signed for recording until certified copies of all permits and approvals required by
applicable Federal, State, COUNTY and TOWNSHIP Codes and Regulations are received by the TOWNSHIP and the
27
cost estimate for completing PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS is received by the TOWNSHIP and approved by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
305.3 RECORDING OF PLANS
A. Granting of PRELIMINARY APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall not entitle the
APPLICANT to record such PLAN at the Recorder of Deeds Office.
B. The FINAL PLAN, as approved and signed by the President of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and the
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Westmoreland County.,
within ninety (90) days of the DECISION by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, except in the event that the
PLAN is approved with a condition requiring a DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT and the posting of FINANCIAL
SECURITY, the ninety (90) day period shall commence upon the execution of that DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT,
with the date of execution of that agreement placed in the PLAN as the date of FINAL APPROVAL . The
DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT and the posting of FINANCIAL SECURITY shall occur within six (6) months of
the DECISION on the PLAN by the BOARD of COMMISSIONERS, unless an extension is granted by the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, in writing. Upon review of the FINANCIAL SECURITY by the TOWNSHIP,
the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall consider approval of the PLAN for recordation, the acceptance of
FINANCIAL SECURITY, and execution of the DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. In the event that the DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT is not executed by all parties within this period, or an
extension is granted, the FINAL PLAN APPROVAL shall be considered null and void. The Recorder of Deeds
shall not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS, and review by the COUNTY. The APPLICANT shall deposit a fee of one hundred dollars
($100) with the TOWNSHIP to insure that the TOWNSHIP receives one Mylar copy of the recorded PLAN. Upon
the receipt of this recorded PLAN, the TOWNSHIP shall refund this deposit.
305.4 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
The TOWNSHIP shall not issue any permits for any construction activity for a PLAN until such time that the PLAN has
been granted FINAL APPROVAL, or, if applicable, has met all conditions of FINAL APPROVAL, and, if applicable,
evidence provided that the PLAN has been duly recorded at Recorder of Deeds Office of the COUNTY.
ARTICLE 4 STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATION STANDARDS
STREET IMPROVEMENT AND DEDICATION STANDARDS
401 GENERAL PROVISIONS
401.1 The arrangement, character, extent, width, GRADE and location of all STREETS shall conform to the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or OFFICIALMAP, as adopted.
401.2 Where not shown on the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or Official Map, the arrangement and other design
standards of STREETS shall conform to the provisions found herein.
401.3 Every LOT within a SUBDIVISION shall have ACCESS to a PUBLIC STREET.
401.4 RESIDENTIAL STREETS shall be arranged so as to discourage through traffic, and provide for maximum
privacy. Appropriate traffic calming measures to reduce speed on RESIDENTIAL STREETS are recommended as
approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
401.5 All STREETS shall be named. No STREET names shall be used which will duplicate or be phonetically
similar with the names of existing STREETS. STREET names shall be subject to the approval of the PLANNING
COMMISSION. The PLANNING COMMISSION may require review of any street name by the fire company which
would service the proposed STREET and/or the United States Post Office as part of their determination.
401.6 STREETS that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing STREETS shall bear the names of
the existing STREETS.
401.7 Any PLAN which includes encroachment within the legal RIGHT-OF- WAY of a State highway is required to
obtain a State Highway Access Permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Permits Office,
28
District 12, Uniontown, Pennsylvania, either prior to the approval of the PLAN or as a condition of receiving any permits
from the TOWNSHIP.
401.8 All ROAD and STREET design and CONSTRUCTION shall comply with standards and methods established
in the latest editions of the following as directed by TOWNSHIP ENGINEER:
A. NHT Engineering Specs;
B. PennDOT DesignManual II, January 1998;
C. PennDOT Guidelines for Design of Local ROADS and STREETS, January 1998;
D. PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, 1998.
402 GENERAL DESIGN AND ARRANGEMENT
402.1 In general, all STREETS shall be continuous and in alignment with existing STREETS and shall provide a
convenient system to insure circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. However, LOOP STREETS and
CUL-DE-SAC STREETS, shall be designed so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
402.2 New STREETS shall be logically related to existing and planned STREETS, to topographical conditions, to
PUBLIC convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the SITES to be served by such
STREETS.
402.3 Where ABUTTING LAND is undeveloped, new SUBDIVISIONS shall make provision for the extension of
rights-of-way into such ABUTTING undeveloped land by continuing the rights-of-way of proposed STREETS to the
boundaries of the SITE being developed.
402.4 Where a LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION abuts or contains an existing or proposed COLLECTOR
or ARTERIAL STREET, the PLANNING COMMISSION may require MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS, deep LOTS
with rear service ALLEYS, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
402.5 Where a LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION abuts on or contains a railroad RIGHT-OF-WAY or
limited ACCESS highway RIGHT-OF-WAY, the PLANNING COMMISSION may require a MARGINAL ACCESS
STREET approximately parallel to and on each side of such RIGHT-OF-WAY, at a distance suitable for the appropriate
use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
GRADES and future GRADE separations.
402.6 New HALF or PARTIAL STREETS will not be permitted. Wherever a PARCEL to be subdivided borders an
existing HALF or PARTIAL STREET, the remaining portion of the STREET, needed to comply with required RIGHTOF-
WAY widths, shall be secured and platted within the new SUBDIVISION.
402.7 DEAD-END STREETS shall be prohibited, unless provided with a permanent or temporary cul-de-sac
turnaround as specified in Section 404.2 of this ORDINANCE.
402.8 Where STREETS continue into ABUTTING municipalities, evidence of compatibility of design, particularly
with regard to STREET widths, shall be submitted. The APPLICANT shall coordinate such design with both
municipalities to avoid abrupt changes in CARTWAY width or in PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS provided.
402.9 The CONSTRUCTION of STREETS, ROADS, and other rights-of-way, whether private or public, as shown
on FINAL PLANS, may be approved only if they are designed to meet or exceed TOWNSHIP STREET standards
including RIGHT-OF-WAY, PAVING width, DRAINAGE, CURBS and GUTTERS
402.10 All CONSTRUCTION shall proceed, as scheduled, and in conjunction with scheduled inspections by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or designee, pursuant to Article 6 of this ORDINANCE.
402.11 Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all STREETS shall be made by dedication to and
acceptance for maintenance by the TOWNSHIP or by other acceptable means.
29
402.12 All STREETS shall be graded to the GRADES shown on the STREET PROFILES AND CROSS-SECTION
PLAN submitted and approved with the FINAL PLAN.
402.13 All materials used in the CONSTRUCTION of STREETS and the methods of CONSTRUCTION and
DRAINAGE shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the latest revision of the PennDOT
Specifications, Publication 408 and PennDOT Standards for Roadway CONSTRUCTION, as revised.
402.14 The typical ROAD section in Appendix A, illustrates design and dimensional standards for RESIDENTIAL
STREETS. Dimensions for other types of STREETS as identified in Section 407.1 and Section 409.5 which are noted
with a double asterisk (**) shall meet or exceed minimum requirements of the latest revision of the PennDOT Design
Manual, Part II, standard for that particular class of Roadway.
402.15 All ROADS must be installed by a PennDOT certified contractor.
403 STREET ACCESS AND DRIVEWAYS
403.1 Except for those provided for a single family home, all ACCESS and DRIVEWAYS in new SUBDIVISIONS
and LAND DEVELOPMENTS shall conform to the standards and regulations of the ZONING ORDINANCE according
to their respective locations and type of uses. The minimum width for one-way DRIVEWAYS shall be twelve (12) feet.
The minimum width of a two-way DRIVEWAY shall be twenty four (24) feet at the opening of the STREET.
403.2 DRIVEWAYS may be provided on the SITE where necessary for convenient ACCESS to the living units,
garage compounds, PARKING AREAS, service entrances of BUILDINGS, collection of refuse and all other
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. DRIVEWAYS serving uses other than single family or two family homes shall enter
PUBLIC STREETS at safe locations, not less than fifty feet (50') from any INTERSECTION, and in no case within the
CURB radius. The maximum width of driveways measured at the STREET LOT LINE shall be twenty-four (24) feet
for those used for two-way traffic and the minimum width shall be twelve (12) feet for those used for one-way traffic.
403.3 Driveways and ACCESS shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide a reasonable SIGHT
DISTANCE at INTERSECTIONS with STREETS. A stopping area, measured twenty (20) feet behind the
RIGHT-OF-WAY line, shall be provided not to exceed a four percent (4%) GRADE wherever possible.
404 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS
404.1 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS are permitted which are a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250’) feet in length,
measured from the CENTER LINE of the intersecting STREET to the center of the CUL-DE-SAC, and where the total
length from the last intersection does not exceed seven hundred (700) feet and where a turnaround, with a CARTWAY
diameter of eighty (80) feet and a RIGHT-OF-WAY diameter of one hundred (100) feet, is provided. Exceptions to this
requirement may be granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS upon the recommendation of the PLANNING
COMMISSION, with the concurrence of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, subject to satisfying other performance
standards of this ORDINANCE and not interfering with the public health, safety and welfare.
404.2 A temporary CUL-DE-SAC for STREETS ending at the property line of a PARCEL during PHASED
CONSTRUCTION shall be designed so that the CARTWAY is widened to a fifty (50) foot width for a distance of
eighty (80) feet at the turnaround. It shall be the DEVELOPER’S responsibility to remove the temporary PAVING.
404.3 When required for future extension, the turnaround RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be placed adjacent to the PARCEL
boundary with sufficient width along the boundary line to permit extension of the STREET at full width.
404.4 DRAINAGE of CUL-DE-SAC STREETS shall be positive drainage and shall preferably be towards the open
end.
405 ALLEYS
405.1 ALLEYS may be permitted under special circumstances in residential areas but in no case shall an ALLEY
provide the only means of ACCESS to a LOT.
405.2 ALLEYS may be required inMULTI-FAMILY dwelling DEVELOPMENTS.
30
405.3 Where ALLEYS are permitted in residential DEVELOPMENTS, they shall have a twenty-five (20) foot
minimum RIGHT-OF-WAY and shall be paved for a width of at least eighteen (16) feet and curbed where required. No
part of any dwelling, garage or other STRUCTURE may be located within twenty-four (24) feet of the CENTERLINE
of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of the ALLEY.
405.4 ALLEYS shall be provided for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES, except that the PLANNING COMMISSION
may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service ACCESS, which is consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
405.5 Where provided for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES, ALLEYS shall have a paved CARTWAY of at least
twenty (20) feet and shall be curbed where required, and shall have a RIGHT-OF-WAY width of thirty (30) feet. Where
necessary, corners shall have a radius of thirty (30) feet to permit safe use by large vehicles.
405.6 Dead-end ALLEYS shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the PLANNING COMMISSION and/or TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER.
406 STREET GRADES
406.1 The entire width of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of each STREET in a proposed SUBDIVISION shall be graded and
suitably prepared for the installation of PAVING, DRAINAGE STRUCTURES, CURBS, GUTTERS and
SIDEWALKS in accordance with the appropriate standards for the class of STREET.
406.2 The minimum CENTERLINE STREET GRADE shall be one (1%) percent, but STREETS constructed at this
GRADE shall be closely monitored and strict attention paid to CONSTRUCTION techniques to avoid ponding. Where
topographical conditions permit, GRADES in excess of one (1%) percent shall be used.
406.3 No STREET GRADE shall exceed the following with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves:
EXPRESSWAYS and ARTERIAL STREETS 7%
COLLECTOR STREETS 10%
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS, 12%
RESIDENTIAL STREETS and ALLEYS
Any modification request on the above standards shall only be considered if it is required to satisfy other performance
standards contained in this ORDINANCE.
406.4 The CENTER LINE GRADE on the CUL-DE-SAC turning area shall not exceed eight (8%) percent
406.5 Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of GRADES. The minimum vertical curve shall be one
hundred-fifty (150) feet in length for ARTERIAL STREETS, one hundred (100) feet in length for COLLECTOR
STREETS and fifty (50) feet in length for MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS and RESIDENTIAL STREETS. Vertical
curves shall be increased twenty (20) feet in length for each one percent (1%) of GRADE change exceeding three
percent (3%).
406.6 Where the GRADE of the STREET is above or below the GRADE of the ABUTTING PARCELS slopes shall
be constructed in a manner approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and shall be sufficient to support the STREET or
the ABUTTING land. Slopes shall be maximum 3:1 ratio.
406.7 Where the GRADE of the STREET is three (3) feet or more above the GRADE of the ABUTTING PARCEL,
guide rails shall be built to protect travel as required by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
407 STREET ALIGNMENT
407.1 Horizontal curvatures shall accommodate the following minimum design speeds:
EXPRESSWAYS and ARTERIAL STREETS 55 mph
COLLECTOR STREETS 45 mph
31
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS 35 mph
RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND other STREETS (less than 500 ft.) 25 mph
407.2 Visibility Requirements:
A. Minimum vertical visibility (measured 4 1/2 feet eye level to tail-lights 18" above ground level).
ARTERIAL STREETS 500'
COLLECTOR STREETS 300'
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS 200'
RESIDENTIAL STREETS and STREETS (less than 500 ft.) 200'
B. Minimum horizontal visibility, measured on STREET CENTER LINE, shall be:
EXPRESSWAYS and ARTERIAL STREETS 550'
COLLECTOR STREETS 350'
All Other ROADS and STREETS 100'
407.3 A tangent shall be required between curves; however, a long radius curve shall be preferred in all cases to a
series of curves and tangents. A minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet shall be required between reverse curves.
407.4 Super-elevation (commonly known as "banking a curve") shall be required when curve radii are less than six
hundred (600) feet on COLLECTOR STREETS, and shall be designed in accordance with PennDOT Design Criteria
applicable to the class of Roadway.
408 INTERSECTIONS
408.1 STREETS shall be designed so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no STREET shall
intersect any other STREET at an angle less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
408.2 STREET CENTER LINES of STREETS opening into opposite sides of another STREET shall either intersect
or be separated from each other by more than 200 feet.
408.3 New INTERSECTIONS of more than two STREETS shall not be permitted.
408.4 Leveling areas. Where the GRADE of any street at the approach of an INTERSECTION exceeds five percent
(5%), a leveling area shall be provided, with a transition GRADE not to exceed two percent (2%) for a distance of fifty
(50) feet from the nearest RIGHT-OF-WAY of the INTERSECTION.
408.5 The planting of trees or other plantings, or the location of STRUCTURES exceeding thirty (30) inches in height
that would obstruct the CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE shall be prohibited, and a PUBLIC right-of-entry shall be reserved
for the purpose of removing any object, material or otherwise, that obstructs the CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
408.6 TURNING LANES. Deceleration, turning, or merging lane may be required by the TOWNSHIP along
existing and proposed STREETS owned and operated by the TOWNSHIP that directly abut the DEVELOPMENT, as
recommended by the TRANPORTATION IMPACT STUDY.
A. Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards:
1) The lane width shall be the same as the required width of the RoadwayMOVING LANES.
2) The lane shall provide the full required lane width for its full length. It shall be tapered.
32
3) The minimum lane length shall be as follows:
Design Speed Minimum Deceleration
of ROAD Lane Length
30 mph 250 feet
40 mph 370 feet
50 mph 500 feet
408.7 Corner CURB radii shall be according to the following schedule of minimum lengths: MINOR COLLECTOR
STREETS and RESIDENTIAL STREETS, 15 feet; COLLECTOR STREETS, 35 feet; and ARTERIAL STREETS, 55
feet. Where STREETS of different categories intersect, the requirements for the one of higher category shall hold.
408.8 The RIGHT-OF-WAY line for corner CURBS shall be an arc concentric with the CURB line with radius of a
minimum of twenty- five (25) feet.
408.9 CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. Whenever a proposed STREET intersects an existing or proposed STREET of
higher order in the STREET hierarchy, the STREET of lower order shall be made a stop STREET. The STREET of
lower order shall also be designed to provide a minimum corner SIGHT DISTANCE as specified in this ORDINANCE.
409 RIGHTS-OF-WAY
409.1 The RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be measured from LOT LINE to LOT LINE and shall be sufficiently wide to
contain the CARTWAY, CURBS, SHOULDERS, SIDEWALKS, graded areas, utilities, and shade trees (if they are
placed within the RIGHT-OF-WAY).
409.2 The RIGHT-OF-WAY of each STREET in a proposed LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION shall be
graded and there shall be installed PAVING, DRAINAGE STRUCTURES, CURBS and GUTTERS, and pedestrian
pathways in accordance with the standards outlined in these SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT Regulations
and in strict accordance with all TOWNSHIP specifications.
409.3 The RIGHT-OF-WAY width of a new STREET that is a continuation of an existing STREET shall in no case
be continued at a width less than that of the existing STREET.
409.4 In review of the requirements of the RIGHT-OF-WAY requirements for a SUBDIVISION, the PLANNING
COMMISSION and the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall consider ROAD classification and DEVELOPMENT
projections as indicated by the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and the DEVELOPMENT PLAN for all phases of the
proposed DEVELOPMENT.
409.5 STREET PAVING AND RIGHT-OF-WAYMINIMUMSTANDARDS
STREET Minimum Required SIDEWALK Total
Classification CARTWAY or graded Area Width
PAVING Width RIGHT OFWAY
WIDTH
(with curbing)
ALLEYS 16' Graded Area On Each Side 20'
RESIDENTIAL STREETS 26' SIDEWALK each side** 50'
MINOR COLLECTOR
STREET 26' SIDEWALK each side** 50'
COLLECTOR STREET 30' SIDEWALK each side** 60'
ARTERIAL STREET 30' SIDEWALK each side** 90'
33
** Unless otherwise waived per standards of this ORDINANCE.
409.6 Additional RIGHT-OF-WAY and CARTWAY widths may be requested by the Board of Commissioners for
the following purposes:
A. To promote PUBLIC safety and convenience.
B. To provide PARKING AREAS in areas of high density residential DEVELOPMENT.
C. To provide slope rights whenever topography is such that additional RIGHT-OF-WAY is needed to provide
adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of two to one except as provided in section 507 of this
ORDINANCE.
410 CURBS AND GUTTERS
410.1 Curbing shall be required for the purposes of DRAINAGE, safety, and delineation and protection of pavement
edge.
410.2 CURB requirements shall vary according to STREET hierarchy and intensity of DEVELOPMENT.
410.3 CURBING may be required:
A. For storm water management;
B. To stabilize pavement edge;
C. To delineate PARKING AREAS;
D. Ten (10) feet on each side of DRAINAGE inlets;
E. At INTERSECTIONS;
F. At corners;
G. At tight radii; and
410.4 Where curbing is not required, an edge definition and stabilization shall be furnished for safety reasons and to
prevent pavement unraveling.
410.5 Where curbing is required, this requirement may be waived and SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE swales
used when it can be shown that the conditions described in section 411.1 of this ORDINANCE are met.
410.6 In DEVELOPMENTS for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES concrete CURBS shall be required.
410.7 Where CURBS exist on ABUTTING PARCELS, their extension will shall be required throughout the
proposed SUBDIVISION.
410.8 CURBS may be of the wall type or may be combined with GUTTERS built of concrete or bituminous
concrete. CURBS, combined curbs and GUTTERS, and graded GUTTERS shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications and standards as adopted by the TOWNSHIP and as stated in the ADA.
410.9 Prior to the application of the finished wearing surface, CURB cuts shall be in place and approved by the
TOWNSHIP, for each LOT in the SUBDIVISION.
411 SHOULDERS AND EMBANKMENTS
411.1 SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE swales shall be required instead of CURBS when:
34
A. SHOULDERS are required by state law;
B. Soil, topography or potential environmental impacts from excess of stormwater make the use of SHOULDERS
and/or DRAINAGE swales preferable; or
C. It is in the best interest of the community to serve its rural character by using SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE
swales instead of CURBS.
411.2 SHOULDER requirements shall vary according to STREET hierarchy and intensity of DEVELOPMENT.
411.3 SHOULDERS shall measure a minimum of four (4) feet in width on each side for all STREETS and shall be
located within the RIGHT-OF-WAY. SHOULDERS of greater width shall be required as deemed necessary by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
411.4 The width of swales shall be determined by SITE-specific conditions and hydraulic capacity requirements.
411.5 SHOULDERS shall consist of stabilized turf or other material acceptable to the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
411.6 The entire SHOULDER area shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by rolling and must be level with
the top of the ROAD surface as directed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
411.7 Embankments at the sides of STREETS and cross sections of DRAINAGE swales shall not exceed the
maximum slope established in section 507 of this ORDINANCE except as recommended in the SITE geotechnical
investigation REPORT. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may require more rigid standards where conditions warrant.
412 STREET LIGHTS
412.1 STREET LIGHTING shall be required for all LAND DEVELOPMENTS and NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
and for allMULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS based upon the standards of this section.
.
412.2 STREET LIGHTING shall be required in all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS with proposed new STREETS at
proposed intersections with any COLLECTOR ROAD or ARTERIAL ROAD and at any PLAN entrance. The
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall recommend additional STREET LIGHTING in areas of the PLAN deemed necessary
for public safety. The DEVELOPER may submit an alternate plan for lighting the plan with methods other than
STREET LIGHTS, which shall be reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
412.3 Where required, the DEVELOPER shall install or cause to be installed, at the DEVELOPERS
expense, STREET LIGHTING serviced by underground conduits in accordance with a plan approved by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, the PLANNING COMMISSION, and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The
DEVELOPER shall be responsible for all costs involved in LIGHTING the STREETS until such time that the
STREET(S) are accepted as PUBLIC STREETS of the TOWNSHIP.
412.5 Within LAND DEVELOPMENTS, STREET LIGHTING shall be generally installed at intersections, along
SIDEWALKS and at entryways, between BUILDINGS, and in PARKING AREAS as required in the TOWNSHIP
ZONING ORDINANCE and at all other areas determined to be hazardous by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS on
the advice of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
412.6 The maximum spacing of STREET LIGHTING shall be two hundred (200) feet.
412.7 The maximum height of STREET LIGHTING shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the
ZONING ORDINANCE or 25 feet, whichever is less.
412.8 LIGHTING shall be installed in accordance with PennDOT standards.
412.9 The shielding of LIGHTING shall provide proper LIGHTING without hazard to drivers or nuisance to
residents, and the design of LIGHTING standards shall be of a type appropriate to the DEVELOPMENT and the
TOWNSHIP.
412. 10 Style, type, shielding and manufacturer of STREET LIGHTING shall be subject to the approval of the
PLANNING COMMISSION on the advice of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. STREET LIGHTING shall be high
pressure sodium with photoelectric cell unless otherwise directed by the PLANNING COMMISSION.
35
412.11 Details of the pole shall be submitted with the plan and shall be of a decorative variety as determined by the
PLANNING COMMISSION.
413 STREET SIGNS AND PLAN IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
413.1 A street sign having a name plate shall be installed by the TOWNSHIP at every STREET intersection and
shall conform to CONSTRUCTION standards approved by the TOWNSHIP. Costs for such street sign(s) shall be paid
to the TOWNSHIP as part of the DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT.
413.2 Permanent STREET SIGNS shall be white reflectorized lettering on blue background with colors, style, and size
to match existing STREET SIGNS in North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP.
413.3 The DEVELOPER shall submit any proposed plan identification sign to be located at the entrance(s) of
residential PLANS with the APPLICATION. No sign shall be located within the right-of-way, unless otherwise
approved by the TOWNSHIP. The proposed sign shall include detail on size, location and building materials and shall be
approved by the TOWNSHIP as part of the PLAN review process.
414 SIDEWALKS
414.1 SIDEWALKS shall be required to be CONSTRUCTED in all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS and MAJOR
LAND DEVELOPMENTS involving the construction of new PUBLIC STREETS, unless otherwise waived by the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS under the provisions of Section 414.7 of this ORDINANCE.
414.2 SIDEWALKS shall be four (4) feet wide and 5 inches deep. Concrete is to be PA DOT Class A or better and
broom-finished. The SIDEWALK is to be placed on 5 inches of 2-b for stone base. Scored CONSTRUCTION joints
are to be every 5 feet with expansion joints every 20 feet. CONSTRUCTION and materials are to conform to the
Typical Sidewalk Detail of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP as found in Appendix A.
414.3 Unless an alternative installation plan is proposed by the DEVELOPER, and approved by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS as part of the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT, SIDEWALKS within residential
SUBDIVISIONS shall be installed at the time of the construction of home on that lot. The DEVELOPER shall be
responsible for bonding all SIDEWALKS pursuant to provisions on this ORDINANCE and the Pennsylvania MPC.
Within LAND DEVELOPMENTS, SIDEWALKS shall be installed prior to the issuance of the OCCUPANCY
PERMIT..
414.4 SIDEWALKS installed along COUNTY or STATE ROADS shall meet the specifications established by the
COUNTY or STATE.
414.5 The GRADES and PAVING of the SIDEWALKS shall be continuous across driveways except in NONRESIDENTIAL
USE AREAS and high density residential DEVELOPMENTS and in certain other cases where heavy
traffic volume dictates special treatment. In NON-RESIDENTIAL areas, a concrete apron should be installed to the
RIGHT-OF-WAY line where the concrete SIDEWALKS intersect.
414.6 The alignment and gradient of SIDEWALKS shall be coordinated with the GRADING PLAN to prevent the
passage of concentrated surface water on or across the walk; limit excessive slopes; and prevent the pocketing of surface
water.
414.7 When one of the following conditions exist making the installation of SIDEWALKS unnecessary or
impractical, the DEVELOPER shall so demonstrate those condition(s) and request in writing to the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS that this requirement be waived in whole or in part. Approval or denial of the request shall be
made by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS in writing, pursuant to the provisions of Article VII of this
ORDINANCE. Financial consideration of the costs of the construction of the proposed SIDEWALKS shall not be
considered by the BOARD as a reason for waiving this requirement.
A. Ninety (90%) percent of the LOTS within all phases of the PLAN are greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet and have frontages on a public street of greater than one hundred (100’) feet;
B. The SUBDIVISION PLAN has only one STREET which is a CUL-DE-SAC.
C. The slope of any BLOCK within a PLAN is greater than eight (8%) percent (intersection to intersection) . Unless
other conditions exist, the waiver would only apply to that BLOCK.
36
D. The SUBDIVISION PLAN is less than ten (10) acres including all phases of the PLAN.
414.8 Within MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS and other NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS,
SIDEWALKS shall be installed along all new streets, whether private or public and within the site to provide for
safe pedestrian circulation to the BUILDING(S) and PARKING area(s).
414.9 SIDEWALKS ABUTTING angle PARKING AREAS shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width to prevent car
overhang from restricting pedestrian movement along the SIDEWALK.
414.10 All SIDEWALKS shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Federal specifications for
handicapped accessibility.
415 BIKEWAYS
415.1 BICYCLE LANES, when proposed, shall be placed in the outside lane of a ROAD, adjacent to the CURB or
SHOULDER. When on- STREET parking is permitted, the BICYCLE LANE shall be between the parking lane and the
outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or
CURBS shall not be used.
415.2 Dimensions and construction specifications of BICYCLE LANES shall be determined by the estimated
number and type of users and the location and purpose of the BICYCLE LANE. A minimum 8-foot paved width should
be provided for two-way bicycle traffic and a 5-foot width for one-way traffic.
A. Choice of surface materials, including bituminous mixes, concrete, gravel, soil cement, stabilized earth and
wood planking, shall depend on use and users of the path.
B. Gradients of BICYCLE LANES should generally not exceed a GRADE of five percent (5%), except for short
distances.
415.3 BICYCLE LANES. Lanes shall be four (4) feet wide, or wide enough to allow safe passage of bicycles and
motorists.
415.4 DRAINAGE grates. Bicycle-safe DRAINAGE grates shall be used in the CONSTRUCTION of all
RESIDENTIAL STREETS. The specifications for bicycle-safe DRAINAGE grates are found in Appendix A.
416 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY
416.1 SUBDIVISIONS containing a minimum of fifty (50) lots and all MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS with
either fifty (50) or more units or those DEVELOPMENTS generating 500 or more TRIPS, according to the latest
edition of Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, shall require the submission of a
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY per requirements of this Section. The PLANNING COMMISSION may
require submission of a modified study containing parts of the following requirements for any proposed
DEVELOPMENT not meeting the above thresholds. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, at the advise of
the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may waive certain provisions of this TIS where those provisions would not be
applicable. It is recommended that the DEVELOPER discuss the TIS as part of the PRE-SUBMISSION application
process, outlined in Article III of this ORDINANCE.
416.2 The TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY (TIS) shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer,
experienced in traffic engineering studies, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All costs of the TIS shall
be borne by the property OWNER or APPLICANT.
416.3 Applicability. Use of the TIS may include the following:
A. Assist the TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT in understanding the traffic related impacts at the SITE
ingress, egress, and general circulation on the study area, and to thus minimize those impacts through efficient
SITE level design of such circulation;
B. To consider any alternate or additional ingress or egress and general circulation patterns as conditions of
approval based on the TIS;
C. To consider impacts along perimeter ROADS and intersections to assist the TOWNSHIP in future
transportation planning and capital planning requirements;
37
D. The TOWNSHIP shall not use the TIS to require transportation IMPROVEMENT which are not on or
adjacent to the proposed site. Such requirements, as governed by Section V-A of the MUNICIPALITIES
PLANNING CODE, are distinct and separate from the applicability and intent of the requirements of this
section.
416.4 TIS Elements: The APPLICANT shall submit a detailed description of the highway network and major
intersections within one-half mile of the SITE. Said network may be limited to PRIMARY and SECONDARY
ARTERIOLES and COLLECTOR STREETS and shall include the following conditions both on the SITE and
within such radius. Both existing and applicable projections shall be shown for each of the following:
A. TRIPS generated by the proposed DEVELOPMENT at all peak hours (weekday, morning and evening
peak hours and one Saturday peak hour) during which the proposed use would be in operation.
B. Description of the existing traffic conditions and volumes (weekday, morning and evening peak hours and
one Saturday peak hour) during which the proposed use would be in operation.
C. Traffic signals and signage, and other traffic control devices.
D. Public Transportation Services
E. RIGHTS-OF-WAY and DRIVEWAY widths, including CARTWAY and SHOULDER widths, vertical
grades, horizontal curvatures, obstructions, sight distance, posted speed limits, signage or other notable features.
F. Ingress and egress traffic movement on the SITE.
G. Changes to the highway network.
H. Determination of street service level.
I. Determination of intersection service levels for intersection (s) generating more than 100 TRIPS in any
peak hour
J. Traffic accident history and location of accidents for five (5) years preceding APPLICATION date
K. Proposed and existing pedestrian circulation
L. Traffic IMPROVEMENTS, planned or recommended (e.g., additional traffic lanes, traffic signal, traffic
signage, etc)
M. The anticipated stages of construction and the anticipated completion date of the proposed SUBDIVISION
or LAND DEVELOPMENT
416.5 TIS Standards. The TIS shall adhere to the following standards:
A. Estimation of TRIP generation. TRIP generation per 416.4 (A) shall be estimated using any one of the
following three methods: analogy; TRIP distribution model or surrogate data. Whatever method is used, TRIP
distribution shall be estimated and analyzed for the horizon year and a ten-year projection (both with and
without DEVELOPMENT) Consideration should be given to whether inbound and outbound TRIPS will have
similar distribution.
B. Transportation impact of the DEVELOPMENT using ratios and methodology contained in the current
edition of the Manual of the Institute of Traffic Engineers
C. Levels of Service as parts H and I of Section 416.4 of this ORDINANCE shall be defined using a method
similar to those described in the current Highway Capacity Manual
D. Estimates and projections of street service level, TRIP generation, etc. shall conform to the estimated dates
of major phases in the construction of the proposed PLAN
E. All applicable elements mentioned in Section 416.4 shall be denoted on a map which shall conform to the
applicable drafting standards of Article III of this ORDINANCE.
416.6 Additional Requirements.
A. The TIS shall be submitted with the APPLICATION and reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or his
designee. All costs of this review shall be invoiced to the APPLICANT per standards contained in the
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE. A copy should also be forwarded to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation if STREETS under their jurisdiction are in the study area and to the Westmoreland County
Planning Department if streets under the jurisdiction of the COUNTY are in the study area.
B. The PLANNING DIRECTOR or the PLANNING COMMISSION may require further details similar to
those mentioned in Section 4 of this Article for areas of special concern within a one (1) mile radius of the SITE
for very large DEVELOPMENTS. Said areas may include those identified in the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN in
need of IMPROVEMENT or having identified traffic problems.
417 Waiver of Road Construction Standards for Private Streets Serving NoMore than Three Lots
38
At the request of the APPLICANT, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may waive all or part of the construction
standards, specified in this ORDINANCE for proposed PRIVATE STREETS in SUBDIVISIONS serving no more
than (3) lots, provided:
A. The APPLICANT submits a hardship request, pursuant to Section 701 of this ORDINANCE;
B. The standards of the proposed PRIVATE STREET shall be reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, for
adequacy in providing for safe vehicular access, relationship to the PUBLIC STREET where the PARCEL is
located, utility easements and emergency services. The TOWNHIP ENGINEER shall have the authority to
recommend stricter standards than proposed by the APPLICANT to meet these objectives.
C. The APPLICANT shall be required to cause to be recorded in the Westmoreland County’s Recorders Office a
declaration of covenants, restrictions and EASEMENTS in a form acceptable to the TOWNSHIP solicitor which
shall at the minimum provide:
1) Reciprocal EASEMENTS for use of said PRIVATE STREET by each OWNER of a LOT served by such
STREET:
2) A declaration that the TOWNSHIP has no responsibility for the maintenance of such PRIVATE STREET;
3) Maintenance of the PRIVATE STREET to be paid by the OWNERS of the LOTS served. Maintenance
shall include: normal surface repair; reconstruction; drainage; snow and ice control; and any and all other costs
which may be associated with said STREET;
4) A provision that if the PRIVATE STREET is offered to the TOWNSHIP for dedication in the future, the
STREET will first be brought up to TOWNSHIP specifications, including width for a dedicated STREET as
required by this ORDINANCE, at the expense of the owners of the lots served by said road.
39
ARTICLE 5 DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS
501 RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING ORDINANCE
501.1 Proposed DEVELOPMENTS and SUBDIVISIONS shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE.
502 LAND, BLOCK AND LOT REQUIREMENTS
502.1 LAND
A. Land and all SITES proposed for DEVELOPMENT; shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be
developed,
B. Those areas of SITES having STEEP SLOPES or POOR SOILS shall not be subdivided or developed unless
such deficiencies can be avoided or eliminated, subject to standards provided in Section 507 of this ORDINANCE.
C. Those area of SITES having land subject to flooding as shown on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Maps for
North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP shall not be subdivided unless such deficiencies can be avoided or eliminated in
accordance with Section 505 of this ORDINANCE.
502.2 BLOCKS
A. BLOCKS shall have a maximum length of twelve hundred (1,200) feet and, as far as practicable, a minimum
length of five hundred (500) feet. In design of BLOCKS longer than eight hundred (800) feet, special consideration
should be given to the requirements for satisfactory fire protection as per Section 508.1 of this Ordinance and
include traffic calming measures.
B. INTERIOR PEDESTRIAN WALKS may be required in BLOCKS more than eight hundred (800) feet long.
The RIGHT-OF-WAY of such walks shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width with a minimum paved
SIDEWALK width of five (5) feet. A greater width may be required as necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation.
Interior walks shall be maintained by the ABUTTING property OWNERS in the same manner as SIDEWALKS on
PUBLIC or PRIVATE STREETS, or by a community association or other similar OWNER.
C. Residential BLOCKS shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two (2) tiers of LOTS, except where
THROUGH LOTS are permitted to border an ARTERIAL STREET or COLLECTOR STREET, railroad,
watercourse or other natural barrier.
D. Where a SUBDIVISION abuts an ARTERIAL STREET or COLLECTOR STREET, the greater dimension of
the BLOCKS shall front along such ROAD and/or a STREET or other arrangements made to minimize the number
of points of ACCESS shall be implemented. Such ACCESS shall comply with the provisions of this ORDINANCE
and other applicable codes of the TOWNSHIP. The purpose of this provision is to reduce the number of STREETS
intersecting and taking ACCESS from major highways and to increase the distance between such intersections.
E. THROUGH LOTS shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
DEVELOPMENT from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
BUFFER ZONE, across which there shall be no right of ACCESS, shall be provided along the line of LOTS
ABUTTING such ARTERIAL or other disadvantageous use. THROUGH lots, when permitted, shall clearly
designate the primary ACCESS POINT on the plat.
F. SIDE LOT LINES shall be substantially at right angles or radial to STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY lines.
G. No remnants of land, not meeting LOT size and frontage requirements of the ZONING ORDINANCE for the
applicable ZONING DISTRICT shall exist after subdividing. All portions of a PLAN shall be incorporated into
existing or proposed LOTS unless special usage is applied as part of a LAND DEVELOPMENT proposal. Any
areas reserved for a special purpose, which may revert to an unintended nuisance area, shall not be permitted.
Remnant land areas shall be distinguished on the PLAT from BUFFER ZONES or OPEN SPACE established by
the ZONING ORDINANCE.
40
H. The LOT LINES of all CORNER LOTS located at the intersection of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of two STREETS
or of an ALLEY and a STREET, shall have a curve with a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet joining the two
(2) intersecting RIGHT-OF-WAY lines.
I. LOTS for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES shall be of such size and shape as may be suitable for their prospective
use and to provide sufficient space for OFF-STREET PARKING and loading, and water supply and sanitary
SEWAGE disposal (if either or both are to be provided by individual ON-LOT facilities). The minimum LOT
dimensions shall be in accordance with the ZONING ORDINANCE.
502.3 LOTS. LOT dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by provisions of the ZONING
ORDINANCE and shall further conform to the following requirement designed to abate health hazards:
A. Where either or both water supply and sanitary disposal are provided by individual ON-LOT facilities, the
APPLICANT shall be required to have such tests made as are necessary to determine the adequacy of the proposed
facilities in relation to the proposed LOT size and existing GRADE and soil conditions. In all such cases,
certification by DEP that the proposed facilities will be adequate. Said certification shall be a prerequisite to FINAL
APPROVAL of the PLAN.
B. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive DRAINAGE away from BUILDINGS and water wells.
C. The LOT arrangement and design shall be such that all LOTS will provide satisfactory and desirable
BUILDING SITES, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding DEVELOPMENT.
D. Minimum BUILDING SETBACKS shall be controlled by the ZONING ORDINANCE and shall be shown on
the PLAT.
E. Every LOT shall abut on a PUBLIC STREET.
F. LOTS fronting directly on existing or proposed ARTERIAL STREETS or COLLECTOR STREETS shall be
avoided. ACCESS to such LOTS shall be from service orMARGINAL ACCESS ROADS, wherever possible.
G. In cases where LOTS have FRONTAGE along two or more STREETS, the minimum SETBACK requirements
along each STREET shall be equal to the FRONT SETBACK requirements for the ZONING DISTRICT in which
the LOT is located.
H. FLAG LOTS: Purpose. It is recognized that property owners and land planners should have full
opportunity for subdivision of land and at the same time avoid certain subdivision restrictions such as
FRONTAGE schedules that mitigate against legitimate use of rear acreage, that are consistent with objectives
expressed in the adopted COMPREHENSIVE PLAN encouraging infill development and reducing negative
impacts of sprawl. It is the intent of these regulations to permit utilization of some parcels of land that have
been restricted by other land use standards.
1) A FLAG LOT shall have a minimum lot area equal to that of the zone within which it is located, not
including the FLAG ACCESS STRIP.
2) Only one FLAG LOT may be created per SUBDIVISION as a matter of right, provided all standards of this
section are in compliance
3) The PARCEL of land that includes the FLAG LOT shall have no ability to be further subdivided according to
the minimum lot size requirements of the zone in which the parcel is located.
4) The FLAG ACCESS STRIP shall be a minimum of 25 feet for its entire length from the STREET to the
flag portion of the lot.
5) No FLAG LOT ACCESS STRIP shall be more than four hundred (400) feet long as measured from the
center line of its connection with the PUBLIC STREET and the point/line where the FLAG LOT is contiguous
to the access strip.
6) FLAG LOTS shall not be permitted within a proposed new SUBDIVISION containing five (5) or more
LOTS.
41
7) The TOWNSHIP shall not be responsible for the maintenance of the FLAG ACCESS STRIP portion of the
created FLAG LOT. The owner shall assume all responsibility and liability for normal surface repair,
reconstruction, snow and ice control and any other costs associated with such access provided within this area
of the LOT
503 EASEMENTS
503.1 EASEMENTS with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet shall be provided as necessary for storm
DRAINAGE STRUCTURES, swales, sanitary SEWERS and other utilities from the center of said pipe or swale.
503.2 To the fullest extent possible, EASEMENTS shall be located adjacent to REAR LOT LINES or SIDE LOT
LINES.
503.3 The DEVELOPER shall properly GRADE, provide fencing (when deemed necessary by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER), and stabilize the slopes of open ditches and drainage swales.
503.4 Where a SITE is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a DRAINAGE EASEMENT or
RIGHT-OF-WAY conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to
preserve natural or man-made DRAINAGE, as determined by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, or as may be required or
directed by DEP.
503.5 Where STORM WATER or surface water will be gathered within the SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT and discharged or drained in volume over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT before discharging into an existing stream or STORM WATER
management structure, the APPLICANT or OWNER shall reserve or obtain EASEMENTS over all lands affected. Such
EASEMENTS shall be adequate for such discharge of DRAINAGE and for the carrying such water off-site, and for the
maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of the EASEMENT, including provisions for the right of passage by vehicles,
machinery and other equipment for such purposes. Such EASEMENTS shall be of sufficient width, as determined by
the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER for such passage and work. The OWNER shall convey such EASEMENTS upon demand
and at no cost to the TOWNSHIP.
503.6 The EASEMENTS at the rear of LOTS facing on curvilinear streets should consist of straight lines with a
minimum number of points of deflection.
503.7 RIGHTS-OF-WAY or EASEMENTS for any purpose whatsoever shall be described in the deed, and such
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or EASEMENTS shall be shown on the approved PLAN.
503.8 The APPLICANT shall provide a method of physically delineating pedestrian EASEMENTS across private
LOTS. Such method may include shrubbery, trees, MARKERS, or other method acceptable to the Board of
Commissioners.
503.9 For a TOWNHIP maintained and owned DETENTION FACILITY, the APPLICANT shall convey the
PARCEL of land on which the DETENTION FACILITY lies to the TOWNSHIP and shall indicate said dedication on
the PLAT.
504 IMPACT REGULATIONS, MANDATORY LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS AND FEE IN
LIEU THEREOF [Repealed and replaced 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1051]
504.1 The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this section:
A. Active Recreation – Baseball/Softball fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, play grounds, and other
similar facilities which offer the ability to play an active sport and constructed in conformance with
national standards including those of the National Recreation and Parks Administration.
B. Multi-Family - Dwelling units other than single-family, including but not limited to duplex, mobile
homes in mobile home parks, condominium or group unit development and high and low -rise
apartment buildings as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Recreation Capital Improvement Program – A capital improvements program used to guide the
allocation of land to be developed or funds received in lieu of mandatory land dedication, said plan
being included in the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan, as amended from time to
time by the Township.
42
D. Recreation Service Area – The service radius of existing or proposed Township parks and recreation
facilities as defined by the National Recreation and Parks Administration Standards as outlined in
Section 504.18 of this ordinance.
E. Single Family Dwelling Unit – Single family dwelling units as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
504.2 The provisions and requirements of this section shall, apply to all FINAL LAND DEVELOPMENTS and
FINAL SUBDIVISIONS which would, upon buildout, result in the creation of three (3) or more dwelling
units.
504.3 The DEVELOPER shall dedicate land to be used for purposes of recreation and open space at a per unit
amount for multifamily units as specified in Section 504.17 of this ordinance , which may be amended in the
future by resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners.
504.4 The DEVELOPER shall dedicate land to be used for purposes of recreation and open space at a per unit
amount for single family units as specified in 504.17 of this ordinance.
504.5 Land offered for dedication shall meet the following criteria:
A. The land shall be physically and legally accessible to all residents of the proposed DEVELOPMENT,
within the recreation service area of the DEVELOPMENT. The land, with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners, may be land provided for use by all residents of the Township. Said land shall be
centrally located and dedicated for the purpose of a community center or similar centralized recreational
function as recommended by the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
B. No more than 25% of the land offered for dedication shall be located within the
ENVORONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
C. No more than 50% of the land offered for dedication may possess more than 5% slope.
D. At least 50% of land offered for dedication shall be developed as active recreation with at least two
types of active recreational opportunities offered. Additional facilities may be required by the Board of
Commissioners. The Board shall apply national standards including those of the National Recreation
and Parks Administration to determine the needs of the assumed population of new developments and
shall require corresponding facilities accordingly.
E. All playing fields and associated structures shall be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines.
F. A trail system, if accepted by the Township Board of Commissioners, may substitute for one of the
required active recreation types.
G. Land offered for dedication shall, where possible, be situated such that the parcel abuts adjacent open
space and recreational facilities thus creating an integrated network of open space, trails and
recreational areas.
H. Land offered for dedication shall possess at least 100 feet of FRNTAGE along a PUBLIC STREET.
I. The minimum total acreage of continuous tracts of land to be offered shall be equal to the minimum
lot size, per the Zoning Ordinance, in the District in which the plan is located.
504.6 The Township incorporates all rights granted in Section 705(f) of the Municipalities Planning Code regarding
the maintenance of common open space including the right of the Township to maintain property which the
owner or homeowner’s association fails to maintain and to file liens against all properties having an interest in
said association.
504.7 The dedication of land to the Township shall be a general warranty deed. In lieu thereof, the Township Board of
Commissioners, at its discretion, may require the creation of a homeowners’ association or similar entity
charged with the maintenance of the facilities. The Board of Commissioners may also grant the DEVELOPER
permission to retain ownership. In all cases, ownership by any entity other than the Township, shall require
deed restrictions requiring the maintenance of the approved facilities on the SITE. The Township shall be a
party to an agreement providing for the enforcement of the aforesaid restrictions.
504.8 The DEVELOPER may pay a fee in lieu of land dedication at a set per unit amount for multifamily units as
specified in Section 504.17 of this ordinance.
504.9 The DEVELOPER may pay a fee in lieu of land dedication at a per unit amount for single-family units as
specified in Section 504.17 of this ordinance.
504.10 The fee in lieu paid by the DEVELOPER shall be offered in the form of cash, bond cashier’s or certified check,
or held in an escrow account payable upon FINAL APPROVAL of a PLAN. Payment of said funds shall be a
43
condition of FINAL APPROVAL, the DEVELOPER may elect to place a note on the PLAN which states that
the issuance of a building permit for each LOT or dwelling unit is conditioned upon the payment of the fee in
lieu amount specified in this ordinance at the time of FINAL APPROVAL.
504.11 All such feeds collected shall, upon receipt by the Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly
identifying the specific recreation facilities for which the fee was received. Interest earned on such accounts
shall become funds of that account. Funds from such accounts shall be expended only in properly allocable
portions of the cost incurred to construct the specific recreation facilities for which funds were collected.
504.12 Upon request of any person who paid a fee under this subsection, the Township shall refund such fee, plus
interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the Township had failed to utilize the fee paid for the
purposes set forth in this section within three years from the date such fee was paid.
504.13 Use of Fees Collected. The Township shall use fees collected within the recreation service area from which
funds were collected for the purpose of purchasing land or constructing or purchasing any equipment, structures,
courts, fields or other recreational facilities. All improvements or purchases shall be associated with facilities
accessible to the residents of the DEVELOPMENT. Fees collected may also be used for facilities accessible
and designed for use by all residents of the Township. Said facilities shall be centrally located and dedicated for
the purpose of a community center or similar centralized recreation function as recommended by the
Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
504.14 The allocation of all fees collected shall be based upon recommendations of the Comprehensive Parks,
Recreation, and Open Space Plan as well as the Recreation Capital Improvements Program.
504.15 The DEVELOPER may offer, in lieu of both land dedication requirements and associated fees in lieu thereof, to
pay for 75% of the required fee to be deposited in an interest bearing account for the purpose of repairing or
upgrading existing equipment noted in the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan as in need of
improvement. Said funds may only be used for equipment repair and upgrades in public parks in the
recreational planning area in which the associated PLAN is proposed. The decision of accepting the offer of
such funds rests solely with the Board of Commissioners based on current needs and recommendations from the
Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan as well as the Recreation Capital Improvements
Program.
504.16 Exemptions. The following are exempt from the mandatory land dedication requirements of this section:
A. Group Residence and Group Care Facilities as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
504.17 Calculation ofMandatory Land Dedication and Fee in Lieu Thereof:
A. Land dedication required by single family dwelling units shall be .026 acres per dwelling unit.
B. Land dedication required by multi-family dwelling units shall be .020 acres per dwelling unit.
C. Fee in lieu of land required by single family dwelling units shall be calculated as follows: $11,540
(estimated fair market value per acre) x .026 acres per unit + $200 per unit (assessed for
improvements to public park lands)=$500 (fee per unit)
504.18 Recreation Service Areas. Chart 504-1 shall define the radius of existing and proposed parks and recreation
facilities based on their size and usage. Indian Lake Park shall be categorized as a special activity per the said
chart with a service area radius of three (3) miles.
Chart 504-1
Park
Classification Definition Facilities
Min.
Size
(acres)
Service
Area
Radius
(miles)
Acreage
Requiremen
t per 1,000
population
44
(acres)
Neighborhood Walk to park; intense
recreational
activities; 100%
developed
Playfields, playgrounds, tot lots,
multi-purpose hardcourts, recreation
center, picnicking
0.25-5 0.5 2.0
Community Drive to park; intense
recreational
activities; max. 80%
developed
Same as neighborhood plus
swimming pool, lit playfields and
single-use hardcourts, multipurpose
building, community center
20 3 2.0
Metropolitan Drive to park;
primarily resource
based activities with
some intense
recreational
activities; max 40%
developed
Water resource-oriented, unlit
playfields, playgrounds, picnicking,
hiking/biking/walking trails, nature
center, amphitheater, group camping,
swimming beaches, boating areas
100 12 5.0
Regional Drive to park; natural
areas with some
resource based
activities; max. 20%
developed
Water resources-oriented,
conservation areas (flood
control/management), beaches,
nature study, group camping, rustic
areas, bridle trails, picnicking
250 30 20.0
Preserve Lands dedicated to
the preservation of
natural resources and
wildlife management
Hunting areas and general open space 250 25 N/A
Special
Activity
Specialized
recreational facilities
Arboreta, historical sites, sports
complexes, golf courses and trails
N/A N/A N/A
505 FLOOD PLAINS
505.1 In addition to the requirements of this Ordinance, all DEVELOPMENT in FLOODPLAIN areas shall comply
with the standards of the TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE (Section 812), the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP
FLOOD PLAIN Management Ordinance, Chapter 80 of the CODE and other applicable regulations of the TOWNSHIP,
COUNTY, State and Federal codes and statutes.
505.2 No new CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT shall be allowed in a FLOOD PLAIN unless a permit is
obtained from DEP, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management, and unless a special permit has been obtained from
North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP in compliance with the FloodplainManagement Ordinance, Chapter 80 of the CODE.
506 MINED LAND AREAS
506.1 The DEVELOPER shall certify by note on the PLAN that any proposed BUILDING or STRUCTURE OR
STREET of any type is not within any SUB SURFACE MINED AREA with less than one-hundred (100’) feet of
overburden according to official mining maps produced by the Bureau of Mines. No CONSTRUCTION of any
BUILDING or STRUCTURE or STREET of any type may be initiated on or within these areas until a
GEOTECHNICAL investigation, as specified herein, has been completed and the REPORT with recommendations has
been approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
506.2 Prior to the initiation of the CONSTRUCTION of any STRUCTURE or BUILDING or STREET in areas
identified in Section 506.1, a project geotechnical engineer shall be retained and a detailed geotechnical investigation and
SUBSIDENCE RISK ASSESSMENT REPORT prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed Professional Engineer qualified in
the field of mined land reclamation shall be submitted and approved as a part of the APPLICATION FOR
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. The REPORT shall include an evaluation of the potential SITE engineering and
structural modifications which would minimize any hazards of CONSTRUCTION on the SITE.
506.3 The geotechnical investigation for areas of past subsurface mining activity shall include a core borings as
recommended by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. The DEVELOPER shall submit a Mine SUBSIDENCE RISK
45
ASSESSMENT REPORT which identifies and recommends the most suitable CONSTRUCTION location and practices
for the proposed DEVELOPMENT of the SITE.
506.4 A mine subsidence risk assessment report for subsurface mined areas shall include a detailed evaluation of the
integrity and nature of the overburden and the risk of subsidence, which may occur naturally or may be caused by the
loading of the overburden. The REPORT shall include a review of the proposed CONSTRUCTION and shall
recommend specific CONSTRUCTION and SITE DEVELOPMENT procedures for the proposed SITE
DEVELOPMENT that shall be required as part of the site development and/or conditions imposed on the issuance of
any building permit by the TOWNSHIP.
506.5 A mine subsidence risk assessment report for surface mined areas shall include a detailed evaluation of the
character and stability of the material used to fill the mine excavation and the risk of potential settlement which may be
caused by the loading of said material by proposed STRUCTURES. The REPORT shall include a review of the
proposed CONSTRUCTION and shall recommend specific CONSTRUCTION and SITE DEVELOPMENT procedures
for the proposed SITE DEVELOPMENT.
506.6 The geotechnical investigation for all previously mined land shall accurately locate and map all known mine
features whether on or off the development site, within three hundred (300) feet of proposed STRUCTURES. Such
mapping shall include the known limits of the mine, and any surface features resulting from mining activity such as mine
waste dump areas, seepage areas andWETLANDS.
506.7 The geotechnical investigation shall identify any environmental problems associated with the previously mined
land such as subsidence, acid run-off, residual ponding, disturbed DRAINAGE patterns, unstable spoils piles or
decreased water quality which may affect CONSTRUCTION occupation or environmental integrity of the SITE.
506.8 The APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL shall include the geotechnical investigation, a mine
subsidence risk assessment report, all approvals for necessary permits or APPLICATIONS for such permits and a
statement of the ways in which the proposed DEVELOPMENT avoids or eliminates potential hazards of the previously
mined site which shall be certified by a Pennsylvania registered Professional Engineer having a specialty in this area of
practice.
506.9 All PLANS for STRUCTURES and IMPROVEMENTS on the SITE submitted with the APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT shall clearly delineate the limits of previous mining activity and the limits of the area susceptible to
potential subsidence or settlement. All such delineation shall be clearly labeled as to effect, limitations, and existing
conditions.
506.10 No FINAL APPROVAL shall be granted until the DEVELOPER proves to the satisfaction of the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS that:
A. No known hazard will result from the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
B. All modifications recommended in the SUBSIDENCE RISK ASSESSMENT REPORT have been
incorporated into the DEVELOPMENT proposal.
C. All necessary permits and approvals have been granted and evidence of such has been presented by the
DEVELOPER.
D. Any continuing negative effects of past mining activities will be eliminated by the proposed
IMPROVEMENTS.
E. All current Federal, STATE, COUNTY, or TOWNSHIP standards for environmental and water quality shall be
equaled or exceeded by the proposed DEVELOPMENT of the SITE.
507 STEEP SLOPES AND POOR SOILS
507.1 No alteration, disturbance or CONSTRUCTION of any type shall be approved or initiated, and no
APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL shall be approved for SITES having any portion of their area proposed for
DEVELOPMENT on or within fifty (50) feet of any STEEP SLOPE or any area of slope over 15% with POOR SOILS
until the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE and any other applicable Federal, State, COUNTY, or TOWNSHIP
regulations have been satisfied.
46
507.2 No FINAL APPROVAL of the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT shall be given until all required
STATE and COUNTY and SEDIMENTATION and EROSION control permits have been issued and submitted to the
TOWNSHIP.
507.3 The DEVELOPER shall clearly delineate all STEEP SLOPE area(s) and slopes greater than 15% with POOR
SOILS, as part of the ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS STUDY and on certified SURVEY maps submitted with
all APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT. If no POOR SOILS areas or slopes of 25% or greater exist, the
DEVELOPER shall certify the non-existence of such features.
507.4 No BUILDING SITES shall be designated or improved in POOR SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas except as
permitted by this ORDINANCE.
507.5 When DEVELOPMENT activity, as defined in areas identified in 507.3, is proposed, a geotechnical
investigation and report shall be required to assess the short and long-term stability of the SITE and the possible effects
on neighboring properties of developing the proposed SITE in the proposed manner. These areas and the
proposed DEVELOPMENT shall be investigated and documented in a statement by a registered Professional Engineer
prior to FINAL APPROVAL. This slope investigation shall determine the engineering characteristics and physical
properties of the slopes, soil deposits and underlying rock strata, which are proposed for use in structural foundations.
Materials used for earthwork construction shall be similarly evaluated.
507.6 A geotechnical investigation report prepared by or under the direction of a professional engineer, experienced
in soil and foundation engineering, shall be submitted for SITE PLANS located in potentially ENVIRONMENTALLY
SENSITIVE areas and for such other sites where special soil or water conditions are deemed by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER to be potentially hazardous. The required soils REPORT must be prepared in accordance with this
ORDINANCE and other applicable State, or COUNTY regulations.
507.7 The SITE geotechnical investigation should include, but not be limited to, the following detailed factual
information, analysis, and recommendations:
A. Surface Features - Surface contours, old CONSTRUCTION, rock outcrops (if any), watercourses, ditches,
ponds, wooded areas, filled-in areas, and old slide areas.
B. Hydrologic Features - The presence of seepage zones, depth to groundwater, and the possible fluctuations with
the seasons.
C. Subsurface Features
1) A plotted, horizontal and vertical record of the stratification of the soil and rock deposits.
2) Information on the relative density of granular soils in the different strata and on the consistency of
cohesive soils.
3) Information on subsurface geologic features and past mining activity including depth of overburden.
D. Exploration Methods - Physical explorations can be carried out by several methods. Field explorations should
follow the applicable standards or the procedures and practices recommended by the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM). It is generally sufficient to secure soil samples at intervals of five feet in depth or at changes
in the material. The intervals should be determined by such conditions as the soils encountered and/or the type of
STRUCTURE.
E. The spacing and depths of borings should also be based on SITE conditions and proposed construction.
Maximum spacing between borings should not exceed 250 to 300 feet. One boring for every 6,000 to 10,000 square
feet of BUILDING area should be a minimum for a high-rise structure, and a minimum of one boring per
STRUCTURE is recommended for single-family residences.
F. Groundwater Measurements – Information is required on groundwater elevations, including depth of
permanent and perched water tables. Water levels should be determined on completing the boring and again,
approximately 24 hours later.
47
G. Classifications and Descriptions - Direct observation of soils samples from various depths and locations will be
required for correlation with the known geology of the area. Classification and description of soils will be done by
the Unified Classification System (ASTM Specification D2487), and by the Visual Manual Identification Procedure
(ASTMSpecifications D2488).
H. Laboratory Testing - The laboratory testing program should be dependent upon the characteristics of the soils
and the anticipated geotechnical problems analysis.
I. The recommendations of all such investigations and REPORTS of POOR SOILS, STEEP SLOPES and other
identified soil or water condition hazards shall be reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. Incorporation of said
recommendations may be required as conditions for PRELIMINARY APPROVAL and/or FINAL APPROVAL.
J. All PUBLIC and PRIVATE ROADS, bridges, utilities and other facilities shall be located, designed and
constructed to avoid POOR SOILS and STEEP SLOPE areas or to withstand any anticipated soil or rock
movement.
K. ROAD and utility alignments and GRADES shall minimize cuts and fills.
L. Hazardous slope conditions that may be present on a SITE must be corrected prior to completion of the
DEVELOPMENT.
M. Cut and FILL Slopes
N. General. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are minimum and may be increased by
the TOWNSHIP on the recommendation of the ZONING OFFICER or by the recommendation of a civil engineer,
geotechnical engineer, or engineering geologist with the approval of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, if necessary for
safety and stability or to prevent damage of ABUTTING properties from SEDIMENTATION, or EROSION or to
provide ACCESS for slope maintenance and DRAINAGE. RETAINING WALLS may be used to reduce the
required SETBACKS when approved by the ZONING OFFICER.
O. Setbacks from Property Lines. The tops of cuts and toes of FILL slopes shall be set back from the outer
boundaries of the area to be disturbed including slope return areas and EASEMENTS.
507.8 DRAINAGE AND TERRACING
A. DRAINAGE FACILITIES and terracing shall conform to the provisions of DEP regulations, DEP EROSION
and SEDIMENTATION Control Handbook, and STORM WATER MANAGEMENT Ordinance provision of this
section.
B. Subsurface DRAINAGE. Cut and FILL slopes shall be provided with subsurface DRAINAGE as necessary for
stability. All runoff calculations shall be provided for review by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
C. Disposal. All DRAINAGE FACILITIES shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable
DRAINAGE way approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to
deposit such waters. EROSION of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of stilling
basin, energy dissipaters or other approved devices at the outfall of storm pipes.
507.9 EROSION CONTROL
A. Slopes. The faces of cut and FILL slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against EROSION.
All such slopes shall be protected in compliance with Westmoreland Conservation District regulations.
B. Temporary EROSION control devices or methods shall be employed prior to and during site construction.
C. Permanent EROSION control procedures or devices shall be established and approved prior to the release of
any guarantees or securities.
507.10 SANITARY REGULATIONS
48
A. ON-SITE soil absorption and SEWAGE disposal systems or any part thereof shall be prohibited in POOR
SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas, as regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
B. ON-SITE soil absorption and SEWAGE disposal systems (septic tanks, absorption fields, and seepage beds and
pits) shall require permit approvals before any part of any such system shall be installed within fifty (50) feet of
POOR SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas. The APPLICATION shall include a map delineating the topography and
the boundaries of regulated slopes and shall be in conformance with all PA DEP and COUNTY regulations.
507.11 VEGETATION
All existing vegetation on STEEP SLOPES shall be preserved in its natural condition. Where slope alteration
necessitates disturbance of existing vegetation, both temporary and long-term vegetation shall be established within sixty
(60) days of the initial disturbance. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may extend this time limit at the request of the
developer on the recommendation of the TOWNSHIP Engineer if such extension shall not contribute to increased
potential for landslide activity, EROSION or lowside SEDIMENTATION or sediment pollution to a waterway.
507.12 ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTION
A. Operations or activities that increase loads, reduce slope support or otherwise cause instability are prohibited in
these areas.
B. The licensed professional engineer who prepared the soils geotechnical REPORT shall review the preliminary
and final DEVELOPMENT PLAN for compliance with recommendations expressed in the REPORT.
C. Inspections shall be performed at critical stages of the work. Such inspections shall be at the expense of the
DEVELOPER. The OWNER must notify the TOWNSHIP of the need for inspection at each of the following
stages:
1) Initial Inspection - When work is ready to begin, but before any GRADING or brush removal is
started.
2) Toe Inspection - After the natural ground is exposed a prepared to receive FILL, but before any FILL
is placed.
3) Excavation Inspection - After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation
exceeds 10 feet.
4) FILL Inspection - After the FILL emplacement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts
exceeds 10 feet. Structural fills shall be inspected more regularly by the ON-SITE inspector
according to a schedule determined by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
5) Drainage Device Inspection - After forms and pipes are in place, but before any concrete is poured.
6) Rough GRADING - When all rough GRADING has been completed. This inspection may be called
for at the completion of the rough GRADING.
7) Final - When all work has been completed, including installation of all DRAINAGE STRUCTURES
and other protective devices, and the GRADING PLAN and required REPORTS have been
submitted.
8) "Certified record" drawings or "as-built" drawings showing all completed work, including the
topography, and all STRUCTURES AND IMPROVEMENTS within one-hundred (100) feet of the
STEEP SLOPES shall be provided to the TOWNSHIP prior to the issuance of any OCCUPANCY
PERMITS and prior to the release of all guarantees and securities of the DEVELOPER by the
TOWNSHIP. Said drawings must consist of two (2) sets of reproducible plans labeled as “Record
Plans.” Said drawings must be submitted in a digital format such that they may be directly imported
into the TOWNSHIP’S geographical information system in a manner consistent with the standard
outlined in Appendix B of this ORDINANCE.
49
508 WATER
508.1 PUBLICWATER SUPPLY
A. If water within a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT is to be provided by means other than by private
wells owned and maintained by the individual OWNERS of LOTS within the SUBDIVISION, the DEVELOPER
shall present evidence to the PLANNING COMMISSION that the SUBDIVISION or DEVELOPMENT is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of LOT OWNERS, or by a municipal
corporation, AUTHORITY or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission (PUC) or an APPLICATION for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
B. Where an approved PUBLIC water system is within one thousand (1,000) feet from the SUBDIVISION or
LAND DEVELOPMENT, all necessary MAINS and LATERALS for connection from the LOTS to the system, as
shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN and FINAL PLANS, shall be installed by the DEVELOPER.
C. The DEVELOPER shall construct water MAINS in such a manner as to make adequate water service available
to each principle BUILDING or dwelling unit within the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. The entire
system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the TOWNSHIP and MAWC and
shall be subject to its approval. The water supply must comply with the regulations and standards of DEP.
D. MAINS must be sized to provide for adequate pressure and supply for the anticipated demands of the
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT and to meet the minimum requirements for fire protection established
by the American Insurance Association and the National Board of Fire Underwriters. Minimum MAIN sizes shall
be in accordance with the requirements of theMAWC.
E. If adequate source of supply is available, fire hydrants shall be installed at a maximum spacing so that
properties to be built upon shall be within six hundred (600) linear feet of the fire hydrant. A fire hydrant shall be
located at the entrance of each cul-de-sac of 500 feet in length. If adequate supply is not available, fire hydrant
connections shall be provided for future installation. Review and approval by the appropriate TOWNSHIP fire
prevention official shall be required in order to insure that adequate fire protection is provided and shall be at the
expense of the DEVELOPER. The TOWNSHIP shall identify fire hydrant locations, and fees for these hydrants
shall be paid by the DEVELOPER prior to the recordation of the PLAN.
F. All water MAINS proposed to be installed in or along RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall be located in accordance with
MAWC regulations.
G. Water MAINS shall be extended to the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT boundary when required
by the PLANNING COMMISSION.
H. All water line design and CONSTRUCTION shall be reviewed and approved by theMAWC Engineer.
I. If a PUBLIC water supply system is to be provided to the SITE within a six-year period as indicated in the
MAWC Water Master Plan, the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Capital IMPROVEMENTS Program, or other
official document; the TOWNSHIP may require installation of a CAPPED SYSTEM, or DRY LINES (MAINS
only), within the ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY; or the TOWNSHIP may require a payment in lieu of the
IMPROVEMENT.
J. Average daily residential demand shall be computed in accordance with the housing unit type and size data.
K. NON-RESIDENTIAL demand shall be computed in accordance with use and size data.
L. The entire cost of all work shall be borne by the DEVELOPER, except if approved for the difference in the cost
of PUBLIC facilities required for the proposed use and the cost of more adequate PUBLIC FACILITIES requested
by the TOWNSHIP that will permit additional service for other areas.
508.2 PRIVATEWATER SUPPLY
50
A. Where PUBLIC water is not accessible, or cannot be extended to the SITE, the DEVELOPER shall furnish
water for all new SUBDIVISIONS and by the LOT OWNER on an individual LOT basis.
B. In all cases where the water supply is from a well, the OWNER shall obtain a certificate that he has complied
with the applicable STATE and COUNTY health regulations and shall submit such certificate and copies of well
logs from adjacent wells to the PLANNING COMMISSION. This certificate will be a prerequisite to the FINAL
APPROVAL or issuance of a BUILDING permit for any and all BUILDINGS erected under approval of this
Ordinance.
C. Individual private wells shall be located a horizontal distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from property
lines, approximately one hundred (100) feet from all tile disposal fields and other SEWAGE disposal facilities; ten
(10) feet from all PVC or cast iron sewer lines; thirty (30) feet from any vitrified sewer tile lines; and shall not be
located within any FLOODPLAIN.
D. As a precaution against seepage, a water-tight seal shall be provided around the pump mounting.
E. All abandoned wells shall be sealed in a manner that will render them water-tight in accordance with DEP
regulations.
F. In all cases where it has been determined that individual water supplied from private wells is not feasible, a
PUBLIC water distribution system will be required.
G. Where no PUBLIC water supply is available to the SUBDIVISION, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
shall require the DEVELOPER to obtain from the proper health officer, certificates of approval as to the quality and
adequacy of the water supply proposed to be utilized by the DEVELOPMENT.
509 SANITARY SEWERS
509.1 PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS
A. No sanitary SEWAGE facility shall be constructed until plans and specifications have been submitted to DEP
and approved in accordance with existing laws and until such plans and specifications have been approved by the
North Huntingdon TownshipMunicipal Authority and AUTHORITY Engineer.
B. All sanitary sewers must be designed and constructed in accordance with DEP regulations and shall meet the
standards contained in the following:
1) DEP Bureau ofWater QualityManagement SewerageManual, Publication No. 1, latest edition.
2) NHTMAManual of procedures and requirements for the construction of sanitary sewers.
C. Where an approved sanitary sewer system is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT, all necessary MAINS and LATERALS for connection from the LOTS to the system, shall be
shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN and FINAL PLAN, and shall be installed by the DEVELOPER, subject to
review and approval by the DEP and the NHTMA.
D. The NHTMA should be contacted prior to the submission of an APPLICATION proposing sanitary sewerage
systems.
E. If no such existing sanitary sewer facilities are available, but will become available within ten (10) years,
according to the Capital IMPROVEMENTS Plan for the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Municipal Authority
(NHTMA), the DEVELOPER shall install sewer lines, including LATERAL connections, which will provide
service to each LOT when connection with the PUBLIC sanitary sewer system is made. The new sewer lines shall
be suitably capped at the limits of the SUBDIVISION and the LATERALS shall extend from the new sewer line
and be capped at the RIGHT-OF-WAY line. The sewer installation shall include CONSTRUCTION within
RIGHT-OF-WAY or EASEMENTS to bring the new sewer to the future connection with the TOWNSHIP sanitary
sewer system.
51
F. All capped PUBLIC sanitary sewer lines and LATERALS shall be tested for leaks and other deficiencies prior
to connection to the PUBLIC sewage system. The DEVELOPER shall deposit funds in ESCROW, or furnish
bonds or other security to meet the cost of such testing.
G. When capped sewers and LATERALS are required, ON-SITE disposal facilities shall also be provided, in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance (Section 510.2).
H. The DEVELOPER shall make the connection to the TOWNSHIP sanitary sewage facility for all dwellings
within sixty (60) days after notification in writing that such connections are authorized. ESCROW funds or other
guarantee of completion shall be established and remain in effect until permanent connection is made to the system.
The amount of such security shall be determined by the NHTMA but shall be no greater than 110% of the cost of
such connection as estimated by the NHTMA ENGINEER.
I. The DEVELOPER shall prepare PLANNING MODULE COMPONENTS (PMC) including PLANS and
specifications for sanitary sewers, for submission to the DEP. The PMC, along with any required fees, shall be
submitted to the TOWNSHIP for transmission to the appropriate agencies. No APPLICATION FOR FINAL
APPROVAL shall be approved and no work shall be done in connection with the SUBDIVISION until a permit is
granted and submitted to the TOWNSHIP.
J. A full-time NHTMA approved inspector shall be required during the entire CONSTRUCTION period for all
lines and LATERALS intended for immediate or future connection to the PUBLIC wastewater treatment system.
509.2 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
A. If PUBLIC sewer facilities are not available, the DEVELOPER shall provide for private sewage disposal in
conformance with TOWNSHIP and DEP specifications prior to the approval of any APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
B. All sewage disposal systems must be designed and constructed in accordance with STATE DEP regulations
and shall meet the standards contained in the DEP Bureau of Water Quality Management Sewerage Manual,
Publication No. 1, latest edition
C. If PUBLIC sewer facilities are not available, the DEVELOPER shall install an individual ON-LOT SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS for each LOT.
D. All PLANS and specifications for ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, private sanitary SEWERS,
sewage pumping stations, and sewage treatment plants shall be submitted to and approved by the SEWER
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, the DEP, and other regulatory agencies prior to the FINAL APPROVAL of any
PLAT.
E. Where the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT will be served by ON-LOT sewage disposal systems,
the PLANNING COMMISSION shall require the DEVELOPER to submit PERCOLATION TESTS and a sanitary
feasibility REPORT prepared by a Pennsylvania Licensed Professional Engineer in accordance with the methods
and procedures set forth by the Department of Environmental Resources DEP
F. A written REPORT from DEP shall be submitted to the PLANNING COMMISSION indicating the suitability
of all LOTS for ON-LOT sewage disposal. The location of the ON-LOT sewage system and the well, and the
measured distance between them, must be shown on the PLAN prior to the issuance of a BUILDING PERMIT and
shall be reviewed and approved by the SEWER ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
G. The DEVELOPER shall provide each OWNER or occupant of a dwelling unit with ON-LOT facilities with a
PLAN of the system and an instruction manual for the use, operation, and maintenance of the system.
H. Existing ON-LOT systems shall be shown on any PLAN. The PLANNING COMMISSION shall review the
existing ON-LOT sewage disposal system for any LOT being made smaller through a SUBDIVISION and may
require any additional REPORTS as necessary to verify the ability of the ON-LOT sewage disposal system to
function on the smaller LOT.
I. When PUBLIC sanitary sewage is available or becomes available all DEVELOPMENTS shall be required to
connect to the PUBLIC system. Initial CONSTRUCTION and IMPROVEMENTS to the proposed
52
DEVELOPMENT. SITE shall include all connectors needed to facilitate the eventual connection to the PUBLIC
sanitary sewage system, as required in Section 510.1.2 of this ORDINANCE.
J. A full-time TOWNSHIP (or municipal AUTHORITY, as applicable) appointed inspector shall be required
during the entire CONSTRUCTION period for all lines and LATERALS intended for immediate or future
connection to the PUBLIC wastewater treatment system. Said inspection shall be in compliance with this
ORDINANCE. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) appointed by the
TOWNSHIP, if applicable.
510 UTILITIES
510.1 Every LOT in a SUBDIVISION shall be capable of being served by a gas distribution system, electric
distribution system, cable television and a telephone distribution system constructed and connected in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the TOWNSHIP and appropriate PUBLIC utility, where concerned.
Letters shall be provided certifying ability for each LOT to be served by such utilities.
510.2 The gas distribution system may be waived if the energy supply is to be all-electric.
510.3 All utility lines including, but not limited to, electric, natural gas, street light supply, cable TV, and telephone
shall be placed underground, except where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the PLANNING COMMISSION that
the underground installation required herein is not feasible because of the physical condition of the lands involved.
510.4 A cable television conduit to provide LATERAL connection between trunk lines and each residential unit in the
PLAN shall be required as a PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. The design standards for such underground cable television
lines shall be in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or, in lieu thereof, the standards shall
comply with those for telephone lines or electric lines as they may reasonably apply.
510.5 Where practicable, all utilities shall be located within the STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, but not under the
CARTWAY or SIDEWALKS, otherwise EASEMENTS or RIGHTS-OF-WAY across private property of sufficient
width for installation and maintenance shall be provided.
510.6 All utility EASEMENTS shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and placed so as to service the LOT involved
with the least practical difficulty to the LOT OWNERS and the TOWNSHIP, and all EASEMENTS shall be dedicated
for municipal purposes.
510.7 LOTS that abut existing EASEMENTS or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have previously been installed may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be
installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a ROAD widening, or an extension of service, or
other such condition occur as a result of the SUBDIVISION and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such
utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
510.8 Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to
lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations
along horizons; clearing swaths through treed areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a staggered alignment; trees
shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments; and alignments
shall follow REAR LOT LINES and other alignments.
510.9 Year-round screening of landscaping of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground, other
than utility poles, shall be required.
510.10 FINAL PLANS shall be coordinated with required tree planting, and "as-built" PLANS shall show locations of
all utilities and all STREET trees.
511 OFF-STREET PARKING
511.1 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards of the
ZONING ORDINANCE.
53
511.2 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS in NON-RESIDENTIAL USE districts shall be located to the side and rear
of BUILDINGS wherever possible.
511.3 PARKING AREAS for all commercial uses and MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS, shall be paved with a
bituminous surface, such as asphalt or concrete. Gravel surfaces are not acceptable.
511.4 Pedestrian CROSSWALKS and refuge ISLANDS shall be provided at intervals not exceeding two hundred
(200) feet along the length of each PARKING AREA.
511.5 The minimum width of ISLANDS shall be 10'.
511.6 PARKING AREAS shall be designed to permit each vehicle to proceed to and from the PARKING SPACE
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other vehicle.
511.7 ACCESS shall be designed so as to allow vehicles to enter a PUBLIC STREET in a forward direction. Parking
aisles or drives shall be designed to as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular ACCESS to a street in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movements. No driveway entering a PUBLIC STREET at the CURB shall exceed a
width of twenty-five (25) feet.
511.8 The edge of any PARKING AREA shall not be closer than 10' to the outside wall of the nearest BUILDING.
511.9 All dead-end PARKING AREAS shall be designed to provide sufficient area for backing and turning
movements from the end PARKING SPACES of the PARKING AREA.
511.10 No less than a 5' foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for CURB lines in a PARKING AREA.
511.11 The layout of every PARKING AREA shall be such as to permit safe and efficient internal circulation in
accordance with standards, including truck traffic where applicable.
511.12 Every OFF-STREET PARKING AREA shall include sufficient stacking space to accommodate entering and
exiting vehicles without overflowing into adjacent STREETS.
511.13 All PARKING SPACES shall be marked so that individual spaces are identifiable.
511.14 All OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS in a commercial, industrial, or MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
shall be suitably illuminated for night use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away
from property in a residential area. All luminaries shall have a total cutoff angle no greater than 90 degrees from the
vertical. Lighting standards shall conform to those in the ZONING ORDINANCE.
511.15 All Off-Street Parking Areas shall meet landscaping requirements of this ORDINANCE and the ZONING
ORDINANCE.
511.16 All public parking shall conform to requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act..
512 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
All loading facilities shall conform to the standards and regulations of the ZONING ORDINANCE, Section 819, and
shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrian and with passenger automobile circulation.
513 STORMWATERMANAGEMENT
513.1 The DEVELOPER shall construct and/or install such DRAINAGE STRUCTURES as necessary to:
A. Prevent EROSION damage and to carry off or to detain and control the rate of release of surface waters in
compliance with the TOWNSHIP STORMWATERMANAGEMENT Ordinance.
B. Encourage all run-off control measures to percolate the STORMWATER into the ground to aid in the recharge
of ground waters. This may include constructing several smaller stormwater retention/recharge areas in lieu of one
large facility.
54
C. Carry surface water to the nearest adequate STREET, STORM DRAIN, DETENTION BASIN, and natural
watercourse or drainage facility.
D. Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead water away from springs, and to avoid excessive
use of cross GUTTERS at STREET intersections and elsewhere.
E. Handle the anticipated peak discharge from the SITE and also the existing run-off being contributed from all
land at a higher elevation in the same watershed.
F. Maintains the adequacy of the natural stream CHANNEL. Accelerated bank EROSION shall be prevented by
controlling the rate and velocity of run-off discharge to these water courses, so as to avoid increasing occurrence of
stream bank overflow.
G. Preserve the adequacy of existing CULVERTS, and bridges by suppressing the new FLOOD peaks created by
new LAND DEVELOPMENT.
H. Design and build facilities for STORMWATER quality and quantity.
I. Encourage the construction of stormwater facilities that blend into the natural landscape of the site.
513.2 Retention of existing watercourses and natural drainage features:
A. Whenever a watercourse, stream, or intermittent stream is located within a DEVELOPMENT site, it shall
remain open in its natural state and location and shall not be piped, unless a DEP permit is obtained and in
accordance with TOWNSHIP approval.
B. The existing points of natural DRAINAGE discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered without the
written approval of the affected OWNERS and the approval of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
C. No storm water run-off or natural DRAINAGE shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage facilities,
or create flooding or the need for additional DRAINAGE structures on other private properties or PUBLIC lands.
55
513.3 STORMWATERMANAGEMENT PLAN
The STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN included in the APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL shall
include all information required by and consistent with the standards of the TOWNSHIP STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Ordinance #820 as enacted and amended, conformance with the Pennsylvania STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Act (Act 167), Turtle Creek and Youghiogheny Watershed Ordinances, and other STATE, COUNTY
and TOWNSHIP regulations may also be applicable. The STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN must be
approved by the Westmoreland County Conservation District. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and the Westmoreland
County Conservation District shall review the STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The APPLICATION shall
not be approved by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS if the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and the Westmoreland
County Conservation District does not approve the STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER shall present a REPORT to the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS stating the deficiencies with the STORM
WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN and those reasons shall be a basis for denial of the APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
514 EROSION and SEDIMENTATION
514.1 EROSION and SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS
A. GRADING and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control procedures and STRUCTURES shall comply with
all applicable regulations and all required approvals including the approval of the Westmoreland County
Conservation District shall be granted prior to FINAL APPROVAL of the proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT.
B. The following shall apply to all SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENTS in the TOWNSHIP:
1) Pennsylvania STORMWATERMANAGEMENT Act Guidelines (P.L. 864, Act 167.)
2) PA DEP Soil EROSION and SEDIMENTATION ControlManual, latest edition.
3) Turtle Creek Watershed Act 167 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT Plan prepared for Allegheny
County andWestmoreland County.
4) STORMWATERMANAGEMENT Ordinance # 820, as amended.
5) NPDES regulations and permits;
514.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND COMPLIANCE
A. No changes shall be made to the contour of the SITE, and no GRADING, excavating, removal or destruction of
the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the SITE, shall be commenced until such time as a PLAN for
minimizing EROSION and SEDIMENTATION as been processed, and reviewed by the PLANNING
COMMISSION, theWestmoreland COUNTY Conservation District and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, and
soil and EROSION approval received.
B. Approval by the Board of Commissioners of all PRELIMINARY PLANS and/or FINAL PLANS does not
relieve the DEVELOPER of his obligation to execute the EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control measures as
contained in this section.
C. All sites with greater than five (5) acres of disturbance or deemed ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and/or the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT shall require a preconstruction
meeting between the TOWNSHIP, the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT, the
property owner and the excavator.
D. FINAL APPROVAL of PLANS and specifications by the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION
DISTRICT for the control of EROSION and SEDIMENTATION shall be concurrent with the approval of the
PLANS of SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, and become a part thereof. FINAL PLANS for
56
minimizing EROSION and SEDIMENTATION as approved, will be incorporated in the DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT and PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE, as required by the TOWNSHIP.
E. At the time a BUILDING PERMIT is applied for, a review shall be conducted by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER to insure conformance with the PLAN as approved. During CONSTRUCTION, further consultative
technical assistance may be required to insure compliance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
F. During the DEVELOPMENT phase, the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall inspect the DEVELOPMENT SITE
and enforce compliance with the approved EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control PLANS.
G. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION controls shall be provided both during and after CONSTRUCTION in
accordance with the provisions in this ORDINANCE.
H. Proposed EROSION and SEDIMENTATION controls should be submitted with the STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN as part of the APPLICANT'S PRELIMINARY PLAN.
I. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding phase has been inspected and considered
stabilized and approved. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall issue a written
description of the required corrections and establish the time by which they shall be made.
514.3 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. Measures used to control EROSION and reduce SEDIMENTATION shall, as a minimum, meet the standards
and specifications of theWestmoreland County Conservation District.
B. The following measures to minimize EROSION and SEDIMENTATION shall be included, where applicable,
in the EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control plan:
1) Stripping of vegetation, GRADING or other DEVELOPMENT shall be done in a way that will
minimize EROSION in compliance with the TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, and the STORM
WATERMANAGEMENT Ordinance.
2) The DEVELOPMENT PLAN shall preserve salient natural features, keep FILL operations to a
minimum, and ensure conformity with topography so as to create the least EROSION potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water run-off.
3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
4) The disturbed area and the duration of temporary exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum, but
shall not exceed the time limits established in the DEP Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual, latest edition.
5) Disturbed soils shall be permanently stabilized as quickly as practical, but within a time not to exceed
twenty (20) days.
6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
DEVELOPMENT.
7) The permanent vegetation and mechanical EROSION control and DRAINAGE shall be installed as
soon as practical in the DEVELOPMENT.
8) Provisions shall be made to accommodate effectively the increased run-off caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after DEVELOPMENT within the SITE. Where necessary, the rate of
surface water run-off will be mechanically retarded.
9) Sediment in the run-off water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of
sediment traps, sediment basins, or similar measures. Maintenance of these items is the responsibility
of the DEVELOPER until all construction of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS on the SITE is completed
and the entire SITE is stabilized to seventy (70) percent of GROUNDCOVER at which point the
DEVELOPER shall remove said traps and basins.
57
514.4 SITE GRADING
In order to provide more suitable SITES for BUILDING and other uses, improve surface DRAINAGE, and control
EROSION, the following requirements shall be met:
A. All SITES and LOTS, shall be graded to provide proper DRAINAGE away from BUILDINGS and dispose of
it without ponding, and all land within a DEVELOPMENT shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water
without ponding, except where ponding (DETENTION BASINS and RETENTION BASINS) is part of the
STORMWATERMANAGEMENT plan for the site.
B. Concentration of surface water run-off shall be permitted only in swales, watercourses, or DETENTION
BASINS. Subject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, swales shall be sodded, utilize jute matting, or
other similar measures to insure proper growth of the GROUND COVER.
C. GRADING shall in no case be done in such a way as to divert water onto the property of another OWNER.
D. During GRADING operations, necessary measures for dust control must be exercised.
E. GRADING equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams. Provisions shall be made for the installation of
temporary CULVERTS or bridges.
F. Tire cleaning areas shall be provided at each point of ACCESS on the DEVELOPMENT SITE.
G. EROSION controls shall be installed prior to the mass grading of the site
514.5 EXCAVATIONS and FILLS
A. No excavation shall be made with a face steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, except under the
following conditions:
1) A concrete, timber, masonry or other approved RETAINING WALL constructed in accordance with
approved standards is provided to support the face of the excavation.
2) A soils (geotechnical) engineering REPORT documents soil stability for the proposed slopes in excess
of 2:1 on this site and the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER approves the proposed slopes and the proposed
method of CONSTRUCTION.
B. Edges of slopes shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from property lines or RIGHT-OF-WAY lines of
STREETS or as directed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge
without encroaching on the ABUTTING property.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the CUT face of excavations and
the sloping surfaces of FILLS.
D. CUT and FILL shall not endanger adjoining property.
E. FILL shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or EROSION of the soil.
F. FILLS shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed CHANNELS.
G. FILLS ABUTTING natural watercourses or constructed CHANNELS shall have suitable protection against
EROSION during periods of flooding.
58
514.6 RESPONSIBILITY
A. Whenever SEDIMENTATION is caused by stripping of vegetation, GRADING or other DEVELOPMENT, it
shall be the responsibility of the DEVELOPER causing such SEDIMENTATION to remove it from all affected
surfaces, DRAINAGE SYSTEMS and watercourses ON-SITE and OFF-SITE, and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
B. It is the responsibility of the DEVELOPER doing any work on or across a stream, watercourse, or swale, or
upon the FLOODPLAIN or RIGHT-OF-WAY during the period of the work, to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
C. The DEVELOPER shall not block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, deposit any material, or
perform any work which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream or watercourse without having obtained
prior approval from the TOWNSHIP and/or DEP, whichever is applicable.
D. The DEVELOPER who makes any surface changes shall be required to:
1) Collect ON-SITE surface run-off and control it to a point of discharge into the natural watercourse of
the DRAINAGE area.
2) Handle existing OFF-SITE run-off through his DEVELOPMENT by designing it to adequately
handle all upstream run-off.
3) Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with TOWNSHIP requirements, all DRAINAGE and
EROSION control IMPROVEMENTS (temporary and permanent) as required by the approved
EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Control Plan and the approved STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Plan.
515 MONUMENTS ANDMARKERS
515.1 Permanent reference MONUMENTS or MARKERS shall be located at the boundary corners of each SITE or
SUBDIVISION according to the following standards:
A. A minimum of two (2) or one third of the number of points of intersection, whichever is greater, shall be
concrete MONUMENTS at least four (4) inches square at the top, six (6) inches square at the bottom and at least 30
inches in length. Any fraction resulting from computing the required number of reference MARKERS shall be
raised to the next whole number. All exterior BOUNDARY CORNERS shall be marked with concrete monuments.
B. The remaining intersection points shall be located with solid metal pins of at least 5/8 inch diameter with a
minimum length of thirty (30) inches.
515.2 All LOT corners shall be located with solid metal pins of at least five-eighths inch diameter with a minimum
length of thirty inches. Prior to the issuance of an OCCUPANCY PERMIT, it shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to install the metal property pins.
515.3 MONUMENTS and MARKERS shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with
the intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the MONUMENT or MARKER is level with the
surface of the surrounding ground as finally graded.
The MONUMENTS and pins as required shall be shown on the FINAL PLAT with the distance between them and
with sufficient curve data plainly marked. If such MONUMENTS have not been set at the time the FINAL PLAT is
submitted to the TOWNSHIP a certified check, payable to the TOWNSHIP shall be deposited with the
TOWNSHIP. The amount of the check shall be sufficient to cover the cost of setting the required MONUMENTS
and pins as estimated by the TOWNSHIP. If the MONUMENTS and pins have not been set within thirty days after
the expiration of the street maintenance bond, the MONUMENTS will be set by the TOWNSHIP and the check
forfeited.
516 STREET TREES, LANDSCAPING, AND TREE PRESERVATION
59
516.1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. The TOWNSHIP institutes the provisions of this Section for the following purposes and in order to:
1) Enhance the aesthetic quality and character of new SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS;
2) Preserve existing natural resources through innovative design;
3) Enhance the general health and safety of the public by protecting ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
AREAS and replacing valuable natural resources such as trees and other vegetation in such areas;
4) Provide for effective buffer areas between SUBDIVISIONS and where desirable, between LAND
DEVELOPMENTS and between different ZONING DISTRICTS;
5) Retard glare, heat and pollution;
6) Stimulate air purification and oxygen regeneration;
7) Prevent soil erosion.
B. ZONING ORDINANCE. Landscaping requirements per the ZONING ORDINANCE which are stricter than
those of this Section shall supercede lesser requirements of this Section. Said requirements shall be included in
the LANDSCAPING PLAN and approved, bonded, and regulated per the regulations of this Section.
516.3 TREE PLANTING QUANTITIES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
A. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. For allMAJOR SUBDIVISIONS involving the CONSTRUCTION of new
STREETS, trees shall be required at the following rates and standards:
1) Trees shall be required to be planted on a TREE LAWN within the RIGHT-OF-WAY along all
new STREETS, for all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS, according to the specifications detailed below:
(a) Trees shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of each tree. In no instance shall large trees, as
listed in Section 516.3(D)(1) of this ORDINANCE, be closer than fifty (50) feet from each other
and shall be planted on alternate sides of the STREET . As an alternate to planting larger trees,
small flowering trees, per section 516.3(D)(2) of this ORDINANCE may be planted twenty five
(25) feet apart.
(b) Street trees shall be planted according to the specifications detail as indicated in Appendix A.
Street trees shall be planted within a four (4) foot TREE LAWN between the property line of each
lot and the SIDEWALK, unless otherwise provided for in section (c) below. At intersections, trees
shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the curbs. In the event that
SIDEWALKS are waived under the provisions of this ORDINANCE, STREET TREES shall be
planted no further than seven (7) feet from the edge of the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(c) Street trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with SIDEWALKS, EASEMENTS, or UTILITY
LINES. In order to accomplish the objectives of this section, the DEVELOPER may propose an
alternate design for the planting of required trees and installation of SIDEWALKS that includes
those requirements as well as the required CARTWAY and CURBING within the area of the
required RIGHT-OF-WAY. Alternate plans must be reviewed by the utility companies and
authorities serving the DEVELOMENT, with written approval by same. The TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER shall review such plans and make a recommendation to the BOARD OF
COMMISSINERS.
(d) Size, type and quality standards. Street trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in CALIPER.
Trees shall meet the general specifications for height and spread in relationship to CALIPER for shade
trees as stated in the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(e) The TOWNSHIP shall exercise powers authorized by the First Class Township Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to establish maintenance responsibilities for TREES located
within PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
B. Additional Tree Planting Requirements and/or Tree Preservation.
1) Including the required planting of STREET TREES, the SITE must have a total tree coverage of five
percent (5%) of the total site area as measured by the standards contained in this section.
2) All new tree planting shall meet the species and CALIPER standards of this Section. The
DEVELOPER shall calculate the projected tree coverage for the SITE based upon the area of the DRIP LINE
of all newly planted trees at maturity and the existing total area of DRIP LINE of trees to be credited per section
516.3 of this ORDINANCE.
60
3) Due consideration should be given to planting new trees in the following locations based upon the
characteristics of the site, in the following order of priority:
(a) On hillsides within the PLAN either on lots or in designated OPEN SPACES or buffer areas ;
(b) Along existing streams as buffer;
(c) On portions of proposed lots;
(d) In designated recreation areas, active or passive;
(e) In DETENTION POND areas as a buffer, not in embankments or near outlet structures
4) In meeting the requirements of this section, the DEVELOPER may utilize covenants to assure tree planting
on locations within the PLAN owned by individual property owners. These covenants shall be indicated on the recorded
PLAN. Tree planting areas owned by either the developer or a homeowners association shall be indicated on the
recorded PLAN.
C. Credit for Preservation of Existing Tree Stands and Individual Trees. DEVELOPERS are strongly encouraged to
preserve existing TREES on the site. The amount of new tree planting may be reduced by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS upon recommendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION provided existing trees are preserved on
the SITE according to the following requirements:
1) In order to qualify for credit for the preservation of trees, the developer shall submit a TREE PRESERVATION
PLAN demonstrating the relationship of tree preservation on the SITE to the five (5%) percent requirement of total
tree coverage with said exclusions. The PLANNING COMMISSION through a SITE visitation and/or review of the
TOWNSHIPWOODLANDS OVERLAY will perform the review of this PLAN. The DEVELOPER is encouraged
to consult with the TOWNSHIP on this plan prior to submission of an APPLICATION. The PLANNING
COMMISSION may require submission of this plan by a licensed landscape architect for larger developments. The
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN shall include, at a minimum:
(a) Location of existing trees requested to be credited.
(b) Species of existing trees requested to be credited.
(c) Determination of percentage of trees in any cluster (one acre or more) that have a CALIPER have of
6” dbh or greater as a percentage of the entire cluster.
(d) Designation of any individual trees, not in a cluster (less than one acre) than have a dbh of 6” or
greater.
(e) The total acreage of site coverage of all preserved trees that can be counted toward meeting the 5%
requirement, according to standards contained in this section.
2) The following shall not be counted toward meeting the five percent (5%) tree coverage requirement cited in this
section.
(a) Trees located on STEEP SLOPES as regulated by Section 507 of this ORDINANCE.
(b) Identified diseased trees.
(c) Clusters of trees that have a majority of trees with less than 6” CALIPER dbh.
(d) Individual trees with less than 6” CALIPER dbh.
D. APPROVED STREET TREES AND PLANTMATERIALS. The following plant materials are approved for use
with the TOWNSHIP provided the specific SITE is suitable. The DEVELOPER may propose alternate species, subject
to the approval of the TOWNSHIP.
1) Large Trees.
a) Fraxinus americana -While Ash
b) Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata - Green Ash
c) Gleditsia tricanthos inermis - Thornless Honey locust
d) Liguidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
e) Liriodendron tulipera - Tulip Tree.
f) Phellodendron amurense - Amur Cork Tree
g) Plantanus acerifolia - London Plane Tree
h) Quercus alba -White Oak
i) Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak
j) Quercus phellos -Willow Oak
k) Robina pseadocacia inermis - Thornless Black Locust
l) Tilia - Linden
61
m) Zelkova serrate - Japanese Zelkova
2) Small Trees
a) Acer ginnala - AmurMaple
b) Cornus florida - Flowering Dogwood
c) Crataegus phaenopyrum -Washington Hawthorn
d) Gingko biloba - Gingko (male only)
e) Prunus kwanzan - Kwanzan Cherry
f) Sophora Japonica - Japanese Pagodatree
E. TheWOODLANDS OVERLAY. The APPLICANT and the TOWNSHIP may utilize theWOODLANDS
OVERLAY in the development and evaluation of proposed TREE PRESERVATION PLAN.
516.4 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS
A Purpose and Applicability. The standards contained in this section are intended to improve the appearance of LAND
DEVELOMENTS as well as prevent EROSION, improve STORMWATER management, enhance visual character,
and improve the natural environment. All landscaping, screening and BUFFER ZONE plantings required by this
ORDINANCE shall be in addition to those included in the ZONING ORDINANCE. In particular, any required planting
shall meet the plant size requirements of the applicable sections of the ZONING ORDINANCE. However, the
DEVELOPER may establish to the satisfaction of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS that plants of smaller size will
equal or exceed the performance of required plants both at the time of planting and within three (3) years of planting.
B LAND DEVELOPMENT Requirements. All LAND DEVELOPMENTS shall include at a minimum ten (10%) of
the total SITE AREA in landscaping IMPROVEMENTS. This requirement is in addition to other stated requirements
contained in this ORDINANCE and the ZONING ORDINANCE. Description of proposed landscaping shall be
provided in the landscaping plan as submitted in the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. The LANDSCAPE
PLAN shall be of sufficient detail to list the type of the proposed planting, the size of the planting at planting and
maturity and the number of plants and calculations that satisfy requirements of this Section.
C Landscaping shall be used in all open areas not covered by BUILDINGS, required parking areas, SIDEWALKS
or other IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Landscaping shall be a mixture of HIGH-LEVEL PLANTING, LOWLEVEL
PLANTING and GROUND COVER, which shall be of a type, size and placement compatible with the
LAND DEVELOPMENT and the surrounding land uses.
D OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS. Parking lots for more than five (5) cars shall require additional landscaped
area equal to an aggregate minimum of five percent (5%) of the total paved area of the parking LOT. Such
landscaping shall be in addition to that required in this Section and in the ZONING ORDINANCE. In parking lots
designed to accommodate rows of parked vehicles, a ten (10) foot wide raised landscaping island shall be provided
along every other row of parking spaces. No more than twenty (20) parking spaces or 180 feet shall be permitted in
a continuous row without being interrupted by a ten (10) foot wide raised separation to provide areas for landscaping
per provisions of this ORDINANCE.
E Unless where a stricter requirement is required by the ZONING ORDINANCE, a landscape periphery shall be
provided at a depth of five (5) feet along all public RIGHTS-OF-WAY, as measured from the property line, for all
LAND DEVELOPMENTS in the TOWNSHIP, and shall be considered a part of the ten percent (10%) of required
landscaping area for LAND DEVELOPMENTS.
F Within the SITE AREA, landscaping shall be required for the following areas: the side and rear perimeters of
the site; the BUILDING perimeter; parking lots; dumpsters; screening areas adjacent to residentially zoned
properties and STORM WATER DETENTION and STORM WATER RETENTION FACILITIES, and loading
docks and shall be considered a part of the ten percent (10%) of required landscaping area for LAND
DEVELOPMENTS.
G The location and size of landscaped plantings shall not adversely affect SIGHT DISTANCE. Consideration
shall be given to future growth potential of all planted materials in reviewing SIGHT DISTANCE issues.
H HIGH-LEVEL PLANTING shall be required at the rate of one (1) per 1,000 square feet of total landscaping.
LOW-LEVEL PLANTING shall be required at the rate of one (1) per 200 square feet of total landscaping. HIGH62
LEVEL PLANTING and LOW-LEVEL PLANTING may be grouped. All other areas fulfilling the landscape area
requirements of this Section and the ZONING ORDINANCE shall contain GROUND COVER.
516.5 INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENTS AND BONDING
A. In order to minimize any potential conflict with housing construction activity, STREET TREES may be
planted at the same time any required SIDEWALKS are installed according to provisions of Section 414 of this
ORDINANCE.
B. Seasonal Constraints. In lieu of planting due to seasonal constraints, the DEVELOPER shall be required to submit
to the TOWNSHIP an agreement signed by the purchaser at the time of settlement. Said agreement shall indicate
the following:
1) The locations and types of proposed vegetation on the submitted and approved LANDSCAPE PLAN shall be
planted when weather permits or within six months of the signing of the agreement.
2) The purchaser grants the DEVELOPER the right to plant trees or other agreed upon vegetation as indicated on the
LANDSCAPE PLAN.
C. The TOWNSHIP may require the DEVELOPER or OWNER to deposit with the TOWNSHIP a sum of money
in the form of cash, certified check, letter of credit or bond equal to a minimum of fifteen (15%) percent of the
total landscape costs to cover the cost of replacing, purchasing, planting and maintaining all dead, dying,
defective or diseased plant material within the guaranteed period of 18 months.
A. Installation. Plant materials must be installed consistent with standards of the American Standards for
Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.
B. The TOWNSHIP shall make a final inspection for acceptance at the end of the guaranty period of 18
months. This inspection will be performed when plant materials are in full leaf, May 1st through November 15th.
All ESCROW funds will be released upon acceptance following the end of the guaranty period.
C. Conditions of Occupancy. The completion of all requirements of this Section or a guaranty thereof shall be
instituted before the issuance of an occupancy permit as described in the Zoning Ordinance. In the event that all of
the required landscaping improvements cannot be installed at the time of request for an OCCUPANCY PERMIT
due to the loss of the planting season, a temporary OCCUPANCY PERMIT may be granted for a period not longer
than nine months to allow for landscaping IMPROVEMENTS to be installed during the next planting season.
D. Maintenance. Maintenance of landscaped areas within approved LAND DEVELOPMENTS is the ongoing
responsibility of the property OWNER. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy
manner. Plants that die must be replaced with a similar or acceptable substitute. Failure to maintain required
landscaping shall result in an enforcement action by the Code Enforcement Officer as a violation of this chapter,
and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in Article 7 of this ORDINANCE.
516.6 MODIFICATIONS
A. At the request of the DEVELOPER and the recommendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION, the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may modify or waive the landscaping standards of this Section where one
or more of the following conditions occur:
1) There are special considerations of SITE design and/or topography.
2) There is existing healthy vegetation that is sufficient to meet the requirements. Existing vegetation shall be
used to meet all or part of the requirements of this section wherever possible.
3) There is a unique relationship to other properties.
4) Landscaping would interfere with utilities, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, EASEMENTS, sight distance or other
vegetation.
ARTICLE 6 CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
63
601 PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE
After FINAL APPROVAL has been granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS but before the start of
CONSTRUCTION, a PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE shall be held at the TOWNSHIP Offices. Those
required to be in attendance at this meeting are the TOWNSHIP ZONING OFFICER, TOWNSHIP ENGINEER,
TOWNSHIP ROAD Superintendent, the DEVELOPER, the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT and
the prime contractor and construction inspectors.
602 PROGRESS INSPECTIONS
602.1 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall appoint one or more qualified inspectors at the DEVELOPER'S
expense, to enforce the provisions of this ORDINANCE and the accompanying design standards and IMPROVEMENT
specifications.
602.2 Fees for inspection of required IMPROVEMENTS. The COMMISSIONERS shall establish, by resolution, a
schedule of fees for the TOWNSHIP'S inspection of IMPROVEMENTS required under the provisions of this Chapter,
including but not limited to the payment of fees charged by the TOWNSHIP'S professional consultants for their
inspection. Such resolution shall be duly recorded in the Resolution Book of the TOWNSHIP, and such FEE
SCHEDULE shall be reproduced and made available upon request at the TOWNSHIP BUILDING. The resolution
providing for the various fees shall be periodically reviewed and amended, when necessary, by resolution of the
COMMISSIONERS The release, in whole or in part, of any FINANCIAL SECURITY posted in connection with such
IMPROVEMENTS and, if applicable, the acceptance of such IMPROVEMENTS by the TOWNSHIP shall be
contingent upon the payment of the proper fees as established by the resolution and the FEE SCHEDULE. The
DEVELOPER shall provide the TOWNSHIP a sum equal to two (2%) percent of the total bonded amount of PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS as a deposit for inspection fees. In the event that the total inspection fees incurred are less than the
deposited amount, according to the aforementioned fee schedule, the difference shall be returned to the DEVELOPER.
In the event that the inspection fees exceed the deposited amount, according the aforementioned fee schedule, the
additional sum shall be invoiced to the developer, with contingency that the bonding shall not be released until final
payment is made to the TOWNSHIP.
The TOWNSHIP reserves the right to require inspections of PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS that impact the public,
health, safety and welfare and are approved as part of a LAND DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN. Any such costs for those
inspections shall be borne by the DEVELOPER who shall pay such fees prior to the issuance of any OCCUPANCY
PERMIT.
602.3 In the event the APPLICANT disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the inspection
of IMPROVEMENTS, the APPLICANT shall, within ten (10) working days of the billing date, notify the
TOWNSHIP that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the TOWNSHIP shall
not delay or disapprove a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION or any approval or permit
related to DEVELOPMENT due to the APPLICANT's request over disputed inspection expenses.
602.4 Dispute resolution. If within 20 days from the date of billing, the TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT
cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the APPLICANT and the
TOWNSHIP shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in MPC section 510(g).
602.5 Criteria for fees. Review and inspection fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or consultant for similar services in the TOWNSHIP, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the ENGINEER or consultant to the TOWNSHIP when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on APPLICANTS.
602.6 Notification. The DEVELOPER shall notify the PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT at least
seventy-two (72) hours prior to beginning any installation of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS in an approved PLAN. While
work is in progress, the DEVELOPER shall notify the Inspector at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the time that the
following required progress inspections are desired:
A. Inspection of the sub-GRADE of streets prior to laying of the base;
B. Inspection of the base as it is being constructed and prior to final PAVING of streets;
C. Inspection of street PAVING during construction;
64
D. Inspection of the installation of storm sewers and drainage facilities as they are being constructed and prior
to final PAVING of streets;
E. Inspection of all utilities and street crossings within the public right-of-way;
F. All grading being performed.
The INSPECTOR shall prepare a written REPORT of all inspections in duplicate on OFFICIAL FORMS provided by
the TOWNSHIP. The TOWNSHIP shall retain one (1) copy, one (1) copy shall be retained by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER, and one (1) copy shall be forwarded to the DEVELOPER.
603 TESTING
All construction materials, whether for public or PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS, shall be tested by a qualified
independent testing laboratory, unless notified by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. The costs for such tests shall be borne
by the DEVELOPER.
604 FINAL INSPECTION AND APPROVAL
604.1 When the DEVELOPER has completed all of the necessary and appropriate PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the
DEVELOPER shall notify the TOWNSHIP, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS and shall send a copy thereof to the TOWNSHIP and the TOWNSHIP'S ENGINEER. The
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER to inspect all of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall,
thereupon file a REPORT in writing, with the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, and shall promptly mail a copy of such
REPORT to the DEVELOPER by certified or registered mail. The REPORT shall be made and mailed within thirty
(30) days after receipt by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER of the aforesaid authorization from the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS. Said REPORT shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS, either in whole or in part. If said PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, or any part thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, said REPORT shall contain a statement of reasons for
such non-approval or rejection.
604.2 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall notify the DEVELOPER, within 15 days of receipt of the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER'S REPORT, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS with relation thereto.
604.3 If the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS will be deemed to have been approved and the
DEVELOPER shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its security.
604.4 Completion of rejected PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. If any of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS shall not be
approved by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, the DEVELOPER shall proceed to complete the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS or rectify any deficiencies and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined
herein, shall be followed.
604.5 No limitation of DEVELOPER'S rights. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the
DEVELOPER'S right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS or the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
605 ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
605.1 No property or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT shown on a FINAL PLAT shall be considered to have been
accepted by the TOWNSHIP until a formal DEDICATION thereof has been officially accepted by adoption of an
ORDINANCE of the TOWNSHIP, duly enacted and advertised in accordance with the Law.
605.2 Upon completion of the final inspection and approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the DEVELOPER
shall request in writing that the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS formally accept the DEDICATION of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS. The request for acceptance shall be accompanied by a legal description of all rights-of-way and
property, to be dedicated to the public. The ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS request shall be received
65
by the TOWNSHIP no more than ten (10) days before the next regular meeting of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
in order to be scheduled for that meeting. Upon approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and the DEVELOPER
posting a MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE as defined in Section 609 and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall
enact an ordinance accepting the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS as part of the TOWNSHIP'S PUBLIC FACILITIES.
605.3 Prior to the acceptance of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, and the return of any remaining APPLICATION
and review fees, the DEVELOPER shall submit to the TOWNSHIP the following:
A. Written REPORT certified by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER that all required PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
are completed according to specifications including ROADS, SIDEWALKS, utilities and STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT facilities. The written REPORT is to include boundary designations of STREETS and
EASEMENTS.
B. Evidence certified by the TOWNSHIP ZONING OFFICER that all permanent STREET SIGNS and other
SIGNS required by this ordinance, the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT or any other applicable code have
been installed.
C. Two sets of As-built drawings of completed IMPROVEMENTS, clearly labeled as such by a Professional
Engineer or Land Surveyor, to the Board of Commissioners and to the Western Westmoreland Municipal
Authority, North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Municipal Authority, and the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County. Said drawings must be submitted in a digital format such that they may be directly
imported into the TOWNSHIP’s geographical information systems in a manner consistent with the standard
outlined in Appendix B of this ORDINANCE.
D. Certification of CONSTRUCTION costs.
E. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE for ROAD IMPROVEMENTS, utility extensions, STORM WATER
facilities and other PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS pursuant to Section 609.
F. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE for water line extensions and other structures to the Western
WestmorelandMunicipal Authority.
G. A written request that the TOWNSHIP and the NHTMA accept the IMPROVEMENTS.
H. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE for sewer line extensions, structures, and ancillary equipment.
606 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
606.1 Upon approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS in the PLAN, the DEVELOPER shall be released from any
liability pursuant to the FINANCIAL SECURITY posted to guarantee the proper installation of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
606.2 From time to time, during the installation of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the DEVELOPER may request
partial release of the FINANCIAL SECURITY. Any such request shall be in writing and shall be addressed to the
BOARD of COMMISSIONERS. The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt
of such request to allow the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER to certify, in writing, that such portion of the installation of
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this ORDINANCE and the
APPROVED PLAT.
606.3 Upon such certification by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall authorize
release of all or a portion of the FINANCIAL SECURITY in an amount as estimated by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
which fairly represents the value of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS completed. The BOARD of COMMISSIONERS
may require retention of ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of such PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS until such time as
all PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS have been installed and the FINANCIAL SECURITY is released in its entirety.
607 POSTING OFMAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall require a MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE when accepting the
DEDICATION of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The purpose of the MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE is to secure the
structural integrity of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and to guarantee the proper functioning of those
66
IMPROVEMENTS in accordance with the Article 4 and Article 5 of this ORDINANCE. The amount of the
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE aforesaid shall be fifteen percent (15%) of the actual cost of the installation of such
IMPROVEMENTS for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of the ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATION.
608 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
608.1 TOWNSHIP remedies. In the event that PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, which have been required have not
been installed as provided in this ORDINANCE within 24 months, or additional time period as mutually agreed upon by
the TOWNSHIP and the DEVELOPER, of the FINAL PLAT approval, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall
enforce remedies provided under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to effect completion of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
608.2 Installation by the TOWNSHIP; use of security proceeds. If proceeds of the FINANCIAL SECURITY are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS covered
by the FINANCIAL SECURITY, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may install all or part of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS in all or part of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT and may institute appropriate legal
or equitable actions to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. All
of the proceeds, whether resulting from the FINANCIAL SECURITY or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the DEVELOPER, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS covered
by the FINANCIAL SECURITY and not for any other municipal purpose.
ARTICLE 7 MODIFICATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
701 MODIFICATIONS
701.1 If any mandatory provisions of this ORDINANCE are shown by the APPLICANT, to the satisfaction of the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS to be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship, or that an alternate standard can provide
equal or better results, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may grant a modification to that provision. A modification
may be granted provided it will not be contrary to PUBLIC interest and provided the purpose and intent of this
ORDINANCE is maintained.
701.2 All requests for modification shall be in writing and signed by the APPLICANT. The request shall fully state
the reasons and grounds for why the provision(s) is unreasonable or the hardship imposed, and shall discuss the
minimum modification necessary.
701.3 It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would result if the modification were granted.
Furthermore, a hardship cannot be claimed by one who purchases with or without knowledge of restrictions; it must be
from the APPLICATION of this ORDINANCE; it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence of
a modification granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered.
701.4 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall consider modification requests that are necessary to meet
objectives of this ORDINANCE and the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, that encourage flexibility and creativity in design
of PLANS to protect ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS, and otherwise are consistent with the objectives of
this ORDINANCE and the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
701.5 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall request an advisory opinion from the PLANNING COMMISSION
and from the TOWNSHIP Engineer on the modification request.
701.6 In granting modifications, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may impose such conditions as will, in its
judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
701.7 The TOWNSHIP shall keep a written record of all requests for modifications.
701.8 If a modification is granted it shall be referenced in the conditions of approval of the PLAN, and shall apply
only to that PLAN.
67
701.9 The written request for a modification shall be included in the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. Such
request shall cite the section(s) of the ORDINANCE to be modified, the extent of modification and the reasons for the
modification.
701.10 Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS setting
forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS justified the modification.
702 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
702.1 Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this ORDINANCE shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the TOWNSHIP, pay a judgement of
not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the TOWNSHIP as a result
thereof. No judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgment in a timely manner, the
TOWNSHIP may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determines that there has been a violation or
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ORDINANCE to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
702.2 The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
702.3 The OWNER or tenant of any STRUCTURE or premises or land or LOT or part thereof, or any agent,
architect, attorney, banker, builder, contractor or other PERSON who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains
such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
702.4 The TOWNSHIP may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop
any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a SUBDIVISION of real property in violation of
any ordinance adopted pursuant to this article.
702.5 Nothing herein shall prevent the TOWNSHIP from taking such other legal action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.

OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 of 2012
ORDINANCE NO. 2172
ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
ESTABLISHING A NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP TRUTH IN
ADVERTISING ORDINANCE, TO ESTABLISH THE TYPES OF
GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH THE
ORDINANCE, REQUIRING FOR IDENTIFICATION OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES AND PROVIDING
SPECIFICATIONS FOR SAID IDENTIFICATION.
WHEREAS, the Township of North Huntingdon, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania,
continues to desire to promote the health, safety and welfare of those coming into the confines of
the Township and of its residents who patronize merchants throughout the Township, attend
events held by non-profit organizations, clubs and fraternal organizations, and visit friends and
family residing in group residences and healthcare facilities; and
WHEREAS, the summoning of aid in the form of police assistance, fire service, and
emergency medical services is directly related to achieving the goal of enhancing the health,
safety and welfare of the aforementioned persons; and
WHEREAS, both Township residents and others who come into the Township are often
unfamiliar with the location of the township boundaries and the exact location of many specific
businesses and organizations and whether they are situate within the Township or outside the
Township; and
WHEREAS, such persons that summon emergency assistance occasionally act to
summon such assistance from another municipality other than the Township of North
Huntingdon, resulting in delays at times when the prompt response is essential to preserve
property and life; and
WHEREAS, a number of businesses, non-profit organization, non-profit corporations,
schools, churches, public clubs, social and fraternal organizations, private clubs, social and
fraternal organizations, recreational facilities, amusement facilities, healthcare facilities, group
living facilities and other groups have been found to communicate and publish through print,
audio, digital and other media that the establishment is situate in other municipalities rather than
the Township of North Huntingdon, thereby exacerbating the confusion of patrons and other
visitors; and
WHEREAS, North Huntingdon Board of Commissioners makes a finding of fact that
such an incorrect designation of the township situs of any establishment may contribute to the
confusion of patrons and other visitors resulting in delays associated with misdirected requests
for emergency assistance, which the Township seeks to remedy with the enactment of this
Ordinance.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED and enacted by the North Huntingdon Board
of Commissioners, as follows:
1. TITLE: This Ordinance may be cited as the North Huntingdon Township Truthin-
Advertising Ordinance.
2. DEFINITION: As used on this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADVERTISEMENT – Any offer, intended for general distribution to the public
or to a specific group of persons, to provide information or to place goods or
services into the stream of commerce, by or on behalf of a person or entity who
deals in goods or services or otherwise by his occupation holds himself or herself
out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices or goods involved in the
transaction or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his or her
employment of an agent or broker or other intermediary who by his or her
occupation holds himself or herself out as having such skill.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT – An enterprise, activity, profession or
any other undertaking of an incorporated or unincorporated nature conducted for
profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by a person, partnership,
corporation, association or any other entity. This term shall include a person,
partnership, corporation, association, institution or other entity employing one (1)
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
GROUP LIVING FACILITY – Any facility where two (2) or more individuals
reside in separate quarters under a common roof structure who may or may not
receive assistance with everyday activities.
ORGANIZATION – Any group of persons associated together for religious,
benevolent, cultural, scientific, political, patriotic or other purposes.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE RESIDENCE – Truth-in-Advertising Ordinance shall
extend to all public and private residence in developments constructed in the
North Huntingdon Township.
3. TRUTH-IN-ADVERTISING - Every commercial establishment, non-profit
organization, non-profit corporation, school, church, public club, social or
fraternal organization, private club, social or fraternal organizations, recreational
facility, amusement facility, healthcare facility, group living facility, municipal
and other governmental agency, or any other organizations that places
advertisements in newspapers, circulars, television, radio, internet and in any form
of media whatsoever developed, or in any other way or form communicates its
location to the general public, other than specifying the general street address or
mailing address, shall not identify the location of the establishment as being
located in a municipality other than the Township of North Huntingdon unless the
advertisement or communication conspicuously identifies the location of the
Establishment as within the Township of North Huntingdon.
4. IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED - Every commercial establishment, non-profit
organization, non-profit corporation, school, church, public club, social or
fraternal organization, private club, social or fraternal organizations, recreational
facility, amusement facility, healthcare facility, group living facility, municipal or
other governmental agency, or any other organizations which use or reference the
name of another municipality in any signage affixed to real property must also
identify the property as being located in the Township of North Huntingdon by
affixing the words “North Huntingdon Township” on each visible sign face. The
words “North Huntingdon Township” must be a minimum of 1/3 the size of the
name of the establishment, organization, facility or development. The minimum
size of the “North Huntingdon Township” lettering shall be six (6) inches in
height.
5. OBSTRUCTIONS – No trees, shrubs, plants and natural or man-made
obstructions of any kind shall be planted or placed in such a manner in front of the
sign so that the words “North Huntingdon Township” are obscured from view at
any time.
6. PENALTIES – The penalty for violating this Truth-in-Advertising Ordinance
shall be Five Hundred Dollars and 00/100 ($500.00) per occurrence plus the court
costs of prosecuting the violation. Each such publication of an advertisement in
violation shall be deemed a separate violation. For advertisements in violation
that are broadcast electronically, each such broadcast shall be deemed a separate
violation. The Township Solicitor, upon express direction of the Township Board
of Commissioners or a designee thereof, shall be authorized to petition the Court
of Common Pleas for injunctive relief for any violation of this Ordinance.
7. CONSTITUTIONALITY – If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this
Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Township Commissioner that this Ordinance
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
8. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES – All Ordinances or parts of ordinances
conflicting with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as
they are inconsistent with this ordinance, except that the repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person or any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed, prior to this ordinance
taking effect.
EFFECTIVE DATE – This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after
Board of Commissioner’s approval.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 21st day of March, 2012.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
By: _________________________________
Lee D. Moffatt, President
ATTEST:
______________________________
John Shepherd, Township Secretary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire

1
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 8 OF 2012
ORDINANCE NO.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROVIDING FOR AN AMENDMENT TO ORDINANCE NO 765, THE
ZONING ORDINANCE, AND ORDINANCE NO 2163, TO PROVIDE
REGULATION OF OIL AND GAS WELL DRILLING AND ANCILLARY
OPERATIONS OF SHALLOW OIL AND GAS WELLS AND FROM WELLS
TO GEOLOGIC SHALE FORMATIONS.
WHEREAS, North Huntingdon Township has the power to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
people and property in the Township;
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon Township Board of Commissioners believe that it is in the best
interest of the residents and citizens that the Township be provided certain information prior to
commencement of oil and gas drilling operations; and
WHEREAS, the North Huntingdon Board of Commissioners wish to amend Zoning Ordinance No. 765
that provides for oil and gas development.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED and it is hereby ordained and enacted by
the Board of Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION 1: Purpose
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to declare the development of oil and gas as a
Permitted Use in all zoning districts, and as a Conditional Use for ancillary operations, including
compressor stations and processing plants in certain zoning districts. North Huntingdon Township
recognizes that the regulation of oil and gas operations is the primary responsibility of the regulatory
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but that the Township maintains it’s zoning powers as
set forth in Pennsylvania Statute Title 53, Municipality Planning Code (“MPC”) and through the North
Huntingdon Township Zoning Ordinance. It is in the Township’s best interest to determine certain
requirements for the purpose of issuing a Zoning Permit. It is also necessary to have information
concerning oil and gas exploration, development, and production taking place within the Township and to
ensure certain security and safety measures are in place related to oil and gas well drilling.
SECTION 2: Definitions
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
Oil and Gas Development or Development. The well site preparation, well site construction and
excavation, drilling, seismic operations, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with an
oil and gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used for
such activities; and the installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters, and
other equipment and structures whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction,
installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other
2
equipment and activities associated with the exploration for, production and transportation of oil and gas
other than natural gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities performing the
equivalent functions that operate as midstream facilities.
Township: North Huntingdon Township, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
Oil and Gas. Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other
constituents or similar substances that are produced by drilling a well of any depth into, through, and
below the surface of the earth.
Operator. Any person, partnership, company, corporation and its subcontractors and agents who has an
interest in real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas.
Well Site. The well site shall consist of the area occupied by the facilities, structures, and equipment
necessary for or incidental to the construction, drilling, fracturing, production, or operation of an oil or
gas well. If multiple areas are used, then the total combined areas shall be considered the well site area.
Natural Gas Compressor Station. A facility designed and constructed to compress natural gas that
originates from an oil and gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for
delivery of oil and gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural gas processing plant or
underground storage field, including one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes,
valves, tanks and other equipment.
Natural Gas Processing Plant. A facility designed and constructed to remove materials such as ethane,
propane, butane, and other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to
be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets but
not including facilities or equipment that are/is designed and constructed primarily to remove water, water
vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from natural gas.
SECTION 3: Permitted Districts
The Township of North Huntingdon hereby designates the following zoning districts within the Township
in which oil and gas development may be permitted by right or as a Conditional Use. In either case, it
must meet all conditions and standards contained in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
1. Oil and Gas Development Shallow wells: oil and gas development for shallow wells and
pipelines are permitted uses in all zoning districts. Wellheads must be 500 feet from existing
buildings and well pads must be at least 300 feet from existing buildings in residential districts.
Impoundments must be 300 feet from the nearest building. All access roads must be at least 200
feet from occupied residential buildings, unless a waiver is granted by the property owner.
2. Oil and gas development for deep wells from shale reservoir or rock and pipelines within the
Township are permitted uses in all zones. Wellheads must be 500 feet from existing buildings
and well pads must be at least 300 feet from existing buildings in residential districts.
Impoundments must be 300 feet from the nearest building. All access roads must be 200 feet
from occupied residential buildings unless a waiver is granted from the property owner.
3
SECTION 4: Conditions and Standards
Oil and gas development may be a Permitted Use or Conditional Use for compressor stations and
processing plants, subject to the following standards and conditions:
1. Operator shall submit an application for well drilling to the Township. Applicant will also be
required to submit a Site Development Plan to the Township Engineer for approval for the site in
accordance with Township regulations for site development. The Applicant will be required to
pay fees for application and review in accordance with the existing fee structure for plan reviews.
Operator shall comply with all applicable codes of the: Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance; the Grading, Excavation, and Fill Ordinance; the Stormwater Ordinance; Floodplain
Ordinance; and other relevant ordinances. No site work shall occur prior to the approval by the
Township Engineer. Any modification to an existing and permitted site that materially alters the
site development plan or midstream facility will require a revised submittal and approval from the
Township. Upon approval from the Township, the Zoning Officer will issue a permit.
2. Operator will be responsible for costs and fees in accordance with the Township fee structure. In
addition, any direct costs associated with the review of an application or related studies will be
paid by the applicant. This includes any direct costs associated with hiring a third party to assist in
the review of the application and related documents. Unpaid costs will be a basis for the
Township to deny future applications for that Operator.
3. Operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding and permitting requirements for
Township roads that are to be used by overweight vehicles and equipment for development
activities. For state and county roads located within the Township, Operator shall provide a copy
of the Highway Occupancy Permit for overweight vehicles to the Township. Operator shall
provide a transportation route map which depicts the roads to be utilized in the Township. The
Operator shall inventory the condition of the roads and provide video and photo documentation to
the Township. The Operator shall also submit at the time of application a road restoration plan
that indicates how the Operator plans to address damage to Township roads during construction
and after construction is complete. Prior to the commencement of any activity at the site, the
Operator shall enter into a township roadway maintenance and repair agreement with the
Township, in a form acceptable to the Township regarding maintenance repair and bonding of
Township roads before, during, and immediately after drilling operations. Corrective action shall
be taken by the Operator as directed by the Township.
4. Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the Township roads utilized remain free
of dirt, mud and debris resulting from development activities and shall ensure such roads are
promptly (within 24 hours) swept or cleaned of dirt, mud and debris. Ingress and egress points
shall be located to comply with PA Code 67 Chapter 441 PaDOT Design Manual 2, and shall meet
transition grades, turning radii, and accommodate traffic capacity to provide for efficient
movement.
5. Operator shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the safety of persons in areas established
for road crossing and/or adjacent to roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school
transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of anticipated heavy or frequent
truck traffic associated with development, Operator shall provide flagmen to ensure the safety of
children at or near schools or school bus stops and include adequate signs and/or other warning
measures for truck traffic and vehicular traffic.
4
6. Operator shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning. However, Operator shall be permitted
to, consistent with any relevant outdoor burning ordinance(s), laws and regulations, burn any
brush, trees, or stumps that have been removed from the ground and collected into a pile or piles
on the properties where the Operator is engaging in development.
7. Prior to development, Operator shall provide to the Township three (3) copies of an approved
Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency ("PPC") Plan. The Plan shall comply with PaDEP
Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of Environmental Emergency Response
Plans or the most recent applicable guidance document. Additionally, the Operator shall identify a
third party or company emergency responder.
8. Before any development activities, the Township shall ascertain whether the Township’s Police
and Fire Departments have secured adequate information to deal with any potential dangerous
conditions that may result due to development activities. First responders shall, upon request from
the Township and at the Operators sole cost and expense, have an on-site orientation providing
adequate awareness information prior to drilling of an Oil and Gas well. The Operator will provide
at least fifteen (15) days' notice of an on-site orientation. Such site orientation shall be made
available immediately after any substantial modification to the development or well site, or not less
than annually during the period when the Operator anticipates drilling activities in the Township.
9. Operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure appropriate dust control measures are in
place.
10. Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities is an important and integral part
of oil and gas development, as part of the planning process, Operator shall consider the location of
its temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to minimize interference
with Township residents' enjoyment of their property and future Township development activities.
The Township Engineer will review the site plan with consideration of private property usage and
future development.
11. Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is essential to the safety of those involved in the
development of oil and gas, the Operator shall take steps, to the extent practicable, to direct site
lighting downward and inward toward the drillsite, wellhead, or other area being developed by
shielding so as to minimize light leaving the site and towards public roads and adjacent buildings.
12. At least 24 hours prior to any development activity at an oil or gas well location, the Operator shall
provide the following information to each property owner within two thousand five hundred
(2,500) feet of the planned surface location of the well(s):
a. A copy of the well survey plat showing the location(s) of the planned well(s);
b. A general description of the planned operations at the planned well(s) and associated
equipment to be used in the development of the well(s);
c. The contact information for the Operator, including a 24-hour emergency number.
13. The Operator shall provide to the Township Engineer a Site Development Plan in accordance with
Township requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, in addition to:
a. A map showing the planned access route to the Well Sites on public roads,
5
b. Information on the status of State and County road bonding.
c. Identification of all structures within 750 feet of limits of the disturbed area,
d. The well survey plat showing the planned surface location(s) of the well(s), and site
facilities for oil and gas development, including an off site transmissions plan.
e. Operator shall comply with the Township floodplain requirements and stormwater
management requirements outlined in Ordinance 2011. No drilling or facilities are
permitted within the floodplain, except where no other area provides access to the oil
and gas deposit and this is thoroughly documented. In such cases, no storage of
chemicals shall be permitted and only needed structures which shall be designed to
withstand a 100-year storm event will be permitted in the floodplain. A qualified
Engineer must certify that any development and structures do not cause additional
flooding impacts. Exemption from the chemical storage restriction may be granted at
the discretion of the Township where it is necessary and where no environmental risk
would occur.
f. A general description including: identification of water withdraw method and treatment
and disposal of water; location and means for site storage and disposal of hazardous and
nonhazardous waste products; and summary environmental data that includes anticipated
impacts and any proposed mitigation measures.
g. The contact information for the Operator with 24-hour emergency number.
h. Provide list of addresses, delivery date and method of delivery for each resident
within 2,500 feet of the well as required in Section 12. A map showing structures where
residents were notified and a copy of the notice and delivery method will be accepted.
Submittals for shallow and deep wells should include four (4) paper copies and one (1) digital copy
of the land development application and drawings for site plans. Applicable fees for oil and gas
operations are for major developments. The Township will have up to 90 days for review.
14. At least ten (10) days prior to commencement of drilling the Operator shall provide to the
Township Zoning Officer a copy of the drilling permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection ("DEP"). Revocation of any federal, state, municipal, or other required
approvals applicable to the use shall constitute an automatic revocation of the site development
approval.
15. In addition to the requirements in the subsections above, the Operator shall fence all water
impoundments with a minimum thickness eleven (11) gauge chain link fence, at least six (6) feet in
height, meeting OSHA requirements around any pits that contain or could contain water or other
liquids at depths greater than two feet. Fence support posts shall be set in concrete and embedded
into the ground for stability. Tension rods shall be 3/8 inch round steel bolt. Tension bars shall have
a minimum thickness 1/4 x 3/4 inch. Adjustable tighteners should have a 6 inch minimum take-up.
a. Install a gate at the access road. Gates shall be not less than 12 feet wide of two gates
(minimum 6 feet) or 12 foot sliding gate. A combination catch and locking attachment
shall be provided and kept locked when no one is working on the site.
b. Install warning signs providing notice of the potential dangers at the perimeter of the well
site. These should be at least every three hundred feet and more frequent in areas where
sight distance is limited.
6
c. Install a permanent Operator Sign posted at the gate and access road to include company
name, emergency contact information, street address (to be established by Township),
and Township Police number for emergency purposes. The sign must be all weather
material and with a minimum four (4) inch lettering and should be located near and
visible from the public road.
d. Provide at least one security guard at all times when a drilling rig or hydraulic fracturing
equipment is on the well site and in use.
16. Prior to the commencement of drilling activity, no construction activities involving excavation of,
alteration to, or repair work on any access road or Well Site shall be performed during the hours of
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
17. Operator shall take all reasonable measures to prevent the emission of offensive odors from
the development.
18. Oil and gas development sites shall provide a five hundred (500) foot setback area from existing
buildings. Well pads must be at least 300 feet from existing buildings in residential districts and
impoundments must be at least 300 feet from existing buildings.
19. All permanent facilities shall be painted an earth tone color to blend in with the surrounding area.
The Township may require fencing and or landscaping to buffer the facilities from adjacent
properties.
20. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used in connection with the drilling of
any well or for use on any production equipment or used in Development shall not be discharged
into the open air unless it is equipped with (i) an exhaust muffler or (ii) an exhaust box. The
exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be constructed of non-combustible materials designed and
installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations. Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust
muffler of exhaust box shall be maintained in good operating condition according to the
manufacturer’s specifications.
SECTION 5: Penalties
Any Operator or person performing work at their direction that violates or permits a violation of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable, pay a fine of not more than $500 per incident, plus all costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Appeals can be made by written request to the
Township and an appeal will be heard by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Township may choose a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced before a Magisterial District Judge. A person who violates this
Ordinance shall also be responsible for the Township’s attorney’s fees, engineering fees, expert fees and
court costs associated with enforcement.
The Township may seek injunctive relief in accordance with Section 53 Pa CSA 10515.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code which states, “In addition to other remedies, the municipality may institute
and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate violations….”
7
SECTION 6: Natural Gas Compressor Stations, Natural Gas Processing Plants
1. Natural Gas Compressor Stations shall be allowed as Permitted Uses in the Agricultural and
Industrial zones and as Conditional Uses in all other zones.
2. Natural Gas Processing Plants shall be listed as Permitted Uses only in Industrial Zones and as
Conditional Uses in Agricultural Districts.
Conditions for Compressor Stations and Processing Plants
1. Must be located at least 750 feet from the nearest existing building or
2. 200 feet from the nearest lot line, whichever is greater, and
3. Noise level at nearest property line does not exceed lesser of 60 dbA or federal standard.
Note: No restrictions on hours of operations in accordance with PA Act 13.
Compressors are required to be enclosed in a building with doors and meet noise and odor requirements.
The building and roofing color is required to blend into the site. The Township requires restoration of the
site within one year of production termination or nonuse.
SECTION 7: Repealers
Township Ordinance No. 18 of 1998, Ordinance No. 952
SECTION 8: Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after passage.
If any portion of this Ordinance is found to be invalid or to the extent it is determined to be inconsistent
with PA Act 13, the remainder of this Ordinance remains in effect.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED into law this 15th day of August, 2012.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BY: ______________________________
Lee D. Moffatt, President
Board of Commissioners
ATTEST:
John M. Shepherd, Township Secretary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice

OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 14 of 2011
ORDINANCE NO. 2169
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1029
REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO OUTDOOR BURNING
AND FIRES.
WHEREAS, the Township desires to amend the outdoor burning and fire regulations.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained and enacted, by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, at a meeting assembled, by and with the authority of the
same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 66-1 of Ordinance No. 1029 entitled “DEFINITIONS”
shall be amended to include the following additional definition:
RECREATIONAL FIRE – The burning of clean fire wood where the fuel area is no
greater than four (4) feet in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height. Such fires may be for
pleasure or religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes.
SECTION 2. Section 66-3 E. of Ordinance No. 1029 shall be repealed in its
entirety and replaced with the following:
E. Recreational fires are permitted. Recreational fires are categorized in one of the two
following ways:
(1) Portable Fire Pit – a portable fire pit is a portable device intended to contain and
control outdoor fires. Such devices are sold as a unit by various manufacturers which contain a
fire box, usually a screen and/or a cooking grill. Portable fire pits shall be located a minimum of
ten (10) feet from a building.
- 1 -
(2) Freestanding Fire Pit – a freestanding fire pit is a fire ring or other type of structure
which is constructed on the property and not readily moved. A freestanding fire pit shall be
surrounded on the outside by non-combustible material such as steel, brick or masonry.
Freestanding fire places are considered a freestanding fire pit. Freestanding fire pits shall be
located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from a building.
Recreational fires shall adhere to the following provisions of Ordinance No. 1029:
Section 66-2 B., E., F., G; and Section 66-3 D., G., and H. Furthermore, any recreational fire
shall be extinguished by 1:00 a.m. and not be started until 9:00 a.m.
SECTION 3. Section 66-3 of Ordinance No. 1029 shall include an additional paragraph
which states the following:
I. Outdoor cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers and propane or natural gas devices are not regulated or governed by this
Ordinance.
SECTION 4. The remainder of Ordinance No. 1029 shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
SECTION 6. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township Commissioner
that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
- 2 -
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 21st day of December, 2011.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
By: ________________________________
Lee D. Moffatt, President
ATTEST:
______________________________
John M. Shepherd, Township Secretary
SEAL
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
- 3 -

1
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
PROPOSED ORDINANCE ______ OF 2012
ORDINANCE NO. ______________
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
AMENDING ORDINANCE 2021 WHICH ADOPTED THE UNIFORM
CONSTRUCTION CODE KNOWN AS THE PENNSYLVANIA
CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT, ACT 45 OF 99, 35 P.S. § 7210-101- 7210-1103,
AS AMENDED FROM TIME TO TIME AND THE REGULATIONS
ESTABLISHED IN 34 PA. CODE, CHAPTER 401-405, AS AMENDED FROM
TIME TO TIME; SAID ORDINANCE ALSO PROVIDES FOR THE
ADMINISTRATION ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION
CODE; PROVIDES METHODS BY WHICH THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON MAY ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE THE UNIFORM
CONSTRUCTION CODE; SAID ORDINANCE FURTHER PROVIDES FOR A
BOARD OF APPEALS; SAID ORDINANCE FURTHER REPEALS ALL
BUILDING CODE ORDINANCES OR PORTIONS OF ORDINANCES
ADOPTED BY THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON; SAID
ORDINANCE FURTHER PROVIDES FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF FEES
AND FURTHER PROVIDES FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE
PASSAGE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has adopted the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §7210-101 - 7210-1103; and
WHEREAS, the intent and purpose of said Act is as follows:
1. To provide standards for the protection of life, health, property, and
environment and for the safety and welfare of the consumer, general public,
and the owners and occupants of buildings and structures.
2. To encourage standardization and economy in construction by providing
requirements for construction and construction materials consistent with
nationally recognized standards.
3. To permit to the fullest extent feasible the use of state-of-the-art technical
methods, devices and improvements consistent with reasonable requirements
for the health, safety and welfare of occupants or users of buildings and
structures.
2
4. To eliminate existing codes to the extent that these codes are restrictive,
obsolete, conflicting and contain duplicative construction regulations that tend
to unnecessarily increase costs or retard the use of new materials, products or
methods of construction or provide preferential treatment to certain types or
classes of materials or methods of construction.
5. To eliminate unnecessary duplication of effort and fees related to the review
of construction plans and the inspection of construction projects.
6. To assure that officials charged with the administration and enforcement of
the technical provisions of this act are adequately trained and supervised.
7. To insure that existing Commonwealth laws and regulations, including those
which would be repealed or rescinded by this act, would be fully enforced
during the transition to statewide administration and enforcement of a
Uniform Construction Code. Further, it is the intent of this act that the
Uniform Construction Code requirements for making buildings accessible to
and usable by persons with disabilities do not diminish from those
requirements previously in effect. The former provisions of the act of
September 1, 1965 (P.L. 459, No. 235), entitled, as amended, "An act
requiring that certain buildings and facilities adhere to certain principles,
standards, and specifications to make the same accessible to, and usable by
persons with physical handicaps, and providing for enforcement."
8. To start a process leading to the design, construction and alteration of
buildings under a uniform standard; and
WHEREAS, this Ordinance is to promote the general safety and welfare of the
citizens and the residents of the Township of North Huntingdon and to conform to
the requirements of' the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the regulations
to said act promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
(hereinafter sometimes collectively referred as the "Code") 34 Pa. Code, Chapter
401-405, as amended from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act requires the enactment of
an appropriate Ordinance by the Township of North Huntingdon if it elects to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Code.
NOW, THEREFORE, ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the authority of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the Regulations promulgated thereunder
by the Department of Labor and industry as follows:
3
ARTICLE I
BUILDING CODE
§ 1. Adoption of Building Code
The Township of North Huntingdon hereby adopts the Uniform Construction
Code (hereinafter referred to as "Code"). as designated and defined by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act (hereinafter referred to as "Act"), as
amended and supplemented, and the Regulations promulgated by the Department
of Labor and Industry thereunder (hereinafter referred to as “Regulations"), as
amended and supplemented from time to time, as provided in the Act and
Regulations, as the Township of North Huntingdon Building Code. The Uniform
Construction Code, contained in 30 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended
from time to time, consists of the following (All appendices adopted shall be
utilized for supplementary and informational purposes only, as they relate to the
interpretation of the respective codes to which they are associated):
(1) The provisions of Chapters 2-29 and 31-35 of the "International
Building Code 2009" and Appendix "E" ("Supplementary
Accessibility Requirements") and Appendix "H" ("Signs") (First
Printing). This includes all errata issued by the International Code
Council;
(2) The "ICC Electrical Code - Administrative Provisions 2009"
(First Printing). This includes all errata issued by the International
Code Council;
(3) The "International Mechanical Code 2009" (First Printing).
This includes all errata issued by the International Code Council.
(4) The "International Fuel Gas Code 2009", and its Appendices (First
Printing). This includes all errata issued by the International Code
Council;
(5) The "International Plumbing Code 2009", and its Appendices,
except Appendix "A" (First Printing). This includes all errata
issued by the International Code Council;
(6) The "International Residential Code 2009" Chapter 43, Referenced
Standards and Appendices A, B, C, D, G and L (First Printing).
This includes all errata issued by the International Code Council;
(7) The "International Fire Code 2009", (First Printing). This includes
all errata issued by the International Code Council, Excluding
SECTION 105 PERMITS AND SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING,
RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR
FIREPLACES.
4
(8) The “International Property Maintenance Code 2009”, (First
Printing). This includes all errata issued by the International Code
Council
(9) The "International Energy Conservation Code 2009", and the
Appendix (First Printing). This includes all errata issued by the
International Code Council;
(10) Sections AE 501-AE 503 and AE 601-AE 605 of Appendix E
of the "International Residential Code 2009"; (First Printing). This
includes all errata issued by the International Code Council;
(11) The "International Existing Building Code for Buildings and
Facilities 2009", and the Appendix (first Printing). This includes
all errata issued by the International Code Council;
(12) The "International Urban-Wildland Interface Code 2009", and
(First Printing). This includes all errata issued by the International
Code Council;
§ 2. Revisions
The hereinafter sections of the above referenced Code, which form a part of the
Uniform Construction Code, are hereby completed, modified or revised as
follows:
(1) References to Jurisdiction shall be the Township of North
Huntingdon.
(2) The International Building Code §1612.3 insert: “March 17,
2011,” as date of issuance.
(3) The ICC Electrical Code § 404.2 insert: “fee prescribed in
Ordinance 2146, Fees, as amended, as included in associated
building permit fees.”
(4) International Mechanical Code § 106.5 insert: “fee prescribed in
Ordinance 2146, Fees, as amended, as included in associated
building permit fees.”
(5) International Mechanical Code § 106.5.3(2) and 106.5(3)(3) insert:
“zero percent (0%)”.
(6) International Fuel Gas Code § 106.5.2 insert: “fee prescribed in
Ordinance 2146, Fees, as amended, as included in associated
building permit fees.”
5
(7) International Fuel Gas Code § 106.5.3(2) and 106.5.3(3) insert:
“zero (0%) percent.”
(8) International Plumbing Code § 106.6.2 insert: “fee prescribed in
Ordinance 2146, Fees, as amended, as included in associated
building permit fees.”
(9) International Plumbing Code § 106.63 (2) and (3) insert: “zero
(0%) percent.”
(10) International Plumbing Code § 305.6.1 insert: “forty (40") inches”
in both locations.
(11) International Plumbing Code § 904.1 insert: “twenty-four (24")
inches.”
(12) International Residential Code Table R 301.2(1) insert the
following:
(a) Ground Snow Load: 30 lbs.
(b) Wind Speed (mph): 90
(c) Seismic Design Category: D1
(d) Weathering: severe
(e) Frost Line Depth: 36"
(f) Termite: moderate to heavy
(g) Decay: slight to moderate
(h) Winter Design. Temp.: 5° F.
(i) Ice Shield Underlayment: Yes
(j) Flood. Hazard: FEMA Map dated March 17, 2011
(k) Air Freezing index- 1,000
(l) Mean Annual Temp: 25'F
(19) International Residential Code § P2603.6.1 insert: “forty (40")”
inches in both places.
(20) International Residential Code § P3103.1 insert: “twenty-four
(24")” inches in both places.
(21) International Property Maintenance Code 2009. § 302.4 insert
“Twelve 12 inches”.
(22) International Fire Code § 3204.3.1.1. § 3404.2.9.5.1, § 3406.2.4.4
and § 3804.2 insert: “Any area mapped on the current FEMA
Flood Mapping as a flood area (Maps are dated March 17, 2011).”
6
(23) All proposed utility, accessory and miscellaneous use structures
(including, but not limited to garages, carports, sheds, etc.)
containing a building area of 200 square feet or more, shall require
a building permit subject to the review of all applicable codes.
§ 3. Administration and Enforcement
§ 3.1. The Township of North Huntingdon hereby elects to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Article Ill, the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210-1,01 - 7210-1.103, as amended
from time to time, the Regulations promulgated thereunder, and the Code.
§ 3.2. Administration and Enforcement of the Code within the Township
of North Huntingdon shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the Governing Body of the Township of North Huntingdon
from time to time by Resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
Building Code Official to act on behalf of the Township;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township;
(3) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this Township;
(4) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections, and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
(5) Third- party electrical inspection agencies shall be registered with the
Township of North Huntingdon and the Department of Labor and
Industry, prior to performing inspections within the Township.
§ 3.3. Administration and Enforcement of the Code within the Township
of North Huntingdon may also be undertaken by entering into an
Agreement with one or more municipalities to provide for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act by the adoption of an
Ordinance approving an lntermunicipal Agreement pursuant to 53 Pa. C.S.
Chapter 23 Sub ch. A, relating to intergovernmental cooperation.
7
§ 4. Board of Appeals
§ 4.1. Pursuant to 35 P.S. § 7210.501(c) and 34 Pa. Code § 403.121,
(1) The Township of North Huntingdon hereby establishes a Board of
Appeals consisting of three members.
§85-4.2. The composition of the Board of Appeals is governed by the
Following:
(1) All members of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by training and
experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.
Training and experience may consist of licensure as an architect or
engineer, experience in the construction industry, and training or
experience as an inspector or plan reviewer,
(2) All members of the Board of Appeals hold office at the pleasure of the
Township of North Huntingdon’s governing body and without
compensation.
(3) Members of the Township of North Huntingdon’s governing body and
its code administrators may not serve on a Board of Appeals.
(4) The Township of North Huntingdon may fill a position on the Board
of Appeals with a qualified person who resides outside of the
Township when it cannot find a person within the Township who
satisfies the requirements of this section.
§ 4.3. The Township of North Huntingdon shall, by separate Resolution,
appoint the initial members to the Board of Appeals who shall serve on an
annual basis. After the initial appointment to the Board of Appeals, the
Township shall annually at its Reorganization Meeting appoint members
to said Board of Appeals.
§ 4.4 The Township of North Huntingdon may, at any time, establish a
Joint Board of Appeals through an Intermunicipal Agreement pursuant to
53 Pa. C.S. § § 2301-2315 (relating to intergovernmental cooperation).
SECTION II: All Ordinances, Resolutions, Regulations and
Policies of the Township of North Huntingdon, not affected, modified or repealed
by this Ordinance, the Code, Act or Regulations, shall remain in full force and
effect.
8
SECTION III: The Township of North Huntingdon hereby imposes
and assesses fees and costs for the administration and enforcement of said Code,
Act, Regulations, and this ordinance, which fees and costs shall be established by
the Township of North Huntingdon’s governing body.
SECTION IV: Any person, firm or corporation that violates any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Code, Act and/or Regulations commits a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than one Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars in costs incurred by the Township in
enforcement of said violation. Each day that a violation exists and continues shall
be a separate violation.
SECTION V: This Ordinance shall be effective ______________.
SECTION VI: The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and
if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be
adjudged by any Court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application to the
clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part thereof rendered.
SECTION VII: Any Ordinance or parts of Ordinances in conflict
with this Ordinance are hereby specifically repealed.
Township of North Huntingdon
Board of Commissioners
________________________________ ______________________________
Lee Moffatt, President John M. Shepherd, Secretary
(Seal)
_____________________________
Solicitor: Bruce E. Dice

811 FARMS AND LIVESTOCK
811.1 Area Requirements:
R-2 20 acres
R-3 l5 Acres
R-4 l0 Acres
811.2 Any housing or feeding structures shall be centrally located and in all cases shall be located a minimum of
250 ft. from property lines.
811.3 Recreational Horses by Special Exception:
Recreational horses shall be permitted in all zoning districts by Special Exception and shall meet the following criteria:
1. Three (3) acres per one (l) horse, each additional horse must have one (l) acre.
2. The maximum number of horses allowed shall be five (5), as finally determined by the Zoning Hearing Board based on the amount and type of land available and the location of the property in relationship to adjoining land uses. However, the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the maximum number of horses permitted as above stated if all the acreage involved is not usable, that is, topographical and similar factors such as water supplies and similar factors, and as such as may be determined with relationship to the health, safety and welfare of the adjoining land uses and the residents affected thereby.
8-12 3. A buffer zone around the property shall be set by the Zoning Hearing Board as needed.
4. Any housing or feeding structure or structures shall be centrally located and in all cases have a minimum distance of 75 feet from the nearest property line.

8-16 814 HOME OCCUPATIONS
814.1 All home occupations shall require a permit.
814.2 Any service oriented occupation generally and regularly classified as a home occupation shall be determined on a case by case basis with a consideration of all circumstances and facts prevailing at the time by the Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township.
814.3 Home occupations shall include the office of a physician, dentist, clergyman, or other professional person, including musicians, writers, teachers giving instruction, dressmaker, ceramics, milliner, seamstress, insurance, real estate, beauty shop, barber shop and professional services, and where skilled services are offered to clients by one not professionally engaged in the purchase, sale or storage of retail goods.
1. Such occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal building and no person outside the family shall be employed.
2. There shall be no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building.
814.4 The following standards and contingencies shall prevail:
1. No on-street parking.
2. One sign - One (l) square foot for identification
only, in addition to any state and federally required license signs.
3. No lighted sign
4. No noise and no neighborhood disturbances created by the home occupation.
5. No more than two (2) students at one time.
6. No commodities shall be sold that are not the result of the residents' handiwork.
7. No more than one (1) home occupation shall be permitted in a dwelling unit.
In the event that a determination cannot be made by the Zoning Officer, a Special Exception shall be required from the Zoning Hearing Board. All home occupations shall require an occupancy permit.

Township of North Huntingdon Zoning Ordinance 765
823 SIGN REGULATIONS
The following signs are permitted in the following use districts:
823.1 Permitted Signs in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts:
In residential districts the following classes of signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance. Where three (3) or more continuous lots in common ownership are offered for sale simultaneously an advertising sign not exceeding 32 feet in area shall be permitted on the properties for sale. Such a sign shall not be constructed unless:
1. An application for a permit to erect such a sign is
applied for to the Zoning Officer of North Huntingdon Township and the permit issued.
2. Such a sign shall be removed not later than one (l)
year from the issuance of the sign permit unless the sign permit is renewed by the property owner.
3. Failure to remove the sign as described above at the end of the expiration of the sign permit shall constitute a zoning violation and be subject to zoning violation.
823.2 In residential districts designated as R-l, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and R-4, the following non-flashing, non-illuminated signs are permitted under the following conditions:
1. Name Plates and/or identification signs are subject to the following:
(1) There shall be no more than one (l) name plate not exceeding one (l) square foot in area for each dwelling unit, indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted occupation, except that on a corner lot two (2) such signs, one (l) facing each street shall be permitted.
(2) For all other buildings, a single identification sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building and the name of the management thereof shall be displayed except that on a corner lot such signs, one facing each street shall be permitted.
(3) No sign shall project beyond the property line into a public right-of-way.
(4) No sign shall project higher than ten (l0) feet above the level of the ground over which it is located.
823.3 For Sale, For Rent signs shall be subject to the following:
1. There shall not be more than one (l) such sign per lot except that on a corner lot two (2) signs, facing each street shall be permitted. No sign shall be more than ten (l0) square feet in area nor be closer than ten (l0) feet to any other zoning lot.
2. No sign shall project beyond the property line into a public right-of-way.
3. No sign shall project higher than ten (l0) feet above curb level.
4. Church Bulletins subject to the following:
(1) There shall not be more than one (l) sign per lot except that on a corner lot two (2)
signs - one (l) facing each street shall be permitted. No sign shall be more than fifteen (l5) square feet in area nor be closer than ten (l0) feet to any other zoning lot.
(2) No sign shall project beyond the property line into a public right-of-way.
(3) No sign shall project higher than ten (l0) feet above ground level.
823.4 Signs Permitted in Commercial and Planned Economic Development Districts
1. In all Commercial Districts, non-flashing and flashing business signs are permitted subject to the following:
(1) A permit from the Zoning Officer or his duly authorized representative shall be required before a business sign of any kind may be erected, altered, or enlarged.
(2) All requests for erection, alteration or enlargement of any business sign must be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape and dimensions of such
sign and its proposed location or placement upon any structure or property.
(3) The surface area of all signs on one (l) zoning lot shall not exceed one (l) times the lineal front footage of the zoned lot.
(4) Where more than one business is located on a zoned lot, stacking of signs will be permitted. Total square footage of stacking signs shall not exceed one (l) times the lineal front footage of the zoned lot.
(5) For every permanent sign permit, the applicant shall pay a fee dictated by the current fee ordinance.
(6) Where a commercial lot is bounded by more than one public street, and front yard setback requirements are followed on all streets, then the front footage shall be calculated from all frontage when the front yard setback is enforced.
(7) Only one (1) free standing sign per lot. The surface area of any free standing sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(8) Reader boards at a maximum of sixty (60) square feet attached to the existing free standing sign will be permitted in addition to items 1 and 2.
(9) No flashing sign facing a public street or highway shall be illuminated or flashed to simulate a traffic signal or a temporary traffic hazard signal. In no case shall any lighting project into streets or highways such that a motorist or any person using the highway or street may temporarily have the view of the street or highway partially or wholly obstructed.
(10) No sign shall project across the property line into the public right-of-way.
(11) No sign shall project higher than thirty (30) feet above level of the ground over which it is
located.
(12) Temporary signs or mobile signs shall be permitted for new businesses without a permanent sign, for a period of twelve (12) months.
(13) Signs which make use of words such as "Stop", "Look", "One-Way", "Danger", "Yield", or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic are prohibited.
(14) No projected business sign shall be placed to face an abutting residential district except when authorized as a special exception.
(15) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required exitway is prohibited.
(16) Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or health is prohibited.
823.5 Permitted Signs in an Industrial I District:
In an Industrial I District signs are permitted subject to the following:
1. Signs on awnings shall be exempt from the limitations imposed by this ordinance on the projection of signs in Industrial Districts across property lines into public right-of-ways, provided that any sign located on an awning shall be affixed flat to the surface thereof, shall be non-illuminated and shall indicate only the name and/or address of the establishment.
(1) The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one (l) times the lineal feet of frontage of a zoning lot.
(2) In no case shall any lighting project into streets or highways such that a motorist or any person using the highway or street may temporarily have the view of the street or highway partially or wholly obstructed.
(3) No sign shall project across property lines into the public right-of-way.
(4) No sign shall project higher than thirty (30) feet above the level of the ground over which it is located.
Township of North Huntingdon
Westmoreland County
Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance
Ordinance #1011
Adopted August 16, 2000
OFFICIAL
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE 11 OF 2000
ORDINANCE #1011
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON, COUNTY OF
WESTMORELAND, COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO ENANCT A NEW
SUBDNISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE PURSUANT TO AUTHORITY
GRANTED BY THE PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES CODE AND
TO REPEAL THE EXISTING SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE #81,
AS AMENDED
WHEREAS, Article V, Section 501 of the PelUlsylvania Municipalities Code ("MPC") provides authority
to municipalities to enact and amend Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances according to
prescribed procedures established within that Article, and;
WHEREAS, subdivision of property within the Township of North Huntingdon ("Township") has been
governed by Ordinance #81 as amended, originally enacted into law on October 11, l 956, and:
WHEREAS, the Township adopted a Comprehensive Plan on February 16, 2000 pursuant to authority
granted by Article III of the MPC, and one of the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan was
adoption of a new Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and;
WHEREAS, the PlaMing Commission of the Township of North Huntingdon developed a proposed
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and conducted public meetings and distributed the
Ordinance to the We;>tmoreland County Planning Department for comment forty five (45) days prior to
Conducting the required public hearing before the Board of Commissioners, and;
WHEREAS, upon official public notice, the Board of Commissioners conducted a public input hearing on
June 26, 2000, and received comments from citizens on the proposed ordinance, and;
WHEREAS, upon changes made to the proposed ordinance, the Board of Commissioners authorized its
advertising at their July 19. 2000 regular meeting. A summary of the ordinance appeared in the August 8,
2000 edition of the Tribune Review and full te:\.1 of same was provided to the Law Library at the
Westmoreland County Courthouse, with notice that the ordinance would be placed on the Agenda for
consideration at the August 16, 2000 Board of Commissioners meeting,
THEREFORE, be it resolved, that Proposed Ordinance #11 of 2000 be considered by the Board of
Commissioners for the enactment of a new Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance which also
repeals Ordinance #8 L amended, and if enacted this ordinance would be identified as Ordinance # 1011.
1HE NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE - Table of Contents
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROH~10NS._ ________________________
101 TJTLE _______________________________ ~l
102 REPEAL.'! 1
103 AUTIIORITYAiVD,,WMIN/STRATION 1
104 PURPOSE
105 /J\ffERPRETATION ____________________________ 2
106 JURISDlCTJON 2
107 COMPLL4NCE 2
108 COJIIPLL4JVCE WITH OTHER CODES Ai"1> REGU/ATIONS 3
109 SEVE.JlABILITY 3
110 Elv'.4CTMEVT OF SUBD/11SIONAND LAND DEVELOP.JIEiVT ORDIN4iVCE A.))fENDMEVTS 3
lllAPPEiVDICES 3
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS ____________________________ 3
201 INTERPRETATION 3
202 DEFINITIONS 4
ARTICLE 3 -APPLJC4TION REQUIREWENTS _____________ ~----------
301GENER4L ________________________________ 17
302 CIASSIFICATION OFAPPLICAT!OlVS: 17
303 PREAPPLICATION MEETJNGS 18
304 DRAFT/1VG STANDARDS AND REQU/RJ<,'iUENTS 20
305 POST-APPROJ'.4L REQUIREJfE;VTS 25
ARTICLE 4 STREET IMPROVEMENTS1LVD DEDIC.1TION S'DLVDARDS _____________ _
401 GENER4L PROJ ISIONS 27
402 GENERAL DESIGN A.IVD ARRAJVGEJ!ENT 27
403 STREETACCESS A1VD DR/I EWAYS 28
---~
404 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS 29
405 ,-UJ,EYS 29
406 STREET GRADES 29
407 STREET ,,-UJGNMENT 30
408 INTL'RSECTIOIVS 31
409 RIGHTS-OF-WAY 31
410 CURBS"•LVD GUTTERS- -- 31
411 SI/Ol'LIJERS AND EJIB.-LVKJIEVTS 33
412 STREET LIGHTS 34
413 STREET SIG1VS 34
414SIDEWALKS ________________________________ 34
415 BIKEWAYS 35
416 TRANSPORTATION IMPACI' SlVDY 36
417 Waivero/Corutruction Standards/or Private Streets Serving No More than3 Lots__ 37
ARTICLE 5 DESIGN AND LlfPROVE~fENTS STA1VDARDS
501 RE.LA TIONSHIP TO ZONlNG ORDINANCE 38
502 LAND, BLOCK AND LOT REQUIREiUENTS 38
503 E4SEMENTS 40
504 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION L4ND 40
505 FLOOD PLAINS 41
506 M/l'llED LAND :!REAS 41
507 STEEP SLOPES AND POOR SOILS 42
508 W'.4TER 45
509 SANITARY SEWERS 47
510 UTILITIES 49
511 OFF-STRLET PARKING 49
512 OFF-STRLET LOADING FACILITIES 50
513 STORU WATER 1~L4.NAG1'..1UENT 50
514 EROSION and SEDIMENTATION 51
515 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS 54
516 STRLET TREES, IANDSCtPING, 1-LIVD TREE PRE\'ERVATION 55
ARTICLE 6 CONSTRUCTJON, INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF
IMPROJEMENTS'_ ---------------------------------
601 PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFEl&!VCE 59
602 PROGRESS 1NSPEC110NS 59
603 TESTING _________________________________ 60
604 HNAL INSPECT/ON AND APPROV4L 60
605 ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DHPRmEldENTS 61
606 RLLE4SE OF PERFORiJIANCE GUARANTEE_. 62
607 POSTING OF Jl,UNTENANCE GUAR4J.VTEE 62
608 RLiUE.JJIES TO EFFECT COft.IPLETI01V OF PUBLIC IAIPROVEJlfENTS 62
ARTICLE 7 MODIFIC1TIONS,<LVJJ ElVFORCEMElVT ______________________ _
701 MODIFICATIONS.'_------------------------------ 62
702 noTATIONSAlVD PE:V,tLTIES 63
APPENDIX" A" - PLAN DETAIL SHEETS
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROvlSIONS
101 TITLE
111is Ordinance shall be known, and may be cited as 'The NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION
AND LAND DEVELOPME1\T ORDINANCE".
102 REPEALS
102.1 Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the SUBDIVISION Regulations of the TOWNSHIP of
No11h Huntingdon adopted as Ordinance #81, October 11, 1956, as amended, are hereby repealed.
102.2 Section 914 of Ordinance #765, the Zoning Ordinance, which includes the submission requirements for SfTE
PLANS shall be repealed upon the adoption of this Ordinance.
103 AUTHORITY AND AD:\IL"IISTRATION
I 03.1 Authority. The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Act 24 7 of 1968, as reenacted and
amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as subsequently amended, 53, P.S. !Cll 0 I et seq. ( "MPC") enables and authorizes
governing bodies of municipalities to enact a SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE to
regulate SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPJ'v1ENTS situated within the TOWNSHIP.
103.2 ZONING ORDINANCE control of PLA!'<'NED DEVELOPMENTS. In the case of any DEVELOPMENT
governed by the PLA'.\INED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT and PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE, the applicable provisions of this ordinance shall be as modified by the
ZONING ORDINANCE, and the procedures which shall be follO\ved in the approval of any PLAT and the rights and
duties of the parties thereto shall be governed by the ZONING ORDINANCE.
103.3 The PLANNING COMMISSION is hereby designated as the reviewing authority of and for the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS of No11h Huntingdon TO\Y'NSHIP, and is charged with the duty of making investigations,
REPORTS and recommendations on the design and improvement of proposed SlJBDIVISIONS and LAND
DEVELOPMENTS; and shall submit such REPORTS and recommendations to the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
for action on the APPLICATION.
104 PURPOSE
I 04.1 This SlJBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To assure SITES suitable for building purposes and hum:m habitation and to provide for the harmonious
development of the TOWNSHIP.
B. To guide the future growth and development of the TOWNSHIP in accordance with the adopted and
amended C0~1PREHE>ISIVE PLAK
C. To assure coordination of existing STREETS and highv./ays with proposed STREETS or other features of the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the TOWNSHIP.
D. To assure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air and for proper distribution of population,
thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general \Velfare of the citizens.
E. To secure equitable treatment of all LAND DEVELOPMENT and StJBDIVISION PLANS by establishing
definitions, design standards, PLAN requirements and conditions of acceptance of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS by
the TOW>JSHIP.
F. To protect the c11\'ironment of the TO\\':-JSHIP and reduce the maintenance costs of PUBLIC
ll\!PROVEl\IENTS by promoting efficient DEVELOP'v!ENT, maintaining minimum standards and regulating
DEVELOPMENT m identified FLOODPLAI'\f areas.
G. To make adequate prov1s10n for transportation, water flow·age, water supply, DRAINAGE, sanitation,
educational opportunities, recreation, protection of the tax base, securing economy in governmental expenditures
and the protection of both urban and non-urban needs.
H. To provide opportunities for flexibility \Vithin the prescribed design standards consistent with the purposes of
preservation of natural resources , topography and hillsides , provision of open spaces for ACTIVE and PASSIVE
RECREATION assuring the integrity, stability, and beauty of the TOWNSHIP and the economic value of the
land.
I. To maintain the highest level of quality DEVELOPMENT within the TOWNSHIP through the establishment
of reasonable standards of design.
J. To establish provisions consistent \vith those authorized by the Pennsylvania MlJNICIPALITIES
PLAJ\TNING CODE to require DEVELOPERS to pay fees, furnish land and/or establish mitigation measures to
ensure that the development provides its fair share of capital facilities needs generated by the DEVELOPMENT.
105 INTERPRETATION
105.1 In the interpretation and application of this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, the
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
105.2 Conflict with other public provisions. Where any provision of the Chapter is in conflict with any other
ordinance. rule or regulation, or other provision of !av<', the most restrictive provision or that provision imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
105.3 Liability. The review or approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT by the TOY.lNSHIP in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall not constitute liability upon the TOWNSHIP, its officials, or
employees.
105.4 This ordinance shall not apply to any LOT or LOTS fo1mi11g a part of a SUBDIVISION created and recorded
prior to the enactment of this ordinance nor is it intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate. annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those inconsistent with these regulations,
or with private restTictions placed upon propetty by deed. covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive
covenants rum1ing with the land to which the TOWNSHIP is a party.
106 JUIUSDICTION
I 06. l The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the area within the boundaries of NORTH HUNTINGDON
TO\V'.'JSHIP, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
107 COMPLIANCE
107.l No SUI30IVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT of any LOT, or PARCEL shall be made; no STREET,
sanitary SE\VER, STORM SEWER. water main or other IMPROVEMENTS ii~ com1ection there\vith shall be laid out.
constructed. opened or dedicated for PUBLIC use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of BUILDINGS
Al3UTrING thereon, except alter approval of PLATS in accordance with the provisions of this SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOP~vIENT ORDINAJ\'CE.
107 .2 On and after the effective date of this ordinance, no LOT or LAND in a SUBDIVISION may be sold, no
permit to erect any BUILDING in a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPME'H may be issued unless and until a
SUBDIVISION PLAT has been approved and recorded, and until the IIVIPROVE\1ENTS required herein in connection
therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as required by this ordinance.
2
107.3 Nothing in this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE shall be deemed to require the
approval of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS for the division of land for agricultural purposes in PARCELS of
more than ten ( 10) acres, not involving any new STREET or EASEMENT of ACCESS.
108 COlVIPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES At~D REGULATIONS
l 08.1 In addition to complying with the provisions of this ordinance, all SUBDIVISIONS and LAND
DEVELOPMENTS vvithin the TOWNSHIP shall comply with all applicable TOWNSHIP Ordinances as adopted or
amended, as referenced herein and comply with applicable TOWNSHIP, COUNTY, STATE or Federal. Compliance
with said regulations shall be a requirement for any approval under the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
l 08.2 Any violation of applicable TO\VNSHIP, COUNTY, STA TE or Federal regulations or permits shall be
deemed a violation of this ORDINANCE and shall be subject to enforcement procedures authorized by this
ORDINANCE.
109 SEVERABILITY
109.1 Should any section or provision of this ORDINA>JCE be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid. such DECISION shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
110 ENACTMENT OF SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
110.1 The TO\VNSHIP BOARD OF COMlvIISSIO:.JERS may from time to time amend, add to, change, or repeal in
its entirety this SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. Such amendments shall be enacted in
conformance with Section 505 and Section 506 of the MPC.
110.2 From the time an APPLICATION for approval of a PLAT, whether prelin1inary or final, is duly filed as
provided in the SUBDIVISION A"t\TI LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, and while such APPLICATION is
pending approval or disapproval. no change or amendment of the zoning, SUBDIVISION or other governing ordinance
or plan shall affect the DECISION on such APPLICATION adversely to the APPLICANT and the APPLICANT shall
be entitled to a DECISION in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or PLANS as they stood at
the time the APPLICATION was duly filed. In addition, when a prelin1inary APPLICATION has been duly approved,
the APPLICANT shall be entitled to FINAL APPROVAL in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary
APPLICATION as hereinafter provided. However, if an APPLICATION is properly and finally denied, and
subsequent APPLICATION shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
110.3 \v11ere the DEVELOPER has SUBSTANTLA..LLY COMPLETED the required IMPROVEMENTS as
depicted upon the FlNAL PLAT within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of
the PRELIJv!INARY PLAT shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved FINAL PLAT pe11aining to zoning
classification or density, LOT, BUILDING. street or utility location.
111 APPENDICES
111.1 Attached to this ORDINANCE are appendices detailing specifications and checklists. These appendices may
be changed from time to time by resolution of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS as conditions and accepted
engineering practices warrant.
ARTICLE 2 D£FINITIONS
201 INTERPRET A TIO:"I
For the purposes of this Orchnance, the present tense includc:s the future tense, the smgular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory: the word "may" is permissive; the words
"used" or "occupied" include the words "intended. designed", or "arranged to be used" or "occupied", and certain tenns
or words shall be mterpretcd as defined in 202, Definitions bdO\v.
3
202 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ORDINANCE, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
90-DA Y REVIEW PERIOD: The period of time, established by the STATE MPC for in which the review and
communication of the decision of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall be made for any APPLICATION. The
90-DA Y REVIEW PERIOD commences with the OFFICIAL FILING DA TE.
ABUTTING - Having a common border with, or being separated from such conm1on border by an ALLEY or
EASEMENT.
ACCESS -A means of vehicular approach or entry to or exit from a LOT, a SITE or a PARCEL.
ACCESS POINT - Any vehicular entrance or exit to a street. The distance between such ACCESS POINTS shall be
measured from the tem1ination of one ClJRB cut to the estab!islunent of an adjacent CURB cut.
ACTIVE RECREATION- Recreation that requires construction of fields, courts, and other facilities or any type of
recreation that substantially impacts the initial, natural state of a SITE or one which adversely impacts
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE areas.
ALLEY - An ALLEY is also a PRIVATE or PUBLIC STREET primarily designed to serve as secondary ACCESS to
the side or rear of LOTS whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPLICANT - An OWNER or DEVELOPER who has filed an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, including his
heirs, successors and assigns, as the case may be.
APPUCATIOJ\- The APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT - Every APPLICATION, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed
and approved prior to the staii of CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT, including but not limited to an
APPLICATION for the approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT or for the approval of a
PRELIMINARY PLAN or FINAL PLA'.'-r.
APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL - The APPLICATION for FINAL APPROVAL of a DEVELOPMENT to
be submitted by a DEVELOPER to the TOWNSHIP.
APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL - The APPLICATION for PRELIMINARY APPROVAL to be
submitted by a DEVELOPER to the TOWNSHIP.
AR TERlAL ROAD - A PUBLIC ROAD intended to provide for high- speed travel between or within communities or
to and from COLLECTOR ROADS. ACCESS is controlled so that only regionally significant land uses may take
direct ACCESS to these streets.
AUTHORITY - A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164) known as
the Pennsylvania "Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945".
BICYCLE LANE - A lane at the edge of a ROAD reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH - A pathway usually separated from the ROAD, designed specifically to satisfy the physical
requirements of bicycling.
BLOCK - A tract of land or PARCEL entirely surrounded by PUBLIC highways, STREETS. streams, railroad
RIGHTS-OF-\VA Y, cemeteries, public parks, shore lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the TOWNSHIP
of North Huntingdon or a combination thereof.
BOARD OF CO.'.'v1l\1ISSIONERS- The Board of Commissioners of the Township of >forth Huntingdon.
BUILDI)IG - A strucnire or appendage to a structure intended for the shelter. housing or enclosure of any individual,
animal. process. equipment. goods or materials of any kind or nature, which is pem1anently affixed to the land; has one
or more floors or stories; and is bounded by either LOT LINES or yards. A BL:ILDIJ\G shall not include such
4
strncturcs as billboards, FE;\CES, or strncnircs \\ llh interior surfaces not normally accessible to human use. such as gas
tanks, grain elevators. coal bunkers or similar structures. A BUILDING may accommodate more than one family and
have more than one dwellmg unit ~my may be used for residential. conunercial. public. or industrial purposes.
CALIPER - A meJsuremcnt of the size of J tree equal to the diameter of its trnnk measured four and one-half ( 4.5) feet
Jbove natural GRADE.
CAPPED SYSTPvl - A completed water supply JmLor sewerage system put in pbce for future use. contingent upon
expansion. rather than to meet immediate DEVELOPMEJ\T needs.
CAR TWA Y - ThJt portion of a street or ALI .F'{ intended for vehicular use. It includes the actuJl ROAD surface area
from CURB to CTRB. which may include travel lanes. parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. vVhere
there are no CL RBS, the CART\\'A Y is that portion between the edges of the paved or hard surface width.
CHANGE OF USE - Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a BL'ILDl'.'JG or land. The North
American Industry Classification System shall aid in the determination or whether a ch~mge of use 1s substantially
different from the prc\'ious use.
CHA::'-J\TL - The bed and banks of a natural stream which COl1\'cy the constant or intermittent flow of the stream.
CLEAR SIGHT TRL\:'-JGLE - A triangular-shaped land area of unohstrnctecl vision established at STRLET
intersections in which nothing is erected. placed, planted. or :illowcd to grow in such a m:inncr as to limit or obstruct the
S!GllT DIST:\'\CE of motorists entering or lcanng the interscctll)n. Tim area is regulated as lines of sight between
points on the STREET CF:\TER I.l:\'ES of mtcrsectmg STREE IS at a givrn distance from the intersection as de tined
by P J\ :Vlotor V chicle Code Section II.
CODL The Code of the Township of'\orth lfuntmgdon as amended.
COLLECTOR STREET - ROADS connecting residential STREETS to the ARTERL<\L STREETS or providing
ACCESS to '\O'\-RESIDE\TIAL CSES and STREETS. COLLECTOR STREETS fom1 barriers bc\\\ecn
neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are RESIDE:\TIAL STREETS.
CO'dl'REHE'\Sl\'E Pl.:\:\ - The merall pnl1cy guide for the physiL'al DE\Tl.OP\lE'\T of the TOW'\SIIIP
consisting of maps. charts. and textual matter 111 accordance with the \lPC.
CONSTRCCTION - The CO:\STRUCTIO'\. reconstrnction. renovation. repair. extension, expansion. alteration or
relocation of a STRl ·cTl 'RE. including the placement nf \10I3Il.E HOL\!FS.
COL1NTY - The COL lNTY uf W cst111orclancl. Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALKS - A R!Ci!IT-OF-\\',\ Y, municipally authonzcd, which cuts across a BLOCK to ti.m11Sh access for
pedestrians to adjacent STREETS or prope11ies.
CtiRB - :\ \ertical ur sloping edge ti! a RO:\D, such as a 13clgian Block Cl. RR. Barner CLRB, \!OL ~ L\l3LE ( 'l 'RI3
or b1tummous \vcdge CURI3.
DBH- D1ar11eter at Base Height The diameter of a tree's trunk at its breast height.
DECLSIO"i - Final adjudication of the ZON!l\G llLARING !301\RD by reason of JUnsdicl10n under the ZOJ\ING
ORDI'\A'\CE uf the TO\\"\SI-IIP of :\orth Huntmgdon or of appeals from detem1inations. Decisions shall be
appcalable to the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County.
DEDIC.-\ TIO>i - 1l1e o·ansfer of property rnterests from priYatc to PCBLIC ownership for a PCBL!(' purpose The
O"ansfcr may bL· of fee-simple interest or of a kss than fee mtcrest, includmg an EASF\1E:\T
DE!'- rhe l'e111h\ h·an1a lkpartmL'nt of Em·1ronmental Protection.
DET1\IIFD ( 'O'\STRl '('TIO'\ DR.\ \\'l:\CiS- Drawings that show a level of detail such that they may be re\'iewed
for rnmpliancl' \\1th all codes and standards adopted and used hy the TOWNSHIP or any of its representatives
5
DETENTION BASIN - A basin designed to retard STORJvf WATER runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetennined rate. A DETENTION BASIN can be designed to drain completely after a stom1 event.
DETERMINATION - T11e final action by the ZONING OFFICER ofN011h Huntingdon TOWNSHIP appealable to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
DEVELOPED OPEN SPACE- OPEN SPACE, some of which is developed for ACTIVE RECREATIONAL uses or
requiring regular maintenance of landscaping and lawns.
DEVELOPER - Any O\\lNER, agent of such O\VNER or tenant with pem1ission of such OWNER, who makes or
causes to be made an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOP!vIENT.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT - The agreement benveen the TOWNSHIP and the DEVELOPER which is required
for FINAL APPROVAL of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT and which shall state all conditions for
DEVELOPMENT and shall establish the responsibilities of the parties to the agreement including PERFOR.l\1ANCE
GUARANTEE, sequencing, scheduling, methods of constrnction and provision of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
required prior to release of the PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
DEVELOPMENT - The division of a PARCEL of land into hVo (2) or more PARCELS; the CONSTRUCTION,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any BUILDINGS; any use or change in
use of any BUILDINGS or land; and extension of any use of land or any clearing, GRADING, or other movement of
land, for which pennission may be required pursuant to this ORDINANCE.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for DEVELOPMENT, including PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT, a PLAT of SliBDIVISION, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of BUILDINGS and
other structures, intensity of use or density of DEVELOPMENT, STREETS, ways and PARKING AREAS, OPEN
SP ACE and PUBLIC facilities.
DRAINAGE - TI1e removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, GR.A.DING, or other means.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM - The system through 'which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, \vaterbodies
and WETLANDS.
DRIP LINE- The area covered by the overhang of a tree's branches.
DR..IVEWA Y- An area capable of providing or intending to provide vehicular access from a STREET to a
BUILDING on a LOT.
DRY LINES- See CAPPED SYSTEM.
EASEMENT - Authorization by a LOT OWNER of the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated
part of his LOT.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to
IMPROVEMENTS and may require conservation measures or the employment of creative DEVELOPMENT
techniques to prevent degradation of the enviromnent, or may require limited DEVELOPMENT, or in ce11ain instances
may preclude DEVELOPMENT. This includes all fean1res in the EJ\;VIRONMEl\TALL Y SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE - Any area within a SITE that reasonably reflects areas incorporated into the
ENVIRONME?\TALL Y SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
E>IVIRONMENTALL Y SENSITIVE OVERLAY- A mapped area, compiled and maintained by the Plam1ing and
Zoning Department, the boundaries of which are composed of STEEP SLOPES, WETLANDS. FLOODPLAINS,
and POOR SOILS: and which is regularly updated in accordance \vith approved PLANS and challenges to the map
per section 304.7 of this ORDINA>iCE.
EROSION - The detachment ::md rnoYerncnt of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by
water. wind. ice, or gravity.
6
ESCROW - A deed, a bond, money, or a piece of property delivered to a third PERSON to be held by the third
PERSON and released to the grantor only upon the fulfillment of a condition.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Any public utility corporation or municipal authority including those providing natural gas,
electricity, water sewage, telephone or cable to the citizens of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT - The government of the United States of America.
FEE SCHEDULE- The cuITent Township of North Huntingdon Fee Ordinance as adopted and amended.
FEl\{1\ - The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FENCE - A fabricated baITier used to enclose an area of land, a LOT or SITE.
FILL - The depositing of land, whether submerged or not, and, gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition
whatsoever, as approved by TOWNSHIP engineer.
FINANCIAL SECURITY - An inevocable letter of credit, bond, cash deposit or ESCROW account established to
guarantee the completion and maintenance of required LvfPROVE!VIENTS. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE and
l\'Li\INTENANCE GUARANTEE are types of FINANCIAL SECURITY.
FINAL APPROVAL - The ultimate approval of a DEVEL0Prv1ENT granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
which follows PRELL'v1INARY APPROVAL and filing of the FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN, all granted in
accordance \vith Article 3 of this ORDINAJ\CE.
:INAL PLAN - The final map of a SUBDIVISION which is submitted for approval by the Board of Commissioners
and which, if approved, will be filed with the COUNTY Recorder of Deeds or the final LAND DEVELOPMENT map
officially recognized as the approved PLAN by the Board of Commissioners.
FINAL PLAT - See FINAL PLAN.
FLAG ACCESS STRIP - That portion of a FLAG LOT that provides vehicular access to the buildable portion of
the LOT, which by its characteristic is naITow and less than the minimum LOT FRONTAGE requirements
established within the ZONING ORDINANCE. The area contained within the FLAG ACCESS STRIP is not
counted toward meeting the minimum lot size requirements of the ZONING DISTRICT.
FLAG LOT - A type of LOT ( conm10nly flag-shaped m configuration) and often called a rear lot subdivision, in
which STREET FRONTAGE is provided by a strip ofland which is narrow in relation to the remainder of the LOT
which extends from the main body of the lot to the street. The purpose of which is to provide for habitation or use or
a rear portion of a LOT w"hich otherwise would not meet the minimum STREET FRONTAGE requirements of the
ZONING DISTRICT requirements as stated in the TO\VNSHlP ZONING ORDINANCE.
FLOOD - A temporary inundation ofnonnally d1y land areas.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA - A relatively flat or lmv land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface watc:·s from any source.
FRONTAGE-The ABUTTING ofa LOT LINE onto a STREET.
GRADE - TI1e slope of the ground surface, SIDEVv'ALK, or STREET specified in percentage(%) tenns.
GRADING - The act of changmg the natural contour of the land in any \Vay.
GRADING PLA1\ - A plan to be prepared where a DEVELOPER con-templates removaL modification or destruction
of existmg STRl 'CTURES and or GROl:ND COVER and which shall be submitted with an APPLICATION FOR
DE\TLOP\!ENT m accordance with this ORDINANCE nr the GRADING ORDINANCE.
GROU:\D COVER - A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a dense mat covering the surface of
the land, preve11ung soil from being blmvn or \Vashed away.
7
GUITER - A shallow CHANNEL usually set along a CURB or the pavement edge of a ROAD for purposes of
catching and carrying runoff water.
HIGH LEVEL PLANTING - Consists of trees of a deciduous nature with a minimum height of six feet at planting
and a CALIPER of two (2) inches at planting and trees of an evergreen nature with a minimum height of six feet at
planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the American Standards for Nursery Stock
published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Inc., Washington, D.C.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - The area of a LOT or SITE occupied by BUILDINGS, ROADS, parking areas, outdoor
storage areas and other paved surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT - Any man-made, immovable item which becomes a part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate
and which is necessary to produce usable and desirable LOTS from ra\v acreage including, but not limited to,
GRADING, pavement, CURB, storm and sanitary SEWERS, GUITER, drains, and bettem1ent to existing water
courses, SIDEWALKS, STREET SIGNS, CROSSWALKS, shade trees, GROUND COVERS, sodding or seeding,
STREET name SIGNS and MONUMENTS.
INTERIOR PEDESTRIAN WALKS - Sidewalks not ABUTTING the CAR TWA Y of a STREET.
ISLAND - A raised area in a STREET, usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes, or used for
landscaping, SIGNS or lighting.
LAND DEVELOPMENT -Any of the following activities:
A. The IMPROVEMENT of one LOT or two or more contiguous LOTS, tracts or PARCELS of land for any purpose
involving:
1) A group of two or more residential or non-residential BUILDINGS, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single non-residential BUILDING on a LOT or LOTS regardless of the number of occupants or
tenure; or
2) The division or allocation of land or space, \vhether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of STREETS, COMMON AREAS, leaseholds,
condominiums, BUILDING groups or other features.
B. SUBDIVISION of land.
C. The following shall not be considered a LAND DEVELOPMENT:
1) The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling into not more than three (3) residential units,
unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
2) The addition of an accessory BUILDING, including fam1 BlJfLDINGS, on a LOT or LOTS subordinate to an
existing principal BUILDING; or
3) The addition or conversion of BL'ILDINGS or rides within the confines of an enterprise which would be
considered an amusement park. For purposes of this exemption, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area
used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly
acquired acreage by an amusement park until the initial PLANS for the expanded area haw been approved by the
municipality.
LANDSCAPE PLAN - A LANDSCAPE PLAN prepared by a landscape architect identifying each tree and shrnb by
size, type and scientific name, 8 & B or bare root, location together with a planting diagram and such other diagrams or
REPORTS necessary to show method of planting, staking and mulching, grass seeding specifications and mixtures.
LA TER,A..L - Pipes for utilities connecting individual BUILDI.'!GS to larger pipes called l'vLA..INS, trunks or interceptors
that usually are located in STREET RIGHTS-OF-WA'{.
8
LIGHTING - Artificial illumination as of walks, PARKING AREAS, STRUCTURES and outdoor features.
LIGHTING is defined and regulated in terms of the following characteristics:
A. Candlepower - the amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot distant from a light source to an intensity
of one foot candle. l\Iaximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light
source or luminaire.
B. Cutoff - the point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or luminaire are completely eliminated
( cutofl) at a specific angle above the ground.
C. Cutoff angle - the angle formed by a line dra\vn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line
perpendicular to the ground from the light source, above which no light is emitted.
D. Cutoff-type luminaire - a luminaire with elements such as shields, reflectors or fractor panels which direct and cut
off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than ninety degrees.
E. Foot-candle - a unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of \Vhich are one foot from a uniform point
source of one cancel.
F. Glare - the brightness ofa light source which causes eye discomfori.
G. Luminaire - a complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and
decorative parts.
H. Maximum permitted illumination - the maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at the interior
BUFFER YARD line at ground level in accordance with the standards of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
LOT- A designated part ofa SITE or a PARCEL, tract or area of land that is legally established by a plat or otherwise
as pennitted by law and to be used or built upon as a unit. A SITE or PARC EL may include more than one ( l) LOT,
but a LOT cannot include more than one ( l) SITE.
LOT, COR.'J'ER - A LOT ABL!T[ING two or more STREETS having an angle of intersection of not more than 135
degrees.
LOT LINE - A line bounding a LOT which divides one LOT from another or from a STREET or any other PUBLIC or
private space.
LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a LOT which extends along an existing or dedicated PUBLIC STREET, or
\vhcre no public streets exist, along a STREET.
LOT LINE. REAR - That boundary of a LOT which is most distant from, and is most nearly parallel to the FRONT
LOT LINE.
LOT LINE. SIDE - Any boundary of a LOT which is not a FRONT or REAR LOT LINE.
LOT. THROUGH -- LOTS having FRONTAGE on two STREETS, which ate approxin1ately parallel to one another
when AJH 1TTTI\G the LOT.
LOT \VIDTH - The distance berween the SIDE LOT LINES measured at the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY line or along
the front BUILDING line of the LOT on cul-de-sacs, as determined by the prescribed FRONT YARD requirements.
LOT. ZONl'.'JG - A LOT. unoccupied or occupied by a main structure. with or without accessory sttuctures. fronting on
a PCBLIC STREET or a street in a SUBDIVISION approved by the TO\VNSHIP and having thereon such open areas
as are required by this ordinance for one ( 1) of the uses pem1itted in the ZONI\iG DISTRICT in which it is located.
LOW-LEVE!. l'LA"JTING -- Consists of shrubs and any other plant species that is greater than two feet in height at
plantrng and kss than six feet 111 height at planting. All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent \Vith the
.''\merican Standards for Nursery Stock published hy the American Association of Nurserymen. Inc., Washington,
D.C.
9
MAIN - In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be connected.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE - A guarantee, in the form of FINANCIAL SECURITY, of facilities,
IiVfPROVEMENTS or work to insure the correction of any failures of any IMPROVEMENTS required pursuant to this
ORDfNANCE and any other North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP regulation, or to maintain the same.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION -A major SUBDIVISION as defined in Article 3 or this ORDINANCE.
MANHOLE - An inspection chamber whose dimensions allow easy entry and exit and working room for a PERSON
inside.
MARKER - A metal pipe or pin installed to delineate a specific location within a PARCEL of land or
DEVELOPMENT.
MINOR SUBDIVISION - A minor SUBDIVISION as defined in Article 3 or this ORDINANCE.
MONIBv1ENT - A concrete post installed to delineate a specific location within a parcel of land or DEVELOPMENT.
MOUNTABLE CURI3 - A low CURB with a flat slope designed to be crossed easily without discomfor1.
MOVING LANE - Any traffic lane where trnffic movement is the primary if not sole function.
MA WC - Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County.
MPC - Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
NHTMA - North Huntington TOWNSHIP Municipal Authority.
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE - Any use other than a RESIDENTIAL USE.
NOTICE, PUBLIC - See PUBLIC NOTICE.
OCCUPANCY - The physical possession upon, on or within any LOT or STRUCTURE for a use.
OCCUPANCY PERi\HT- A permit for the use or OCCUPANCY ofa BUILDING, STRUCTURE or LOT indicating
compliance with all provisions of the BUILDING code, ZONING ORDINANCE, and this ORDINANCE.
OFFICLl\L FILING DA TE -Upon the detem1ination by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR that an
APPLICATION is complete, per standards established Article III of this ORDINANCE, the date in which the 90 DAY
REVIEW PERlOD commences. That date shall be either the date of the first regular PLAN'NING COMMISSION
meeting following the determination that the application is complete, or thirty (30) clays after that determination,
whichever comes first.
OFFICIAL FORi\1- The standard fom1s, as amended and altered, distributed by the TOWNSHIP or any of its
representatives, requesting information associated with an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, its approval,
and post-approval requirements.
OFF-SITE - Located outside the SITE that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
OFF-SITE SE\NER SERVICE - TI1e disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary sewer system served by a central sewage
treatment plant approved by the Pennsylvama Department of Environmental Resources.
OFF-LOT- Located outside the LOT that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA - Any area arranged, designed, used or intended for use of parking and located \Vithin
the boundaries of a LOT or SITE.
ON-LOT - Located on the LOT in question.
01\'-SITE - Located on the PARCEL or LOT that is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPME>JT.
10
ON-LOT SE\VAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM- The disposal of sev,·age by use of septic tanks or other safe and healthful
means within the confines of the LOT in which the use is located and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
ONE HlJNDRED YEAR FLOOD - A FLOOD that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100)
years (i.e., that has a one percent (1 %) change of occurring each year, although the FLOOD may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE - Land set aside for public use as recreational sites, FLOOD PLAIN AREAS, nature trails, historical
sites or other areas where BUILDING is hazardous such as slide areas, undermined areas and other areas as designated
by the federal, state or TOWNSHIP agencies. Also common greens, yards, or other open areas intended for the sole
use of the residents and their guests provided in connection with PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS or
with residential buildings occupied by more than t\vo (1) families per LOT. A LOT, PARCEL, or parcels of land or a
body of water, portions thereof or a combination thereof within a DEVELOPMENT SITE for the use and enjoyment of
residents of a DEVELOPME::\"T. not including STREETS. OFF-STREET PARKING areas, and areas set aside for
PUBLIC FACILITIES.
ORDINANCE - The NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP SCBDIVISION A:t\D LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE adopted as Ordinance #1011, on August 16, 2000
OWNER - The PERSON or PERSONS having the right of legal title to, beneficial interest in, or a contractual right to
purchase a LOT or PARCEL of land.
PARCEL - Any designated piece or tract of land located in the TOWNSHIP established by a PLAT or otherwise as
permitted by law.
PARKING SPACE - A portion of a PARKING AREA not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long,
exclusive of driveways designed for the parking of only one ( l) vehicle which is accessible from the street.
PARKS AND RECREATION COMPREHE:'\'SIVE PLAN- A detailed plan assessing the future recreation needs and
plans of the TOWNSHIP \Vritten in accordance with standards defined in Section 503 of the MPC.
PASSIVE RECREATION- Any type of recreational activity, including hiking trails. picnic areas, etc., which does
not require the substantial alteration of the natural state of a SITE or any ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
areas of the SITE.
PAVING - Concrete or bituminous wearing surfaces \vith appropriate base consistent \Vith sound engineering practices.
"PAVING" shall not include tar and chip and other similar practices.
PERCOLATION TEST - A test designed to detem1ine the ability of ground to absorb water, and used to determine the
suitability ofa soil for DRAINAGE or for the use of an ON-SITE SEvVAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
PERFORIVlA.NCE GUARAJ\TEE - A FINANCIAL SECURITY to insure that all IMPROVEMENTS, facilities, or
work required by this ORDINANCE will be completed in compliance with the ORDINANCE, regulations, and the
approved PLANS and specifications of a DEVELOPMENT. Such FINANCIAL SECURITY includes a deposit of
cash, surety bond, certified check, negotiable securities, or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan
institution provided by the DEVELOPER and as required in the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
PERSON - An individual, partnership, PUBLIC or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit. PUBLIC utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
PHASI!\G PL.Al\- A PLAN showing the boundaries of each phase of DEVELOPMENT, planned dates for
constrncting the proposed phases. and any other required information.
PI-IOTO:tvffTRJC PLA~ - A plan showing the locations, areas, and intensity of illumination of all proposed
UC1I-ITING on a PLAl\.
PLAN - Drawings according to the provisions of this ORDINA>ICE prepared by a STA TE registered surveyor,
engineer or landscape architect for approval of a SUBDIVISION or a LAND DEVELOPMENT.
11
PLAl\'NED DEVELOPMENT - PLAN'NED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT.
PLANNED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - An area of land, controlled by a OvVNER, to be developed as a single
entity for commercial or industrial uses or a combination thereof, the DEVELOPMENT PLAN for which does not
necessarily correspond in LOT size, bulk type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, LOT coverage and required
open space to the regulations established in any one district under the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
PLAN1'i'ED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - An area of land, controlled by a OWNER, to be developed as an
single entity for a number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and NON-RESIDENTIAL USES the
DEVELOPMENT PLAN for which does not necessarily correspond in LOT size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use,
density, or intensity, LOT coverage and required OPEN SPACE to the regulations established in any one district under
the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR- The appointed Planning and Zoning Director of the Township of North
Huntingdon.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The PLANNING COIVHvlISSION of the TOWNSHIP ofN01ih Huntington.
PLANNING MODULE COMPONENTS (PMC) - The APPLICATION for sewage facilities planning for all LAND
DEVELOPMENT requiring revision of the TOWNSHIP Comprehensive Official Sewage Facilities Plan which is
submitted to the DEP, NHTMA, and the TOWNSHIP Planning Agency in compliance with PA Chapter 71 as revised
and with the PA Clean Streams Law and the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan
PLAT - A map, layout or PLAN of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, whether preliminary or final,
prepared in accordance with the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), know as the "Professional Engineers
Registration Law".
PLAT, FINAL - The final map of a SUBDIVISION which is filed for PLANNING COMMISSION
CONSIDERATION and BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS FINAL APPROVAL and, which if approved, shall be filed
with the Westmoreland County Recorder of Deeds and NHTMA.
POOR SOILS- The following soil associations according to the WESTOMORELAND COUNTY SOIL SURVEY:
A. Mine Dump Series;
B. Upshur Series;
C. Upshur-Gilpin Series;
D. Made Land Series.
E. Strip Mine Spoil Series.
F. Mine Wash Series
PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE - A required meeting between the DEVELOPER. contractor,
CONSTRUCTION inspectors and TOvVNSHIP representatives prior to the initiation of CONSTRUCTION for the
purposes of reviewing conditions, regulations and methods of CONSTRUCTION
PRELII'vlINARY PLAN or PLAT - The preliminaiy map, dr;nving or chaii indicating the proposed layout of a
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT which is filed for PLANNING COMMISSION consideration and
preliminary approval by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. A PLAN as required by and meetings the standards of
Article 3 of this ORDINANCE.
PRIVATE llvlPROVE\IE\iTS - All STREETS, walkways, GUTTERS, CURBS, SEWERS, water lines and other
utilities or related facilities, but not including DRIVEWAYS and PARKING AREAS, to be operated and maintained
by private entity, but which must be constrncted in accordance with the TOWNSHIP ordinances.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY - The area dedicated to the use of a PRIVATE STREET or other private purposes for the
use of OWNERS, residents or vtsitors of a PLANl\ED ECONOJ\HC DEVELOPMENT. PLAI"<'NED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOP!V!ENT, or LOT.
PRIVATE STREET - A STREET, including the entire PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY, which is intended for private use
and is a PRIVATE L\IPROVEMENT.
12
PUBLIC - Of or pertaining to land, BUILDINGS, structures, uses or activities owned, operated or controlled by the
TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon, the Norvvin School District, or other government agencies, federal, state or local
other than a detention facility.
PUBLIC HEARING - A fom1al meeting before the BOARD OF COi\!MISSIO'.';"ERS, PLA1''NING COMMISSION, or
ZONING HEARING BOARD held pursuant to PUBLIC NOTICE, which requires sworn testimony of all witnesses
and transcribing of all testimony. The intended purpose is to infom1 and obtain public comment prior to taking action in
accordance with the MPC (Act 24 7), as amended.
PUBLIC IMPROVE:-1.ENTS - All STREETS, walkways, GUTTERS, CURBS, SEWERS, water lines and other
utilities or related facilities to be dedicated to or maintained by the PUBLIC; and, if dedicated to and maintained by the
TOWNSHIP, must comply with the TOWNSHIP ordinances.
PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84 ), known as the
"Sunshine Act".
PUBLIC NOTICE - A notice published once each week for t\vo (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the TOW0/SHIP. Such notice shall state the time and place of the PUBLIC HEARING and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the PlJ13LIC HEARING. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30)
days or less than seven (7) days from the date ofthc PUBLIC HEARING.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE - Land designated as OPEN SPACE which is owned by the TO\VNSHIP or other
governmental agency and which is set aside for use by the general populace.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - The area dedicated to and accepted by the TOWNSHIP, COUNTY of the
Commonwealth for a PlillLIC STREET and other PUBLIC PURPOSES.
PL13LIC STREET - A paved STREET, thoroughfare or highway, including the entire PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY,
\vhich has been dedicated and accepted by the appropriate governmental body.
REAR BUILDING LL\"E - See BUILD NG LINE, REAR.
REAR LOT LINE - See LOT LINE, REAR.
REAR YARD - See YARD, REAR.
REPORT - Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any body, board, officer or
consultant other than a SOLICITOR to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such REPORT in the rendering of any DECISION or detem1ination. All REPORTS shall be deemed
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency. Any REPORT used, received
or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a detem1ination or DECISION shall be made available
for inspection to the APPLICANT and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be
provided at cost of reproduction.
RETAINING \VALL - A STRCCTURE erected bet\vcen land of different elevation to protect STRUCTURES and/or
to prevent the washing down or EROSION of earth from the upper slope level.
RIGHT-OF-\VA Y - Land occupied or intended to be occupied by a STREET, CROSS\VALK, railroad, utility,
PUBLIC facility amiior other special use.
ROAD - 'I11e entire nght-of-way of the public street or highway.
SFCRETARY: TOWNSHIP SECRETARY - TI1e Secretary of >Jorth Huntingdon TO\VNSHIP, \Vestrnoreland
COUNTY, Pennsylvania.
SEDL\1ENTA TION - A deposit of soil that has been transpo11ed from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or
other natural means as a product of EROSION.
SEO - The designated SEWAGE E>JFORCELv!ENT OFFICER ofl\"orth Huntingdon Township.
13
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-LOT - An installation on an individual LOT which utilizes an aerobic
bacteriological process for the elimination of solid wastes and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent,
subject to the approval of the SEO and issuance ofpem1it and as permitted by the DEP.
SEWER - Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away SEW AGE or storm \Vater nmoff from the generating source
to treatment plants or receiving streams.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) - The North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Sewage Enforcement Officer
(SEO), certified by the Department of Environmental Protection and appointed by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS.
SHOULDER - 111e graded part of the RIGHT-OF-WAY that lies between the edge of the paved CARTIVA Y and the
curbline.
SIDEWALK - A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a ROAD or TREE LAWN
\vithin the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
SIGHT DISTANCE - The maximum distance of unobstructed vision in a horizontal or vertical plane from within an
automobile located at any given point on a STREET.
SIGHT TRIANGLE - See CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE.
SITE - A PARCEL which is the subject of an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
SITE AREA - The total PARCEL area in a SITE as determined by a SURVEY prepared by a registered surveyor or
Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer.
SOLICITOR - The SOLICITOR of the TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon.
STAFF CONFERENCE - An initial meeting between DEVELOPERS and TOWNSHIP staff which affords both parties
the opportunity to identify and prepare for the probable requirements of a DEVELOPMENT proposal prior to
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN preparation and engineering.
STEEP SLOPES - Areas of existing topography \Vhere, in over a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, or \vhere the
difference in elevation is over twenty (20) feet, the slope equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) from the top
to bottom of the break in grade.
STORM WATER- the runoff of 'Nater from a SITE, as generated and impacted by a SITE.
STOR.Nf WATER DETENTION - The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of nmoff entering the natural drainage
pattern or storm DRA.INAGE SYSTEM by temporarily holding it in surface or subsurface area such as DETENTION
BASINS, reservoirs, rooftops, stTeets, parking lots, or within the DRAINAGE SYSTEM itselt~ and releasing the water
at a desired rate of discharge.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT or STORl\·1 WATER PLAN- The plan for managing storm water mnoff from a
specific SITE.
STORM WATER RETENTION - The slowing, dampenmg, or attenuating of nmoff entering the natural drainage
pattern or stom1 DRAINAGE SYSTEM by temporarily holding it in surface or subsurface areas such as retention
basins, or reservoirs and allowing the runoff to percolate into the ground.
STOR!vl SEWER- A sewer that carries intercepted surface water runoff, excluding domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STREET - An avenue, boulevard, ROAD, thoroughfare, highway. freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct, and any other \vays
used by \"t:hicular traffic or pedestrians but: not including driveways or PARKING AREAS. A STREET shall include
the following:
14
A. ARTERIAL STREET - ROADS intended to serve large volumes of traffic for long distance and high-speed travel
bet\veen or within communities or to and from COLLECTORS. An ARTERIAL STREET is a MAJOR STREET.
B. COLLECTOR STREET - ROADS which carry considerable volumes of local traffic and connect RESIDENTIAL
STREETS to ARTERIAL STREETS or to provide ACCESS to NON-RESIDENTIAL USES, Community Facilities
and ABUTfING properties, and which has direct ACCESS lin1ited to only NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
C. MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS - COLLECTOR STREETS which primarily function to provide direct
ACCESS to NON-RESIDENTIAL USES and which therefore carry traffic at lower speeds, connecting
RESIDENTL.\L STREETS and COLLECTOR STREETS.
D. RESIDENTIAL STREET - A STREET which primarily functions to provide direct ACCESS to ABUTIING
RESIDENTIAL USES.
E. HALF OR PARTIAL STREET - A ROAD, generally parallel and adjacent to a prope1ty line, having a lesser rightof-
way than nom1ally required for satisfactory IMPROVEl'vIENT and use of the STREET.
F. A !v1ARGINAL ACCESS STREET - A local service STREET that is parallel to a higher order STRl:ET which, for
safety. provides ACCESS to ABUTTING PARCELS and separation and protection from through traffic. A
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET may be designed as a RESIDENTIAL STREET or a MINOR COLLECTOR ROAD.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC - A STREET with only one outlet and having the other end designed and constructed for the
reversal of traffic movement. A cul-de-sac is a DEAD-END STREET tenninating in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET, LOOP - A STREET that has its only ingress and egress at two points on the same MINOR COLLECTOR
ROAD or COLLECTOR ROAD.
STREET CENTER LINE - A line which is usually at an equal distance from both street lines. or right-of-way lines.
STREET. PRIVATE - A street including the entire private right-of-way, \vhich is intended for private use and is a
PRIVATE IMPROVE\c!E:'\JT.
STREET, PUBLIC - A paved STREET, including the entire nght-of-\vay, which has been dedicated and accepted by
the appropriate governmental body.
STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in LOTS or water, whether or
not affixed to the LOT. STRUCTURE includes but is not lin1ited to BUILDINGS. garages, carports, FENCES, SIGNS,
or walls. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, OCCUPANCY or ornamentation whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of land or 'Nater is also a STRUCTURE.
SUBDIVISIO'.'J - 111e division or redivision of a LOT, tract or PARCEL of land by any means, into two (2) or more
LOTS. tracts. PARCELS or other divisions of land, including changes in existing LOT Lf't\:ES for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the cou1t for distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership or
I3UILDf't\:G or LOT DEVELOPME~T: provided, however, that the SUBD!VISIOl\l by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into PARCELS of more than ten ( 10) acres, not involnng any new STREET or EASEMENT of ACCESS or
residential dwellings shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED - \\There, in the judgment of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, at least 90% (based on
the cost of the required IIV1PROVE:V1E0!TS for which Ff't\:A)ICIAL SECURITY was posted pursuant to section 305.1)
of those IMPROVE\1ENTS required as a condition for FINAL APPROVAL have been completed in accordance with
the approved PLAN, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEY - A precise legal description of a LOT and the graphic delineation of precise LOT boundaries; LOT
dimensions and areas; all EASE);IENTS and PL:BLIC and private RIGHTS-OF-WAY: and north point and graphic
scale. affectmg the LOT, prepared by a professional land Surveyor licensed and registered in the Commomve::llth of
Pennsvl\·ama.
TOW~SHlP - 111e first Class TOWNSHIP of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP.
15
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STIJDY - A study completed by a traffic engineer or planner, as required by this
ORDINANCE which evaluates the in1pacts a DEVELOPMENT vvill have on the transportation system. Specifically,
the study determines the amount of traffic to be generated by the DEVELOPMENT; the capacity of the existing ROAD
net\vork and intersections to handle the increased traffic; and IMPROVEMENTS necessary to bring ROADS and
intersections up to the preferred level of service to accommodate such traffic.
TREE LAWN - The area in which trees, required by the standards of this ordinance are to be planted. Unless
otherwise approved, the TREE LAWN shall be located between property line of each lot and the SIDEWALK and
and shall be a minimum of four ( 4) feet wide.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN- The plan showing all locations and infom1ation required in section 516.3 of this
ORDINANCE which is used to evaluate the number of trees credited to the DEVELOPER and the corresponding
number to be planted per regulations of the aforesaid section.
TRIP - A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. TRIPS can be added together to
calculate the total number of vehicles expected to enter and leave a specific SITE over a designated period of time.
UNDEVELOPED OPEN SPACE- OPEN SPACE which is left in or restored to its natural state, including that used
for PASSIVE RECREATIONAL purposes, and requiring little regular maintenance.
WESTMORELAND COUNTY SOIL SURVEY - The most recent survey utilized by the COUNTY and the
Westmoreland County Conservation District.
WETLANDS - All areas regulated as wetlands by DEP or FEDERAL agencies.
·woODLANDS OVERLAY -A mapped area, maintained by the TOV/NSHIP, of continuous forest coverage, which
is updated using approved landscaping and TREE PRESERVATION PLANS per section 516 of this ordinance.
WWMA - Western Westmoreland Municipal Authority.
WYE - Point of connection of sanita1y lateral sewer with the main collection line.
YARD - An area on a ZONlNG LOT which is regulated by the ZONING ORDINANCE so as to be unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky.
YARD, FRONT - A YARD established by the FRONT SETBACK extending along the full length of the FRONT LOT
LINE between the SIDE YARDS.
YARD, REAR - A YARD established by the REAR SETBACKS extending along the full length of the REAR LOT
LINE betvveen the SIDE LOT LINES.
YARD, SIDE - A YARD established by the SIDE SETBACKS extending along the SIDE LOT LINES from the
FRONT YARD to the REAR YARD.
ZONING APPROVAL - Approval under the provisions of the ZONING ORDINANCE certifying that an
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT or APPLICATION for OCCUPANCY PERivlIT has fulfilled the
requirements of the ZONING ORDINANCE.
ZONING HEARING BOARD - 'foe Zoning Hearing Board of North Huntingdon TO\VNSHIP
ZONING OFFICER - The person delegated by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS to administer the ZONING
ORDINANCE.
ZONING DISTRICT - An area of the TOWNSHIP in \vhich regulations under the ZONP.\G ORDINANCE uniformly
apply.
ZONING ORDINA:\CE - The :\'orth Huntingdon TO\V:.JSHIP ZONING ORDrNA>JCE, ORDil\ANCE 765 as
cnackd and amended.
16
ARTICLE 3 - APPLICA TIO:\ REQl IIRE\IENTS
301 GE:\ERAL
Whenrn:r a SU3DIVISI00: or L\\1) DEVELOP\!E.\T withm the TO\Vl\Sl !IP is lks1red, an APPLICA TIO\' shall
bl'. submitted to the PL:\.'\,\J\iCI AND 70Nll\G DIRECTOR who shall submit the APPLICATIO!\', once it is
dl'tcmlined complete. according to Section 30.U I c ) of this Ordinance to thl'. PLA\'\II?\G CO\{\!ISSIO>J \\·ith a
REPORT on conformance with TO\V\:Sfl!P Ordmances. The PLA.\iJ\ifl\G CO.\L\1ISSIO\' shall re\lcw and make a
reconm1cndation on the :\PPLIC:\ TION and submit the APPLICATION and recommendation to the BOARD of
CO\L\IJSSIO\ERS. The 80 . .\RD of CO\l\l!SSIO:\ERS shall take action tu apprO\e. approve with condit1uns or
ckny the AP PUCA TIO.\ pursuant to this OIZDJ\IAN"CE.
302 CLASSIFICA TIO:\ OF APPLICA TIOJ\S:
:\l'l'UC\TIO'\S t\ir Sl 'BD!\'ISIO\' or lA'\D DLVELO!'\lE'iT shaII be classified based upon the follm\·ing critena
and dctin1t1n11. and shall bl· processl'.d according to the prov1srnns contamed w1tl1111 this Section.
302. l \L\JOR SLBDl\'ISIO:\S - A Sl BDl\'lSIOl\ that includes either· one or more of the following
characteristics:
A \lultiple phasing of the PL:\>!.
B. Conta1n111g PUBLIC !Ml'ROVUvILN'l S, 111cluding one or more of the foIIowing: STREETS, STORtv!
\\' . .'..TLR DLIL\'TIO\' and STOR.\I \\'ATLR RLIT:'.\!TIOJ\ facilities and puhlic utilities.
C. Location\\ 1th111 an area defined w1tbin the E~VIRON"\!fNTAI.T Y SE:\SITIVE OVERLAY
D. Proposes 0:\-IOT SEWAGE DrSPOSAL SYSTEM(S)
302.2 \Il~OR ST'BDIVISIOI\"S: A SUBDIVISION not including any of the d1aracteristics mcluded in the :--.TAJ OR
SUBDIVISIO\' category. In general. a :VllNOR SUBDIVISION involves the adjustment of LOT LINES for existing
LOTS and or the cre:nion of new LOTS that are already sef\"iced by a Pt'BLIC ROAD, public utilities. a previously
approved on-LOT septic system and arc not located in the ENVIRONMENTALLY SEl\SITIVE OVERLAY.
302.3 \II:\"OR L.\~D DE\'ELOP\1£'-;TS: A SITE plan for a new non-residential DEVELOP'.'v!E:\T located on
one ( 1) LOT. including a CIL\"JGL Cff USE frurn an existing BliILDING ur Lmd area to a '.'JOi'\-RFSIDE:\TIAL
LSE that also affects the land area in one or more of the follm\ mg ways:
A. Addnional parkmg requirements, not currently bemg met on the sl!e:
B. :\cw or improved STORM WATER MAN"AC1EMENT SYSTEMS:
C Changl'. m ingress. egress or traffic circulatrnn:
D. Required landscaping and huller IMl'ROVUv1E!'J"TS necessitated by the development.
302A \L\JOR LA~D DE\'ELOP\IE:\"TS: .\ S!IT PL\:\ for a new :-JO'\-RESIDE:\TIAL DL\"I-:IO!'\IE'\ I
located Ill two (2) lots or more. and all multi-family developments on one (1) LOT or more. Any LAND
DE\TLOP\ff'\JT that mcludes the constructJ()n of ne\\" public or PRIVATr STREETS amVor is located w1th111 an
E\VIRO:\:--.IE:\T:\l!Y Sf'\S!Tl\.E i\REA shall be categorized as a ;-..1:\JOR L.\l\D DEVELOP\IE'.\T
302.5 PRELI\IARY and Fl:\AI. APPRO\'..\L The APPLICX\T shall be required to suhmit a
PRELl\11\iARY PL\:\ APPLICATION for all projects categorized as J\L\JOR SU13DIVISJOJ',;S and \IAJOR
L:\'\D f' 1 \'ELOP\lE'.\TS. The :\ PPI.JCA>JT may elect to combine the PRELIMf\iARY and ff\iAL APPROVAL
procedures for one appro\ al process by meetmg submission requirements for PRELI\ 1I:\A.R Y and Fl;\ AL
Al'PRO\'.\L . Based upon the re\·iew uf tl11s sub1rnssion. the PLANN!N(] CO:VL'v1ISSION may grant FINAL
APPRO\.:\L . pronded that the .\PPT.JCA TIO'\ meets all the prescribed requirements of this section for granting
or apprn\ ,ii.
:\PPLIC.\TIO:\S classified as \II'\JOR LAl\D DEVl~LOP\lE:'.'.JTS or MINOR SUBDIVISIO"\IS may be granted
fl:\:\L .\PPRO\._.\L \\tthout submission requirements nl'.eded for PRLI.I:\11?\ . .\RY ,\PPROV:\L. with thL·
exccptiun that the PL\\''\!:\ Ci CO\l:VIISSION m their renew of the tv!Il\OR LA>ID DEVELOP\IL\'T or Ml'.'iOR
Slll3Dl\"ISIO'\ may require additional information of the APPLICANT before acting on FINAL APPROVAL.
_)02 (J Sl'Il\l!SSIO~ REQl'lRE\IE:Yl'S FOR APPLICATIONS PER CLASSIFICATIO~. Based upon the:
class1fic~1t10n of the :\l'PLIC:\TIO\:. the :\Pl'LICANT Table . below. shall be used as a gmde m dctt:rnnnmg
applicat1llll rc4u1rcrncnts·
17
Table I
Minor Minor LA..:'l"D Major Major LAND
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPJVIENT SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT
Sections 303.3; x x x x
304.1, 304.6
Sections: x x
304.2;304.3; 304.4
Section 304.5 x x
This table serves as a guide only. Any questions on the applicability of any of the submission requirements for a
particular APPLICATION, shall be determined by the PLAf'l'NING AND ZONING DIRECTOR who should be
contacted prior to the submission of the APPLICATION.
303. PRE APPLICATION l\IEETINGS
303.1 STAFF CONFERENCE
Prior to submitting any APPLICATION, whether PRELIMINARY or FINAL, the APPLICANT is encouraged to
attend a STAFF CONFERENCE with the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR. The purpose of the STAFF
CGNFERENCE is to obtain all necessary APPLICATION forms, requirements and ordinance information from the
TOWNSHIP prior to the APPLICANT incmTing substantial expenses of SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT
PLAN preparation :md to detemline the classification of the APPLICATION, whether it be a MINOR or MAJOR
SUI3DIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
303.2 ADVISORY MEETING WITH PLANNING COM~USSION
APPLICANTS are encouraged to discuss SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS with the PLANNING
COMMISSION prior to the fom1al submission of PRELIMINARY or FINAL APPLICATIONS. Prior to submitting
any APPLICATION, the DEVELOPER may participate in an ADVISORY MEETING with the PLANNING
COMMISSION held during a regular meeting of the PLANNING COMMISSION. The purpose of the ADVISORY
MEETING is to review the proposed DEVELOPMENT and DEVELOPMENT SITE to identify issues which should
be addressed in the APPLICATION. Tl1e ADVISORY MEETING affords an opportunity to both the APPLICANT
and the PLANNING COMMISSION to discuss the proposed project on an informal basis. At the ADVISORY
MEETING the APPLICANT may discuss applicable regulations governing the SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT of the property and the feasibility and timing of the APPLICATION. THE PLANNING
COMMISSION may comment upon the proposed APPLICATION. No approval or disapproval of the APPLICATION
shall be given. The request for an advisory meeting hall not constitute an APPLICATION and shall not trigger the
required time period review as specified in the MPC. An APPLICANT desiring to participate in an ADVISORY
MEETING shall submit the official form with required information to the PLANNING DIRECTOR within two (2)
weeks of the regular PLANNING COMMISSION meeting.
303.3 GENERAL APPLICATION SUBlVIISSION REQUIREME:\'TS AND jAPPLICATIOJ\ PROCESSING
A. All APP LI CA TIO NS for a SLBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be submitted on official fonns
prepared by the PLA>INING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT.
B. All APPLICATIO'.\S shall be submitted to the PLANNIJ\G AND ZONNG OFFICE no later than the close
of business day t\venty-one calendar (21) days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the PLANNING
corvrtv1ISSION. Any APPLICATlO'.\S submitted after this period shall be considered at the following monthly
meeting
C. Upon submission. the APPL!CA T!Ol\" shall be reviewed by the PLANNING Al\"D ZONING DIRECTOR to
18
determine its completeness. In order for an APPLICATION to be determined to be complete and considered filed
and placed on the PLANNING COMMISSION agenda, it shall include:
1) 1l1e correct number of copies of all plats and REPORTS, as referenced in this article.
2) !Vleet all requirements for submission based on the classification of the plan, as indicated in Table I, per its
classification. The review of the submission requirements shall not include a review of the correctness of the
PLAN, but rather a review that the required items for review have been submitted.
3) Include the appropriate APPLICATION fee, per the Comprehensive Fee Ordinance of the TOWNSHIP of
North Huntington, Ordinance 1001, as amended.
4) Include all original signatures of all property OWNERS or agents for property OWNERS involved in the
APPLICATION;
5) Evidence of filing of all necessary permits from any regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the project.
D. OFFICIAL FILING DATE: W11en the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR'S initial review has
detennined that the APPLICATION satisfies the requirements applicable thereto and, with the exception of
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT approval, is in full compliance with this chapter the
APPLICATION shall be accepted. Such acceptance shall establish the APPLICATION'S OFFICIAL FILING
DA TE and will be placed on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled PLANNING COMMISSION meeting. 1l1e
90-DA Y REVIEW period shall start at the first regular meeting of the PLANNING COMMISSION. Provided that
said meeting should occur more than 30 davs following the OFFICIAL FILING DATE of the APPLICATION,
the 90 DAY REVIEW PERJOD shall be ~easured fro~n the 30'h day following the day the APPLICATION has
been determined to be filed.
E. If the APPLICATION is detemiined to be incomplete, per the standards contained in Section 303.3 (c) of this
Ordinance, the APPLICA:t-.:T shall be notified in writing and all submitted documents shall be returned to the
APPLICANT, including the APPLICATION fee with a letter indicating the APPLICATION deficiency (s). The
APPLICATION shall not be considered by the PLANNING COMMISSION until it is filed with all required
components, and shall not constitute the starting of the 90 DAY REVIEW PERJOD.
F. APPLICATIONS detem1incd to be complete shall be reviewed for compliance with all applicable
TOWNSHIP Ordinance requirements by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, who shall also forward
copies of the APPLICATION and PLANS to the TO\\TNSHIP ENGI"'.\EER, NHTMA and WESTMORELAND
COUNTY PLANNING DEPART:VIENT for their review cormnents. '!be COUNTY shall submit its review
comments within thirty (30) days of receipt of the PLAN to the PLAN1'!ING A'.'JD ZONING DIRECTOR. The
NHTMA and TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall submit review conunents within fifteen ( 15) days of PLAN receipt to
the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR.
G. The PLANNI:t-.:G AJ\:'D ZONING DIRECTOR shall submit a REPORT to the PLAN'NING COMMISSIO:t-.:
listing any revie\V comments and questions on the APPLICATION prior to the regularly scheduled PLANNING
COMMISSION meeting. A copy of this REPORT shall also be sent to the APPLICANT.
H. After presentation of the APPLICATION at its meeting by the APPLICANT, the PLANNING
COMMISSION shall fornard its recommendations in writing to the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and the
APPLICANT. Any PLAN recommended with conditions shall include a listing of those conditions. In cases of a
recommendation for deniaL PLA.:t-.:Nll\'G COMl\IISSION shall cite reasons from the TOWNSHIP ordinances and
other applicable codes.
I. The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall render its DECISION to approve. approve with conditions, or
deny the APPLICATION taking into consideration the recommendations of the PLANNING COMMISSION and
the COUNTY Planning Department. Such DECISION shall be communicated to the APPLICANT not later than
ninety (90) days after the APPLICATION is filed with the PLANNING COMMISSION.
J. The DECIS!Ol\ of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the
APPLICANT personally or mailed to !um/her at his/her last known address not later than fifteen ( 15) days
following the DECISION.
K. Tii'vlE EXTENSION. Ir during the review of the PLAN, the PLA:\NING CO:VIMISSION or the BOARD OF
CO\li\llSSlO:\ERS desires addnional time to consider the APPLIC'ATI01"' FOR a PRELI:Vll::\IARY APPROV.\L
or FINAL APPROVAL, the APPLICANT may \vaive the ninety (90) day time limitation established by law·, and
grant the BOARD Of COM\!ISSlO'.\IERS an additional review period for a time prescribed by the APPLICANT.
ll1is extension shall be accomplished only in a signed. written agreement on the part of the APPLICANT. In the
19
event that no such time extension is offered by the APPLICANT and it is determined that the APPLICATION does
not meet requirements prescribed in this ORDrNANCE, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall deny the
PLAN according to procedures established herein.
L. PUBLIC HEARING. Before acting on any APPLICATION, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may hold a
PUBLIC HEARING after PUBLIC NOTICE.
M. Approval with Conditions. An APPLICATION may be granted PRELIMINARY APPROVAL or FrNAL
APPROVAL subject to specific conditions. These conditions shall be included in the written communication to
the APPLICANT. In addition, such written communication shall include notification that unless the APPLICANT
agrees to the conditions, then the APPLICATION is denied in accordance with this ORDrNANCE. Said
notification shall be mailed to the APPLICANTS last known address within 15 days of the granting of
APPROVAL with conditions by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The APPLICANT shall notify the
TOWNSHIP in writing of his or her acceptance or rejection of the conditions of approval. If the APPLICANT
does not so notify the TOWNSHIP within 15 days , the APPROVAL shall automatically be rescinded without
written notice to the APPLICANT.
N. PLANS gaining only PRELIMINARY APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS will require
FINAL APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS through the filing of an APPLICATION meeting
all requirements of the ordinance for FINAL APPROVAL and satisfying any conditions attached to the
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
0. Failure of the TOvVNSHIP to render a DECISION and communicate it to the APPLICANT within the time
and in the manner required herein shall be deemed a PRELIMINARY APPROVAL or a FINAL APPROVAL for
all APPLICATIONS already granted a preliminary approval and for all MINOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND
DEVELOPMENTS. Approval of the APPLICATION in terms as presented shall be assumed unless the
APPLICANT has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of the presentation
of the DECISION, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation shall have
like effect.
304 DRAFTING STA,~DARDS At'\TD REQUIREMENTS
304.1 AH APPLICATIONS for SVBDIVlSIONS or LAND DEVELOPMENTS for all APPUCATIONS
submitted shall adhere to the follo\ving standards and specifications. Any PLAN submitted on multiple sheets
shall include these drafting standards on all sheets, as applicable.
A. Completed and Signed APPLICATION Forms
B. Fourteen (14) copies of the PLAN or record for a SUBDIVISION or the master PLAN for a LAND
DEVELOPMENT. Three (3) copies of PLAN detail sheets and other detailed PLANS (EROSION and
sedimentation; utilities; STOR.Ivf \VATER management; landscaping, etc.) The number of copies required may
be adjusted by the PLANNI"NG AND ZONING DIRECTOR as pmt of the application form.
C. Application Fee, per TOWNSHIP FEE SCHEDULE, as amended.
D. ThePLANshallbedrawnatascaleof1"""10', 1"=20', 1"=30', 1"-40', 1"=50' or 1"=100'
E. Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets. Sheets shall be
24" x 36". Plats to be recorded at the Westmoreland County Courthouse shall be 18" x 24" and meet other
applicable standards of the \Vestmoreland County Recorder's Office
F. Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to
t\VO decimal places with the bearing placed in a counterclockwise direction around the proposed LOT or LOTS.
G. The PLAN shall bear a li:gend to indicate clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.
H. The PLAN shall include the names, COU?--ITY deed book references, :ind ZONf\fG DISTRICT of all
adjoining property OWNERS.
20
I. The boundary line of the SUBDIVISION shall be shown as a heavy dashed line. The pattern of the dashed
line shall be shown as one long dash followed by two short dashes. The boundary line of the PLAN shall
include the entire area of all parcels involved in the PLAN.
J. A graphic scale, north arrow and date shall be shown on all PLANS.
K. A title block containing the proposed name of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, the project
number assigned by the fim1 that prepared the PLANS, the PLAN date and dates of all PLAN revisions.
L. SITE location map, taken from a USGS quadrangle map. The location map shall be at scale and size
sufficient to sho\v clearly where the project is.
M. The existing platting of land ABUTTING SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. All existing
BUILDINGS, SEWERS, water mains, fire hydrants, CUL VER TS, petroleum or high-pressure gas lines and
other utilities on or \vithin 200 feet of the SITE shall be shown.
N. EASEMENTS and locations, widths and purposes.
0. All existing streets, on or adjacent to the tract, including name, right-of-way width and CARTWA Y width
shall be shown.
P. If applicable, a notation on the plat that ACCESS to a State highway shall only be authorized by a highway
occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania Depattment of Transportation under Section 420 of the State
Highway Law (P.L. 1242, No. 428 of June 1, 1945).
Q. 111e location of all MGN1jMENTS and LOT MARKERS as regulated in section 515 of this ORDINANCE.
R. A place on the PLAT for approval by the PLANNING C0!\1MISSION, the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS and review by the Westmoreland County Planning Department, and place on the PLAN
for seals of the professional preparing the PLAN, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, the Westmoreland
County Planning Department; the Recorder of Deeds
S. Certification by a registered Surveyor to the effect that the PLAT represents a SURVEY made by him, and
that all MONU:tvlENTS mdicated thereon actually exist and their location, size and material are correctly
shown. And that all engineering requirements of this ORD I>/ AN CE have been fully complied with.
T. The name and address of the DEVELOPER and, if the DEVELOPER is not the OWNER, the name and
address of the OWNER
U. The source of the title to the land as sho\vn on the books of the County Recorder
V. The name, address, certification and seal of the registered engineer and/or Surveyor, or landscape architect
who prepared the PLAT and the professional registered Surveyor who did the SURVEY shown on the PLAT.
\V. Schedule of ZONE\'G DISTRICT requirements , including area and bulk regulations, BUILDING and yard
requirements, and zoning of the parcel(s) to be developed and adjoining properties. FRONT SETBACKS as
required l-iy the ZOJ'\lNG ORDINANCE. ZONING DISTRICT for the subject tract and all adjoining properties.
X. Variances or other zoning approvals which have been requested or have been granted by the TO\VNSHIP.
Y. A copy of the deed for the subject tract and/or an option agreement, lease-purchase agreement or other
such document or instrument conveying to the APPL!C ANT a right of possession to or an interest in the
property \\ithm the proposed SU3DIVJS!ON or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
Z. Etility feasibility: REPORTS from all utilities expected to service the proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOP.\1ENT. which at a minimum shall include a letter as to whether the utility has the capability and
facilities to serve the proposed SL'RD!VISION or LAND DEVELOP:V!ENT.
21
AA. For APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT of SITES along the municipal boundary, information
pertaining to zoning in the adjacent municipality. Approval may be required by the adjoining municipality if
the DEVELOPMENT is partially located in that municipality.
BB. Digital Files. Submitted PLATS must also be submitted in a digital format such that they may be directly
imported into the TOWNSHIP'S geographical information systems in a manner consisten: with the standard
outlined in Appendix B of this ORDINANCE.
304. 2 APPLICATION Requirements for lHAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LA1'l"D DEVELOPMENTS.
In addition to the requirements stated in Section 304.1 , the following submission requirements in Sections Three
and Four shall apply for MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS:
304.3 EXISTING CONDITIONS
If applicable, the boundaries of the TOvVNSHIP'S ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY and the
following information within those boundaries:
A. Contours, shown at two foot vertical intervals or ten foot intervals where slopes exceed 40%. Show
existing contours with dashed lines and number clearly. State location and elevation of datum to which contour
elevations refer. Datum used shall be a known, established benchmark. Contours plotted from U.S.G.S.
quadrangle maps shall not be acceptable. The benchmark used shall be cited and labeled with the elevation and
the northing and easting coordinates on the State Plane coordinate system.
B. Delineation of STEEP SLOPE area(s), with categories of slope oriented as follows: ( 1) 25 to 40 percent;
(2) over 40 percent, accurately depicted and noted on the plat.
C. Identification of soil series as shown in the SOIL SURVEY OF WESTMORELA".'JD COUNTY. Plot soil
limit lines on the base map.
D. If any part of the site lies within a flood plain, as indicated on a certified FEMA map, plot the floodway
and I 00-year flood plain boundary on the map and reference the conm1unity panel number, map name, date and
map panel numbers.
E. All WETLANDS as delineated in the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY and/or othenvise
classified as such by STA TE or Federal Agencies.
F. Potentially hazardous features, including quarry sites, surface and subsurface mines and undermined areas,
including location of all areas of subsurface mining on the site with less than one hundred ( 100) feet of cover.
G. Significant cultural features, including cemeteries, burial sites, archaeological sites, historic buildings,
structures, plaques and MARKERS, or MONUMENTS.
H. Existing surface water resources such as watercourses, streams and ponds, and other natural drainage
features.
304..t PROPOSED CONDITIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
A. 11le proposed STREET layout in the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT including STREETS,
ROADS, ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, or other means of ACCESS located on the site. The PLAT
must include name, jurisdiction of ownership. \Vidth, type and location of right-of-way, and existmg grades and
types of CURBS.
B. The layout of LOTS (showing scaled dimensions). LOT numbers in sequence, and the areas of LOTS m
square feet.
C Portions of the SITE or PARCELS proposed to be reserved for schools. parks, playgrounds or other PUBLIC
semi-public or community pmvoses and all proposed HvlPROVEiv!ENTS for these ponions.
D. Proposed EASElvlENTS. locations, \vidths and pllllJOSes.
22
E. Proposed PUBLIC I~PROVE'vIENTS. TI1e SIZe of each shall be shovm and the locations or distances to each
existing utility indicated.
F. Tabulation of SITE data. total acreage of land to be subdivided, the number of LOTS, the acreage of
individual lots, the acreage of the SUBDIVISION and the acreage of proposed OPEN SPACE and recreation areas.
G. Four (4) sets of DETAILED CONSTRlJCTION DRA WNGS for PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS prepared by a
registered Professional Engineer. Such drawings shall:
1) Be drawn at a scale cited in 304.1 (D) of this ORDINA~CE on sheets of twenty-four by thirty-six (24" x 36")
inches .. \fore than one (I) sheet may be used for large parcels, but each sheet shall be properly indexed.
2) Be designed in confom1ance with the design standards established in this ordinance and in other applicable
TOWNSHIP. COUNTY, STATE and federal codes and regulations.
3) Include a plan and profile of each STREET \Vithin the SITE and at least l\vo hundred (200) feet beyond the
edge of the SITE, including labels showing the SIGHT DISTANCE at each intersection.
4) Contain at least three (3) cross sections at intervals not to exceed one hundred (100) feet and extending fifty
( 50) feet on each side of the STREET CENTER LINE or l\venty-five (25) feet outside of the STREET
lUGHT-OF-WA Y, whichever is greater.
5) Complete curve data for all curves included in the PLAN.
6) Indicate the location of all necessary SEV/ERS, MANHOLES and catch basins.
7) Show DRAINAGE EASEMENTS over private property and label them as PUBLIC or pnvate.
8) Show the top and invert elevation of each inlet and MANHOLE, together with the GRADE of each SEWER
line.
9) Show the GRADE line, material, distance and pipe size of each line in the stom1 DRAINAGE SYSTE!'v1
within the plan and any storm DRA.INAGE SYSTEM in1mediately adjacent to the SITE. Show the pem1it
number if connections are made to P ADOT STORM SEWERS.
10) Show the location of each WYE as proposed for installation.
304.5 ADDITIONAL ITEMS REQUIRED FOR MINOR AND MAJOR LAND DEVELOPl\IENTS. The
APPLICAJ\T may request \vaivers from the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR for any of these requirements
who may determine them to be inapplicable for submission in the APPLICATION.
A. The location and dimensions (in square fret) of planned principal and accessory buildings, including basement
area, loading and unloading areas. If the calculation of PARKING SPACES required, per the ZONING
ORDINANCE is a function of square footage of the proposed use, a detailed floor plan shall be submitted.
B. The proposed use, location, area. height, and bulk of all proposed structures and din1ensions of all yards.
C. Patterns of pedestrian and vehicular circulation on-site and on adjacent STREETS to show ingress, egress,
and circulation m and out of the SITE.
D. Provisions for OFF-STREET PARJ(E\[G AREA to include the layout of parking areas and a computation of
the number of PARKING SPACES to be provided.
E. Provisions for offsn·eet loading facilities.
F. Proposed plantmg and landscaping with specific locations. sizes, species and quantities; proposed open space
and buffers; and screening and fencing for storage and dumpster areas, as required by this Ordinance and the
ZONING ORD~ANCE.
G. Location and specifications for lighting of parking areas and \Valkways, including lighting detail and a
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN.
H. Any other requirements for that specific ZONING DISTRICT, pursuant to the ZONING ORDINANCE.
I. Location, size, and specifications for PRlVA TE IMPROVEMENTS, such as curbs, SIDEWALKS,
DRIVEWAYS, parking areas, fencing, signs, landscaping, planters, outdoor lighting and wheel stops.
J. Proposed fire lanes.
K. Location, size and specifications for PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
L. Location, size and specifications for stom1 se\vers, STORtVf WATER MANAGEMENT facilities, sanitary
sewers, water lines, and fire hydrants.
!vL Elevation drawings for all proposed BUILDINGS.
N. A plan drawn to scale showing the front, rear and side perspectives of proposed BlJILDING(s) shall be
submitted. Such plan shall include the BUILDING'S architectural features, exterior BUILDING materials, first
floor elevations, the height of the BUILDING in feet, the number of stories, and the BUILDING'S relationship to
the finished GRADE immediately surrounding the BUILDING.
304. 6 REPORTS AND PERlVIITS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS A..~D LAND DEVELOPlWENTS
Unless exempted by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, the following REPORTS and permits shall be
required as part of the submission of an APPLICATION:
A. A STORM WATER lvlANAGEMENT PLAN, per requirements of this Ordinance and the STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Ordinance# 820, as amended of the TO\VNSHIP of North Huntingdon.
B. An EROSION and Sedimentation Plan approved by the WESTMORELAND COUNTY
CONSERVATION DISTRICT. APPLICATIONS at a minimum shall require submission of the PLANS
submitted to the Conservation District \Vi th a dated letter of transmittal.
C. ROAD and GRADING PLANS, and phasing and engineering infonnation deemed necessary for
consideration of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, if applicable.
D. A PHASING PLAN and schedule shall be required for all DEVELOPMENTS proposed for
CONSTRUCTION in stages. This schedule shall include a proposed schedule for the filing of APPLICATIONS
FOR FINAL APPROVAL for each phase.
E. ENVIRONMENT AL CONSTRAINTS STIJDY which details the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
features on the SITE and provides information on how the DEVELOPMENT is planned not to interfere with these
features and/or how all applicable local, state and federal regulations are being complied with;
F. Sewerage feasibility study, PERCOLATION TESTS and other evaluations of the SITE'S suitability for
ON-SITE sewage disposal as required by Section 509.2 of this ORDINANCE.
G. Other studies authorized by TOWNSHIP Ordinances and deemed necessary by the PLANNING AND
ZONING DIRECTOR, THE TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER or the PLAl'iNlNG COMMISSION at the ADVISORY
MEETING;
H. Other studies required by State or COUNTY regulations or which are deemed necessary under such
regulations by the PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, THE TO\VNSHIP E"N"GINEER, or the
PLANNING COMMISSION at the advisory meeting.
I. TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY (TIS): Per requirements of Section 416 of this Ordinance.
J. Water quality and adequacy evaluations as required by Section 509.2 of this ORDINANCE.
K. The executed AGREEMENT with the NHT:'v!A lv!unicipal Authority or the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County or the LETfER OF APPROVAL from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection indJCating approval of private water supplies.
L. PLANNING :VIODLLE COl\IPONPHS submission to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
for all sanitary SEWERS:
l\1. Roadway OCCUPANCY submissions to State, COUNTY or TO\V0JSHIP as required to provide SITE
ACCESS and service:
~. Permits or pemLit subrrnssions required by TO\VNSHIP Ordinances or which are deemed necessary by the
PLAN'.\'ING AND ZO>!NG DIRECTOR or PLANI\"I>.'G COl\!MISSION at the STAFF CONFERENCE or
PRE-APPLICATION COl\FERE\:CE:
24
0 Permits or permit APPLICATION submissions required by Federal, STA TE or COUNTY regulations or
which are deemed necessary under such regulations by the PLAN~rNG AND ZONfr.:G DIRECTOR or
PLA\1'."L\G CO\I\HSSIO:.:. Such pe1mits and APPLICATIO'.\S include but are not limited to those required for
Flood Plain !'vlanagement, STOR1v1 \I/ATER \fanagcment, Clean Streams Law Penni!, NPDES (National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System) permit. and DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AL PROTECTION
(DEP) Planning Module pennits and NHTIVIA pemlits.
304. 7 EXEMPTIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES AND WAIVER PROVISIONS
A. Exemptions Based On Plan Charactenstics. 111e PLAl\).;J\;G A:\D ZO:\I:\'G DIRECTOR may waive the
submiss10n or an ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS STUDY and documentation of natural features per the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY for l'LAl\S that involve a boundary line revision creating no
additional lots or a LAND DEVELOPME:\T involving a CHAT\GE OF USE. Said waiver may be granted
prornled that the areas of the ENVIRONMH~TALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY lying within the PLAN'S SITE
are 111 no way adversely impacted by effects of the proposed DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION.
B. Waiwrs. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR may waive APPLICATION requirements per the
E\YIRO:\'ME]'.;TALL Y SE:'.\'.SITIVE OVERL\ Y based on a demonsnated degree of absence of all features
constiniting the OVERtA Y. 1l1e APPLICANT shall provide information demonstrating the absence or the degree
of absence of said features at the STAFF CONFERENCE or prior to the OFFICIAL FILING DA TE of the
APPLICATIO'.\. 1l1e waiver. a zoning determination. shall be final but may be appealed to the ZONI.0.'G
HEARL\G I30ARD under the provisions of the ZONf:\'G ORDNANCE.
C. Reclassification of Application Type. If the aforementioned waiver of APPLICATION requirements per the
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVER.LAY 1s granted. a reclassification of a MAJOR SUBDIVISION or
Y1AJOR LAND DEVELOP~1ENT as a MINOR SCBDIVISION or ML\OR LAND DEVELOP.'v1ENT may be
granted by the PLANNING A1'<TI ZONING DIRECTOR if no other criteria in the APPLICATION would classify
the PLAN as a MAJOR SlJI3DIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
304.8 ITE:'\IS EXEMPTED FROM PLA~ SUBi'\llSSIO!\S WHERE APPLIC~Yr SEEKS O"iLY
PRELli\Ul'iARY APPROVAL. In the event that an APPLICANT elects only to seek PRELIMINARY
APPROVAL of a SUI3IDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, the following items shall be exempt from the
submission requirements of PLANS submitted with the intention of receiving unly preliminary approval.
A. FINAL !'LAN for recording
B. DETAILED CONSTRUCTION ORA WINGS of PUBLIC IMPROVEl\IENTS.
C. F ma! Penrnts from ST A TE or Federal Agencies.
D. The PLANNING COl\1MISSION may require additional information on all aspects of the PRELIMINARY
APPLICATION in order to recommend approval of the plan andlor impose conditions on requinng more
infom1ation and pem1it approvals in order to gain Ff.\iAL APPROVAL .
305 POST-APPROVAL REQUIREl\'IENTS
305.1 PERFOR.\lAt~CE GCARAi\TEE AND FINA:-.ICIAL SECURITY
A. Nu PLAN shall be recorded or permits issued until as a condition for the approval of a FINAL PLAT, the
UL\' ELOPER shall provide. for deposit with the TOWJ\iSHIP. a PERFORMAl\CE CiUARA::-.;TEE in the form of
a Fll\A?"CIAL SECL'RITY. The amount of the Fl:\A:\'ClAL SECURITY shall be sufficient to cover the costs of
PU BI.IC IiVIPROVEMENTS and common ameniues including, but not limited to ROADS, STORM WATER
DETENTION and/or RETENTION BASINS. and other related DRAINAGE FACILITIES, recreational facilities.
open space [\1PROVFv!ENTS. landscaping, and buffers or screen plantings which may be required. by this
ORUI"iA.'JCE and. or as show11 on the Fl:'-JA[. PLAT.
B. The amount of Fl\i.•\'.\CIAL SECLRITY to be posted for the completion of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
shall be equal to 110° ;, of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the DEVLLOPER. The amount of th<:: Fl.'JANCIAL SECURITY shall be based on a cost estimate
submitted by the DEVELOPER or be prepared by the TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER at the DEVELOPER'S request.
Thl.' cost esumate shall be cert1t!ed as bemg "a fair and reasonable estimate" of the cost of PUI3LIC
l\ll'RO\.E\11;"-'TS.
C n1e FI:\AJ\CL~L SECURITY shall prn\·ide for. and secure to the Pl TJ.3I.IC. the completion of any PUBLIC
l\!PRO\T\1L'.'\TS as required 111 the FI:\.\L APPROV,.\L wllhm twenty-four (24) months of the approval. or
25
within another time period, mutually agreed upon by the DEVELOPER and the TOWNSHIP. In those
circumstances separate bonds shall provide for those PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS with a longer time period. The
amount of the FINANCIAL SECURITY may be adjusted annually in accordance with Section 509 (t) of the
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
D. Federal or Commonwealth of Pem1sylvania chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and
restrictive or ESCROW accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable forms of FINANCIAL
SECURITY. Such FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be posted with a bonding company or a federal or
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania chartered lending institution chosen by the party posing the FINANCIAL
SECL'RITY, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct business within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. At the request of the APPLICANT, the TOWNSHIP shall furnish the APPLICANT with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the APPLICANT'S FINAL PLAT contingent upon the obtaining of a
satisfactory FINANCIAL SECURITY. The FINAL PLAT shall not be signed by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS until a satisfactory FINANCIAL SECURITY is presented.
F. The DEVELOPER shall also pay the required inspection fee, per Section 602.2 of this Ordinance, and the
fee for required fire hydrants and street signs prior to the release of the PLAN for recordation.
305. 2 DEVELOPIHENT AGREEMENT
The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, shall require that the DEVELOPER execute a DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT with the TOWNSHIP prepared by the TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR at the expense of the
DEVELOPER. Such DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT shall contain provisions that are reasonably required to
guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval , if any, and to guarantee the proper installation of ON-SITE
and OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS related to the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. Said
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT shall be executed; the required PERFOR.t\1ANCE GUARANTEE shall be posted;
and all required fees shall be paid before the TOWNSHIP approves and signs the FINAL PLAT for recording
purposes. No PLAN shall be signed for recording until certified copies of all permits and approvals required by
applicable Federal, State, COUNTY and TOWNSHIP Codes and Regulations are received by the TOWNSHIP and the
cost estimate for completing PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS is received by the TOWNSHIP and approved by the
TOWNSHIP EJ\GINEER.
3C5.3 RECORDING OF PLAL~S
A. Granting of PRELIMINARY APPROVAL by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall not entitle the
APPLICANT to record such PLAN at the Recorder of Deeds Office.
B. The FINAL PLAN, as approved and signed by the President of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and the
TO\VNSHIP SECRETARY shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Westmoreland County.,
within ninety (90) days of the DECISION by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, except in the event that the
PLAN is approved with a condition requiring a DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT and the posting of FINA[';"CIAL
SECURITY, the ninety (90) day period shall commence upon the execution of that DEVELOPERS
AGREEMENT, with the date of execution of that agreement placed in the PLAN as the date of FINAL
AP PROV AL . The DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT and the posting of FINANCIAL SECURITY shall occur
within six (6) months of the DECISION on the PLAN by the BOARD of COMMISSIONERS, unless an extension
is granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, in writing. Upon review of the FINANCIAL SECURITY by
the TOWNSHIP, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall consider approval of the PLAN for recordation, the
acceptance of FINANCIAL SECURITY, and execution of the DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. In the event that the DEVELOPERS AGREEME>!T is not executed by all parties within this
period. or an extension is granted, the FINAL PLAN AP PROV AL shall be considered null and void. 111c Recorder
of Deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of BOARD OF
Crnv1?v1ISSIONERS , and review by the COUNTY. The APPLICANT shall deposit a fee of one hw1dred dollars
( $100) with the TOWNSHIP to insure that the TOW'-.JSHIP receives one Mylar copy of the recorded PLAN. Upon
the receipt of this recorded PLA>l, the TO\VJ\SHIP shall refund this deposit.
305..t ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
26
The TO\VNSHIP shall not issue any permits for any constrnction activity for a PLAN until such time that the PLAN
has been granted FINAL APPROVAL , or, if applicable, has met all conditions of FINAL APPROVAL , and, if
applicable, evidence provided that the PLAN has been duly recorded at Recorder of Deeds Office of the COUNTY.
ARTICLE 4 STREET IMPROVE!VIENTS AND DEDICATION STANDARDS
STREET IMPROVEMENT AND DEDICATION STANDARDS
401 GENERAL PROVISIONS
401.1 The arrnngement, character, extent, width, GRADE and location of all STREETS shall conform to the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or OFFICIAL MAP, as adopted.
401.2 Where not shown on the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or Official Map, the arrangement and other design
standards of STREETS shall conform to the provisions found herein.
401.3 Every LOT within a SCBDIVISION shall have ACCESS to a PUBLIC STREET.
401.4 RESIDENTIAL STREETS shall be arranged so as to discourage through traffic, and provide for maximum
privacy. Appropriate traffic calming measures to reduce speed on RESIDENTIAL STREETS are recommended as
approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
401.5 All STREETS shall be named. No STREET names shall be used which will duplicate or be phonetically
similar with the names of existing STREETS. STREET names shall be subject to the approval of the PLANNING
COMMISSION. TI1e PLANNING COMMISSION may require review of any street name by the fire company which
would service the proposed STREET and/or the United States Post Office as part of their determination.
401.6 STREETS that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing STREETS shall bear the names of
the existing STREETS.
401.7 Any PLAN which includes encroachment within the legal RIGHT-OF- WAY of a State highway is required to
obtain a State Highway Access Permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transpo11ation (PemillOT) Pem1its
Office, District 12, Uniontown, Pennsylvania, either prior to the approval of the PLAN or as a condition of receiving
any pem1its from the TO\VNSHIP.
401.8 All ROAD and STREET design and CONSTRUCTION shall comply with standards and methods
established in the latest editions of the following as directed by TOWNSHIP ENGINEER:
A NHT Engineering Specs;
B. PennDOT Design Manual II, January 1998;
C. PennDOT Guidelines for OesiQn of Local ROADS and STREETS, January 1998;
D. PenriDOT Specifications, Publication 408, 1998.
402 GENERAL DESIGN AND ARRANGE~IENT
402.1 In general, all STREETS shall be continuous and in aligmnent with existing STREETS and shall provide a
convenient system to insure circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. However, LOOP STREETS and
CUL-DE-SAC STREETS, shall be designed so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
402.2 New STREETS shall be logically related to existing and planned STREETS. to topographical conditions, to
PUBLIC convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the SITES to be served by
such STREETS.
402.3 \\'l1ere ABUTTING LAND is undeveloped, new SUBDIVISIONS shall make provision for the extension of
rights-of-way into such ABUTTING undeveloped land by continuing the rights-of-way of proposed STREETS to the
boundaries of the SITE being developed.
27
402.4 Where a LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION abuts or contains an existing or proposed
COLLECTOR or ARTERIAL STREET, the PLANNING COMMISSION may require MARGINAL ACCESS
STREETS, deep LOTS with rear service ALLEYS, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
402.5 Where a LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION abuts on or contains a railroad RIGHT-OF-WAY or
limited ACCESS highway RIGHT-OF-WAY, the PLAN'NING COMMISSION may require a MARGINAL ACCESS
STREET approximately parallel to and on each side of such RIGHT-OF-WAY, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be detem1ined vvith due regard for the requirements of
approach ORA.DES and future GRADE separations.
402.6 New HALF or PARTLl\L STREETS will not be permitted. Wherever a PARCEL to be subdivided borders an
existing HALF or PARTIAL STREET, the remaining portion of the STREET, needed to comply with required RIGHTOF-
WA Y widths, shall be secured and platted within the new SUBDIVISION.
402.7 DEAD-END STREETS shall be prohibited, unless provided with a permanent or temporary cul-de-sac
turnaround as specified in Section 404.2 of this ORDINANCE.
402.8 Where STREETS continue into ABUTTING municipalities, evidence of compatibility of design, particularly
with regard to STREET widths, shall be submitted. The APPLICANT shall coordinate such design with both
municipalities to avoid abmpt changes in CARTW A Y width or in PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS provided.
402.9 The CONSTRUCTION of STREETS, ROADS, and other rights-of-way, whether private or public, as shown
on FINAL PLANS, may be approved only if they are designed to meet or exceed TOWNSHIP STREET standards
including RIGHT-OF-WAY, PA YING width, DRAINAGE, CURBS and GUTTERS
402.10 All CONSTRUCTION shall proceed, as scheduled, and in conjunction with scheduled inspections by the
TOWT'<SHIP ENGINEER or designee, pursuant to Article 6 of this ORDINAJ\CE.
402.11 Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all STREETS shall be made by dedication to and
acceptance for maintenance by the TOWNSHIP or by other acceptable means.
402.12 All STREETS shall be graded to the GRADES shown on the STREET PROFILES AND CROSS-SECTION
PLAN submitted and approved with the FINAL PLAN.
402.13 All materials used in the CONSTRUCTION of STREETS and the methods cf CONSTRUCTION and
DRA.INAGE shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the latest revision of the PemillOT
Specifications, Publication 408 and PennDOT Standards for Roadviay CONSTRUCTION, as revised.
402.14 The typical ROAD section in Appendix A. illustrates design and din1ensional standards for RESIDENTIAL
STREETS. Dimensions for other types of STREETS as identified in Section 407.1 and Section 409.5 which are noted
with a double asterisk (**) shall meet or exceed mininmm requirements of the latest revision of the PennDOT Design
:tv!anual, Part II, st.mdard for that particular class of Roadway.
402.15 All ROADS must be installed by a PennDOT certified contractor.
403 STREET ACCESS AND DRIVE WA VS
403.1 Except for those provided for a single family home, all ACCESS and DRIVEVVA YS in new SUBDIVISIONS
and LAND DEVELOP!'vIENTS shall confom1 to the standards and regulations of the ZONING ORDINANCE
according to their respective locations and type of uses. 111e minimum width for one-way DRIVEWAYS shall be
twelve ( 12) feet. The minimum width of a two-way DRIVEWAY shall be twenty four (24) feet at the opening of the
STREET.
403.2 DRIV!:WA YS may be pronded on the SITE where necessary for convenient ACCESS to the living units,
g:.irage compounds, PARKING AREAS, service entrances of BUILDNGS, collection of refuse and all other
ESSENTIAL SER VICES. DIUVEWA YS serving uses other than single family or two family homes shall enter
PUBLIC STREETS at safe loc:.itions, not less than fifty feet (50') from any NTERSECTION, and m no case within the
28
CURB radius. The maximum width of driveways measured at the STREET LOT LINE shall be twenty-four (24) feet
for those used for two-\vay traffic and the minimum width shall be twelve ( 12) feet for those used for one-way traffic.
403.3 Driveways and ACCESS shall be so located, designed and constructed as to provide a reasonable SIGHT
DISTANCE at INTERSECTIONS with STREETS. A stopping area, measured twenty (20) feet behind the
RIGHT-OF-WAY line, shall be provided not to exceed a four percent (4%) GRADE wherever possible.
404 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS
404.l CUL-DE-SAC STREETS are permitted which are a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250') feet in length,
measured from the CENTER LINE of the intersecting STREET to the center of the CUL-DE-SAC, and where the total
length from the last intersection does not exceed seven hundred (700) feet and vvhere a turnaround, with a CARTW A Y
diameter of eighty (80) feet and a RIGHT-OF-WAY diameter of one hundred (100) feet, is provided. Exceptions to
this requirement may be granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS upon the recommendation of the
PLANNING COMMISSION, with the concurrence of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, subject to satisfying other
perfom1ance standards of this ORDINANCE and not interfering with the public health, safety and welfare.
404.2 A temporary CUL-DE-SAC for STREETS ending at the property line of a PARCEL during PHASED
CONSTRUCTION shall be designed so that the CARTWA Y is widened to a fifty (50) foot width for a distance of
eighty (80) feet at the turnaround. It shall be the DEVELOPER'S responsibility to remove the temporary PAVING.
404.3 When required for future extension, the turnaround RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be placed adjacent to the
PARCEL boundary \vi th sufficient vvidth along the boundary line to permit extension of the STREET at full width.
404.4 DRAINAGE of CUL-DE-SAC STREETS shall be positive drainage and shall preferably be towards the open
end.
405 ALLEYS
405 .1 ALLEYS may be permitted under special circumstances in residential areas but in no case shall an ALLEY
provide the only means of ACCESS to a LOT.
405.2 ALLEYS may be required in MULTI-FAMILY dwelling DEVELOPMENTS.
405.3 Wl1ere ALLEYS are pemutted in residential DEVELOPMENTS, they shall have a twenty-five (20) foot
minimum RIGHT-OF-WAY and shall be paved for a width of at least eighteen (16) feet and curbed \Vhere required.
No part of any dwelling, garage or other STRUCTURE may be located within twenty-four (24) feet of the
CENTERLINE of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of the ALLEY.
405.4 ALLEYS shall be provided for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES, except that the PLANNING COMMISSION
may \Vaive this requirement vvhere other definite and assured provision is made for service ACCESS, which is
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
405.5 Where provided for NON-RESIDENTIAL CSES. ALLEYS shall have a paved CARTWA Y of at least
twenty (20) feet and shall be curbed where required, and shall have a RIGHT-OF-WAY width of thirty (30) feet.
Where necessary, comers shall have a radius of thirty (30) feet to permit safe use by l::irge vehicles.
405.6 Dead-end ALLEYS shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities at the dead-end. as deternlined by the PLANNING COMMISSION and/or TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER.
406 STREET GRADES
406.1 TI1e entire width of the RIGHT-OF-\VA Y of each STREET in a proposed SUBDIVISION shall be graded
and smtably prepared for the installation of PA YING. DRAINAGE STRUCTURES. CURBS. GUTfERS and
SIDEWALKS in accordance with the appropriate standards for the class of STREET.
406.2 TI1e minimum CET\TERLINE STREET GRADE shall be one (1 %) percent, but STREETS constrncted at
this GRADE shall be closely monitored and strict attention paid to CONSTRUCTION techniques to avoid ponding.
Where topographical conditions pem1it, GRADES in excess of one ( 1 %) percent shall be used.
29
406.3 No STREET GRADE shall exceed the following with due allowance for reasonable ver1ical curves:
EXPRESSWAYS and ARTERIAL STREETS
COLLECTOR STREETS
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS,
RESIDENTIAL STREETS and ALLEYS
7%
10%
12%
Any modification request on the above standards shall only be considered if it is required to satisfy other perfom1ance
standards contained in this ORDINANCE.
406.4 D1e CENTER LINE GRADE on the CUL-DE-SAC turning area shall not exceed eight (8%) percent
406.5 Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of GRADES. The minimum vertical curve shall be one
hundred-fifty (150) feet in length for ARTERIAL STREETS, one hundred (100) feet in length for COLLECTOR
STREETS and fifty (50) feet in length for MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS and RESIDENTIAL STREETS. Vertical
curves shall be increased twenty (20) feet in length for each one percent (l~io) of GRADE change exceeding three
percent (3%).
406.6 Where the GRADE of the STREET is above or below the GRADE of the ABUTTING PARCELS slopes shall
be constrncted in a manner approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and shall be sufficient to support the STREET or
the ABUTTING land. Slopes shall be maximum 3: 1 ratio.
406.7 Where the GRADE of the STREET is three (3) feet or more above the GRADE of the ABUTTING PARCEL,
guide rails shall be built to protect travel as required by the TOvVNSHIP ENGINEER.
407 STREET ALIGNMENT
407.1 Horizontal curvatures shall accommodate the following minimum design speeds:
EXPRESSWAYS and ARTERIAL STREETS 55 mph
COLLECTOR STREETS 45 mph
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS 35 mph
RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND other STREETS (less than 500 ft.) 25 mph
407.2 Visibility Requirements:
A. Minimum vertical visibility (measured 4 1/2 feet eye level to tail-lights 18" above ground level).
ARTERIAL STREETS 500'
COLLECTOR STREETS 300'
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS 200'
RESIDENTIAL STREETS and STREETS (less than 500 ft.) 200'
I3. :VIinimum horizontal visibility, measured on STREET CENTER LINE, shall be:
EXPRESS\VA YS and ARTERIAL STREETS 550'
COLLECTOR STREETS 350'
All Other ROADS and STREETS 100'
407 .3 A tangent shall be required between curves; however. a long radius curve shall be preferred in all cases to a
series of curves and tangents. A minimum tangent of one hundred ( 100) feet shall be required benveen reverse curves.
30
407.4 Super-elevation (commonly knovm as "banking a curve") shall be required when curve radii are less than six
hundred (600) feet on COLLECTOR STREETS, and shall be designed in accordance with PennDOT Design Criteria
applicable to the class of Roadway.
408 INTERSECTIONS
408.1 STREETS shall be designed so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no STREET shall
intersect any other STREET at an angle less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
408.2 STREET CENTER LINES of STREETS opening into opposite sides of another STREET shall either intersect
or be separated from each other by more than 200 feet.
408.3 New INTERSECTIONS of more than two STREETS shall not be permitted.
408.4 Leveling areas. Where the GRADE of any street at the approach of an INTERSECTION exceeds five percent
(5%), a leveling area shall be provided. with a transition GRADE not to exceed two percent (2%) for a distance of fifty
(50) feet from the nearest RIGHT-OF-WAY of the INTERSECTION.
408.5 The planting of trees or other plantings, or the location of STRUCTIJRES exceeding thirty (30) inches in
height that would obstruct the CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE shall be prohibited, and a PUBLIC right-of-entry shall be
reserved for the purpose of removing any object, material or otherwise, that obstructs the CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
408.6 TURNING LANES. Deceleration, turning, or merging lane may be required by the TOWNSHIP along
existing and proposed STREETS owned and operated by the TOWNSHIP that directly abut the DEVELOPMENT, as
reconm1ended by the TRANPORTATION IMPACT STUDY.
A. Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards:
l) 111e lane width shall be the same as the required width of the Roadvvay MOVING LANES.
2) 111e lane shall provide the full required lane width for its full length. It shall be tapered.
3) The minimum lane length shall be as follows:
Design Speed
of ROAD
30mph
40 mph
50 mph
Minimum Deceleration
Lane Length
250 feet
3 70 feet
500 feet
408.7 Comer CURB radii shall be according to the following schedule of minimum lengths: MINOR
COLLECTOR STREETS and RESIDENTIAL STREETS, 15 feet; COLLECTOR STREETS, 35 feet; and
ARTERIAL STREETS, 55 feet. Where STREETS of different categories intersect, the requirements for the one of
higher category shall hold.
408.8 The RIGHT-OF-WAY line for comer CURBS shall be an arc concentric with the CURB line with radius of a
minimum of t\venty- five (25) feet.
408.9 CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. Whenever a proposed STREET intersects an existing or proposed STREET of
higher order in the STREET hierarchy, the STREET of lower order shall be made a stop STREET. The STREET of
lmver order shall also be designed to provide a minimum corner SIGHT DISTANCE as specified in this ORDINANCE.
~09 RIGHTS-OF-WAY
31
409.1 The RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be measured from LOT LINE to LOT LINE and shall be sufficiently wide to
contain the CARTWA Y, CURBS, SHOULDERS, SIDEWALKS, graded areas, utilities, and shade trees (if they are
placed within the RIGHT-OF-WAY).
409.2 The RIGHT-OF-WAY of each STREET in a proposed LAND DEVELOPMENT or SUBDIVISION shall be
graded and there shall be installed PA YING, DRAINAGE STRUCTURES, CURBS and GUTTERS, and pedestrian
pathways in accordance with the standards outlined in these SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT Regulations
and in strict accordance with all TOWNSHIP specifications.
409.3 The RJGHT-OF-WA Y width of a new STREET that is a continuation of an existing STREET shall in no case
be continued at a width less than that of the existing STREET.
409.4 In review of the requirements of the RlGHT-OF-\VA Y requirements for a SUBDIVISION, the PLANNING
COMMISSION and the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall consider ROAD classification and DEVELOPMENT
projections as indicated by the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and the DEVELOPMENT PLAN for all phases of the
proposed DEVELOPMENT.
409.5 STREET PAVING AND RIGHT-OF-WAY MINIMlJ1v1 STANDARDS
STREET
Classification
ALLEYS
RESIDENTIAL STREETS
MINOR COLLECTOR
STREET
COLLECTOR STREET
ARTERIAL STREET
Minimum
CARTWAY
PAVING
WIDTH
(with curbing)
16'
26'
26'
30'
30'
Required SIDEWALK
or graded Area
Width
Graded Area On Each Side
SIDEWALK each side**
SIDEWALK each side**
SIDEWALK each side**
SIDEWALK each side**
**Unless otherwise waived per standards of this ORDINANCE.
Total
Width
RIGHT OF WAY
20'
50'
50'
60'
90'
409 .6 Additional RIGIIT-OF-WA Y and CART\VA Y widths may be requested by the Board of Commissioners for
the following purposes:
A. To promote PUBLIC safety and convenience.
B. To provide PARKING AREAS in areas of high density residential DEVELOPMENT.
C. To provide slope rights whenever topography is such that additional RIGHT-OF-WAY is needed to provide
adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of nvo to one except as provided in section 507 of this
ORDINANCE.
410 CURBS A,''W GUTTERS
410.1 Curbing shall be required for the purposes of DRAINAGE, safety, and delineation and protection of
pavement edge.
410.2 CURB requirements shall vary according to STREET hierarchy and intensity of DEVELOPMENT.
410.3 CURBING may be required:
A. For stom1 water management:
32
B. To stabilize pavement edge;
C. To delineate PARKING AREAS;
D. Ten (10) feet on each side of DRAINAGE inlets;
E. At INTERSECTIONS;
F. At comers;
G. At tight radii; and
410.4 \\11ere curbing is not required, an edge definition and stabilization shall be furnished for safety reasons and to
prevent pavement unraveling.
410.5 Where curbing is required, this requirement may be waived and SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE swales
used when it can be shown that the conditions described in section 411.1 of this ORDINANCE are met
410.6 In DEVELOPMENTS for NON-RESIDENTIAL USES concrete CURBS shall be required.
410.7 \Vhere CURBS exist on ABUTTING PARCELS, their extension will shall be required throughout the
proposed SUBDIVISION.
410.8 CURBS may be of the wall type or may be combined with GUTTERS built of concrete or bituminous
concrete. CURBS, combined curbs and GUTTERS, and graded GUTTERS shall be constrncted in accordance with the
specifications and standards as adopted by the TO\VNSHIP and as stated in the ADA
410.9 Prior to the application of the fmished wearing surface, CURB cuts shall be in place and approved by the
TOWNSHIP, for each LOT in the SUBDlVlSlON.
411 SHOULDERS AND E:VIBAN'KMENTS
411.1 SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE swales shall be required instead of CURBS when:
A. SHOULDERS are required by state law:
B. Soil, topography or potential environmental impacts from excess of stormwater make the use of SHOULDERS
and/or DRAINAGE swales preferable; or
C. It is in the best interest of the community to serve its rnral character by using SHOULDERS and/or DRAINAGE
swales instead of CURBS.
411.2 SHOULDER requirements shall vary according to STREET hierarchy and intensity of DEVELOPMENT
411.3 SHOULDERS shall measure a minimum of four ( 4) feet in width on each side for all STREETS and shall be
located within the RIGHT-OF-WAY. SHOULDERS of greater width shall be required as deemed necessary by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
411.4 The width of swales shall be determined by SITE-specific conditions and hydraulic capacity requirements.
411.5 SHOULDERS shall consist of stabilized turf or other material acceptable to the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
41 l .6 The entire SHOULDER area shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by rolling and must be levd with
the top of the ROAD surface as directed by the TO\VNSIIIP E)!GJNEER.
411.7 Embankments at the sides of STREETS and cross sections of DRAINAGE swales shall not exceed the
maxnnum slope established in section 507 of this ORDINANCE except as recommended in the SITE geotechnical
investigation REPORT. The TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER may require more rigid standards where conditions warrant.
33
412 STREET LIGHTS
412.1 STREET LIGHTING shall be required for all LAND DEVELOPMENTS and NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
and for all MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS based upon the standards of this section.
412.2 STREET LIGHTING shall be required in all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS with proposed new STREETS at
proposed intersections with any COLLECTOR ROAD or ARTERIAL ROAD and at any PLAN entrance. TI1e
TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER shall recommend additional STREET LIGHTING in areas of the PLAN deemed necessary
for public safety. The DEVELOPER may submit an alternate plan for lighting the plan with methods other than
STREET LIGHTS, which shall be reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
412.3 Where required, the DEVELOPER shall install or cause to be installed, at the DEVELOPERS
expense, STREET LIGHTING serviced by underground conduits in accordance with a plan approved by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, the PLAN'NING COM.\i1ISSION. and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The
DEVELOPER shall be responsible for all costs involved in LIGHTING the STREETS until such time that the
STREET(S) are accepted as PUBLIC STREETS of the TOWNSHIP.
412.5 Within LAND DEVELOPMEl'iTS, STREET LIGHTf'.\iG shall be generally installed at intersections, along
SIDE\VALKS and at entryways, between BUILDINGS, and in PARKING AREAS as required in the TO\VNSHIP
ZONING ORDINANCE and at all other areas determined to be hazardous by the BOARD OF CO:VIMISSIONERS on
the advice of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
412.6 The maximum spacing of STREET LIGHTING shall be two hundred (200) feet.
412. 7 The maximum height of STREET LIGHTING shall not exceed the maximum height permitted in the
ZONING ORDINANCE or 25 feet, whichever is less.
412.8 LIGHTING shall be installed in accordance with PennDOT standards.
412.9 TI1e shielding of LIGHTING shall provide proper LIGHTING vvithout hazard to drivers or nuisance to
residents. and the design of LIGHTING standards shall be of a type appropriate to the DEVELOPMENT and the
TOWNSHIP.
412. 10 Style, type, shielding and manufacturer of STREET LIGHTING shall be subject to the approval of the
PLANNING COM}vtlSSION on the advice of the TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER. STREET LIGHTING shall be high
pressure sodium \vith photoelectric cell unless otherwise directed by the PLANNING COMMISSION.
412 .11 Details of the pole shall be subnutted with the plan and shall be of a decorative variety as determined by the
PLANNING COMMISSION.
413 STREET SIGNS A.:.~D PLAN IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
413. l A street sign having a name plate shall be installed by the TOWNSHIP at every STREET intersection and
shall conform to CONSTRUCTIO:>J standards approved by the TO\VNSHIP. Costs for such street sign(s) shall be paid
to the TOW'NSHIP as part of the DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT.
413 .2 Pem1anent STREET SIGNS shall be white reflectorized lenering on blue background with colors, style, and
size to match existing STREET SIGNS in N011h Huntingdon TO\VNSHIP.
413 .3 The DEVELOPER shall submit any proposed plan identification sign to be loc:itcd at the entrance(s) of
residenti:il PLANS with the APPLICATION. No sign shall be located within the right-of-way, unless otherwise
approved by the TOWNSHIP. TI1e proposed sign shall include detail on size, location and building materials and shall
be approved by the TOWNSHIP as part of the PLAN rev1e\v process.
414 SIDEWALKS
414.1 SIDEWALKS shall be required to be CONSTRUCTED in all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS and MAJOR
LAND DEVELOPMENTS involving the construction of new PUBLIC STREETS, unless otherwise waived by the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS under the provisions of Section 414.7 of this ORDINANCE.
414.2 SIDEWALKS shall be four (4) feet wide and 5 inches deep. Concrete is to be PA DOT Class A or better and
broom-finished. The SIDEWALK is to be placed on 5 inches of 2-b for stone base. Scored CONSTRUCTION joints
are to be every 5 feet with expansion joints every 20 feet. CONSTRUCTION and materials are to conform to the
Typical Sidewalk Detail of North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP as found in Appendix A.
414.3 Unless an alternative installation plan is proposed by the DEVELOPER, and approved by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS as part of the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT, SIDEWALKS within residential
SUBDIVISIONS shall be installed at the time of the construction of home on that lot. The DEVELOPER shall be
responsible for bonding all SIDEWALKS pursuant to provisions on this ORDINANCE and the Pennsylvania MPC.
Within LAND DEVELOPMENTS, SIDEWALKS shall be installed prior to the issuance of the OCCUPANCY
PEfilvIIT..
414.4 SIDEWALKS installed along COUNTY or STATE ROADS shall meet the specifications established by the
COUNTY or STATE.
414.5 The GRADES and PA YING of the SIDEWALKS shall be continuous across driveways except in NONRESIDENTIAL
USE AREAS and high density residential DEVELOPMENTS and in certain other cases where heavy
traffic volume dictates special treatment. In NON-RESIDENTIAL areas, a concrete apron should be installed to the
RIGHT-OF-WAY line where the concrete SIDEWALKS intersect.
414.6 The alignment and gradient of SIDEWALKS shall be coordinated with the GRADING PLAN to prevent the
passage of concentrated surface water on or across the walk; limit excessive slopes; and prevent the pocketing of
surface water.
414.7 \Vhen one of the following conditions exist making the installation of SIDEWALKS unnecessary or
impractical, the DEVELOPER shall so demonstrate those condition(s) and request in writing to the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS that this requirement be waived in whole or in part. Approval or denial of the request shall be
made by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS in writing, pursuant to the provisions of Article VII of this
ORDINANCE. Financial consideration of the costs of the construction of the proposed SIDEWALKS shall not be
considered by the BOARD as a reason for waiving this requirement.
A. Ninety (90%) percent of the LOTS within all phases of the PLAN are greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet and have frontages on a public street of greater than one hundred ( 100') feet;
B. The SUBDIVISION PLAN has only one STREET which is a CUL-DE-SAC.
C. The slope of any BLOCK within a PLAN is greater than eight (8%) percent (intersection to intersection) . Unless
other conditions exist, the waiver would only apply to that BLOCK.
D. The SUBDIVISION PLAN is less than ten (10) acres including all phases of the PLAN.
414.8 Within MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS and other NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS,
SIDEWALKS shall be installed along all new stt·eets, whether private or public and within the site to provide
for safe pedestrian circulation to the BUILDING(S) and PARKJNG area(s).
414.9 SIDEWALKS ABUTTING angle PARKING AREAS shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width to prevent
car overhang from restricting pedestrian movement along the SIDEWALK.
414.10 All SIDEWALKS shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Federal specifications for
handicapped accessibility.
415 BIKEWA YS
415. I BICYCLE LANES. when proposed , shall be placed in the outside lane of a ROAD, adjacent to the CURB
or SHOULDER. When on- STREET parking is permitted, the BICYCLE LANE shall be betvveen the parking lane and
the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated \vith markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or
CURBS shall not be used.
35
415.2 Dimensions and construction specifications of BICYCLE LANES shall be determined by the estimated
number and type of users and the location and purpose of the BICYCLE LANE. A minimum 8-foot paved width
should be provided for two-way bicycle traffic and a 5-foot width for one-way traffic.
A. Choice of surface materials, including bituminous mixes, concrete, gravel, soil cement, stabilized earth and
wood planking, shall depend on use and users of the path.
B. Gradients of BICYCLE LANES should generally not exceed a GRADE of five percent (5%), except for short
distances.
415.3 BICYCLE LANES. Lanes shall be four (4) feet wide, or wide enough to allow safe passage of bicycles and
motorists.
415.4 DRAINAGE grates. Bicycle-safe DRAINAGE grates shall be used in the CONSTRUCTION of all
RESIDENTIAL STREETS. The specifications for bicycle-safe DRAfNAGE grates are found in Appendix
A.
416 TRl\NSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY
416.1 SUBDIVISIONS containing a minimum of fifty (50) lots and all MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS with
either fifty (50) or more units or those DEVELOPMENTS generating 500 or more TRIPS, according to the latest
edition of Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, shall require the submission of a
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY per requirements of this Section. The PLANNING COMMISSION may
require submission of a modified study containing parts of the following requirements for any proposed
DEVELOPMENT not meeting the above thresholds. The PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR, at the advise of
the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may waive certain provisions of this TIS where those provisions would not be
applicable. It is recommended that the DEVELOPER discuss the TIS as part of the PRE-SUBMISSION application
process, outlined in Article III of this ORDINANCE.
416.2 The TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY (TIS) shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer,
experienced in traffic engineering studies, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All costs of the TIS shall
be borne by the property OWNER or APPLICANT.
416.3 Applicability. Use of the TIS may include the following:
A. Assist the TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT in understanding the traffic related impacts at the SITE
ingress, egress, and general circulation on the study area, and to thus minimize those impacts through efficient
SITE level design of such circulation;
B. To consider any alternate or additional ingress or egress and general circulation patterns as conditions of
approval based on the TIS;
C. To consider impacts along perimeter ROADS and intersections to assist the TOWNSHIP in future
transportation planning and capital planning requirements;
D. The TOWNSHIP shall not use the TIS to require transportation IMPROVE:VIENT which are not on or
adjacent to the proposed site. Such requirements, as governed by Section V-A of the MUNICIPALITIES
PLANNING CODE, are distinct and separate from the applicability and intent of the requirements of this
section.
4 I 6.4 TIS Elements: The APPLICANT shall submit a detailed description of the highway network and major
intersections within one-half mile of the SITE. Said network may be limited to PRIMARY and SECONDARY
ARTERIOLES and COLLECTOR STREETS and shall include the following conditions both on the SITE and
within such radius. Both existing and applicable projections shall be shown for each of the following:
A. TRIPS generated by the proposed DEVELOPMENT at all peak hours (weekday, morning and evening
peak hours and one Saturday peak hour) during which the proposed use would be in operation.
B. Description of the existing traffic conditions and volumes (weekday, morning and evening peak hours and
one Saturday peak hour) during which the proposed use would be in operation.
C. Traffic signals and signage. and other traffic contrnl devices.
D. Public Transportation Services
E. RIGHTS-OF-\VA Y and DRIVE\VA Y widths, including CARTWA Y and SHOULDER widths, vertical
grades, horizontal curvatures, obstructions, sight distance, posted speed limits, signage or other notable
features.
F. Ingress and egress traffic movement on the SITE.
G. Changes to the highway network.
36
H. Detem1ination of street service level.
I. Determination of intersection service levels for intersection ( s) generating more than I 00 TRIPS in any
peak hour
J. Traffic accident history and location of accidents for five ( 5) years preceding APPLICATION date
K. Proposed and existing pedestrian circulation
L. Traffic IMPROVEMENTS, planned or recommended (e.g., additional traffic lanes, traffic signal, traffic
signage, etc)
M. The anticipated stages of construction and the anticipated completion date of the proposed SUBDIVISION
or LAND DEVELOPMENT
416.5 TIS Standards. The TIS shall adhere to the following standards:
A. Estimation of TRIP generation. TRIP generation per 416.4 (A) shall be estimated using any one of the
following three methods: analogy; TRIP distribution model or surrogate data. Whatever method is used, TRIP
distribution shall be estimated and analyzed for the horizon year and a ten-year projection (both \Vith and
without DEVELOPMENT) Consideration should be given to whether inbound and outbound TRIPS will have
similar distribution.
B. Transportation impact of the DEVELOPMENT using ratios and methodology contained in the current
edition of the Manual of the Institute of Traffic Engineers
C. Levels of Service as parts Hand I of Section 416.4 of this ORDINANCE shall be defined using a method
similar to those described in the cunent Highway Capacity Manual
D. Estimates and projections of street service level, TRIP generation, etc. shall conform to the estimated dates
of major phases in the construction of the proposed PLAN
E. All applicable elements mentioned in Section 416.4 shall be denoted on a map which shall conform to the
applicable drafting standards of Article III of this ORDINANCE.
416.6 Additional Requirements.
A. The TIS shall be submitted with the APPLICATION and reviewed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or his
designee. All costs of this review shall be invoiced to the APPLICANT per standards contained in the
MlJNICIP ALITIES PLANNING CODE. A copy should also be forwarded to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation if STREETS under their jurisdiction are in the study area and to the Westmoreland County
Planning Department if streets under the jurisdiction of the COUNTY are in the study area.
B. The PLANNING DIRECTOR or the PLANNING COMMISSION may require further details similar to
those mentioned in Section 4 of this Article for areas of special concern within a one ( l) mile radius of the
SITE for very large DEVELOPMENTS. Said areas may include those identified in the COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN in need of IMPROVEMENT or having identified traffic problems.
417 Waiver of Road Construction Standards for Private Streets Serving No More than Three Lots
At the request of the APPLICANT, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may waive all or part of the construction
standards, specified in this ORDINANCE for proposed PRIVATE STREETS in SUBDIVISIONS serving no more
than ( 3) lots, provided:
A. The APPLICANT submits a hardship request, pursuant to Section 701 of this ORDINANCE;
B. The standards of the proposed PRIVATE STREET shall be reviewed by the TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER, for
adequacy in providing for safe vehicular access, relationship to the PUBLIC STREET where the PARCEL is
located, utility easements and emergency services. The TO\NNHIP ENGINEER shall have the authority to
recommend stricter standards than proposed by the APPLICANT to meet these objectives.
C. 111e APPLICANT shall be required to cause to be recorded in the Westmoreland County's Recorders Office a
declaration of covenants, restrictions and EASEMENTS in a fonn acceptable to the TOWNSHIP solicitor which
shall at the minimum provide:
l) Reciprocal EASEMENTS for use of said PRIVATE STREET by each OvVNER of a LOT served by such
STREET:
2) A declaration that the TOW~SHIP has no responsibility for the maintenance of such PRIVATE STREET;
3) Maintenance of the PRIVATE STREET to be paid by the OWNERS of the LOTS served. Maintenance
shall include: normal surface repair; reconstruction; drainage; snow and ice control; and any and all other costs
which may be associated with said STREET;
37
4) A provision that if the PRIVATE STREET is offered to the TOWNSHIP for dedication in the future, the
STREET will first be brought up to TOWNSHIP specifications, including width for a dedicated STREET as
required by this ORDINANCE, at the expense of the owners of the Jots served by said road.
ARTICLE 5 DESIGN At'JD IMPROVE.MENTS STANDARDS
501 RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING ORDINANCE
501.1 Proposed DEVELOPMENTS and SUBDIVISIONS shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE.
502 LAND, BLOCK AND LOT REQUIRElHEl\TS
502.1 LAND
A. Land and all SITES proposed for DEVELOPMENT; shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be
developed,
B. Those areas of SITES having STEEP SLOPES or POOR SOILS shall not be subdivided or developed unless
such deficiencies can be avoided or eliminated, subject to standards provided in Section 507 of this ORDINANCE.
C. Those area of SITES having land subject to flooding as shown on the official FEMA Flood Insurance Maps
for North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP shall not be subdivided unless such deficiencies can be avoided or eliminated
in accordance with Section 505 of this ORDINANCE.
502.2 BLOCKS
A. BLOCKS shall have a maximum length of t\velve hundred ( 1,200) feet and, as far as practicable, a minimum
length of five hundred (500) feet. In design of BLOCKS longer than eight hundred (800) feet, special consideration
should be given to the requirements for satisfactory fire protection as per Section 508.1 of this Ordinance and
include traffic calming measures.
B. INTERIOR PEDESTRIAN WALKS may be required in BLOCKS more than eight hundred (800) feet long.
The RIGHT-OF-WAY of such walks shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width with a minimum paved
SIDEWALK width of five (5) feet. A greater width may be required as necessary to facilitate pedestrian
circulation. Interior walks shall be maintained by the ABUTTING property OWNERS in the same manner as
SIDEWALKS on PUBLIC or PRIVATE STREETS, or by a community association or other similar OWNER.
C. Residential BLOCKS shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two (2) tiers of LOTS, except where
THROUGH LOTS are permitted to border an ARTERIAL STREET or COLLECTOR STREET, railroad,
watercourse or other natural barrier.
D. Where a SUBDIVISION abuts an ARTERL""L STREET or COLLECTOR STREET, the greater dimension of
the BLOCKS shall front along such ROAD and/or a STRr:ET or other atTangements made to minimize the number
of points of ACCESS shall be implemented. Such ACCESS shall comply with the provisions of this
ORDINANCE and other applicable codes of the TOWNSHIP. The purpose of this provision is to reduce the
number of STREETS intersecting and taking ACCESS from major highways and to increase the distance between
such intersections.
E. THROUGH LOTS shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
DEVELOPMENT from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
BUFFER ZONE, across which there shall be no right of ACCESS, shall be provided along the line of LOTS
Al3LTTING such ARTERIAL or other disadvantageous use. THROUGH lots, when pem1itted, shall clearly
designate the primary ACCESS POINT on the plat.
F. SIDE LOT LNES shall be substantially at right angles or radial to STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY lines.
G. No remnants of land, not meeting LOT size and frontage requirements of the ZONING ORDINANCE for the
applicable ZONING DISTRICT shall exist after subdividing. All portions of a PLAN shall be incorporated into
existing or proposed LOTS unless special usage is applied as pat1 of a LAND DEVELOPMENT proposal. Any
areas n~served for a special purpose, \vhich may revert to an unintended nuisance area, shall not be permitted.
38
Remnant land areas shall be distinguished on the PLAT from BUFFER ZONES or OPEN SPACE established by
the ZONING ORDINANCE.
H. The LOT LINES of all COR..l\IER LOTS located at the intersection of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of two STREETS
or of an ALLEY and a STREET, shall have a curve with a minimum radius of t\venty-five (25) feet joining the two
(2) intersecting RIGHT-OF-WAY lines.
I. LOTS for NON-RESIDENTLi\L USES shall be of such size and shape as may be suitable for their prospective
use and to provide sufficient space for OFF-STREET PARKING and loading, and water supply and sanitary
SEWAGE disposal (if either or both are to be provided by individual ON-LOT facilities). The minimum LOT
dimensions shall be in accordance with the ZONING ORDINANCE.
502.3 LOTS. LOT dimensions and areas shall not be less than specified by prov1s10ns of the ZONING
ORDINANCE and shall further conform to the following requirement designed to abate health hazards:
A. Where either or both water supply and sanitary disposal are provided by individual ON-LOT facilities, the
APPLICANT shall be required to have such tests made as are necessary to determine the adequacy of the proposed
facilities in relation to the proposed LOT size and existing GRADE and soil conditions. In all such cases,
certification by DEP that the proposed facilities will be adequate. Said certification shall be a prerequisite to
FINAL APPROVAL of the PLAN.
B. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive DRAINAGE away from BUILDINGS and \'\later wells.
C. The LOT arrangement and design shall be such that all LOTS will provide satisfact01y and desirable
BUILDING SITES, properly related to topography and the character of surrounding DEVELOPMENT.
D. Minimum BUILDING SETBACKS shall be conh·olled by the ZONING ORDINANCE and shall be shown on
the PLAT.
E. Every LOT shall abut on a PUBLIC STREET.
F. LOTS fronting directly on existing or proposed ARTERIAL STREETS or COLLECTOR STREETS shall be
avoided. ACCESS to such LOTS shall be from service or MARGINAL ACCESS ROADS, wherever possible.
G. In cases where LOTS have FRONTAGE along two or more STREETS, the minimum SETBACK
requirements along each STREET shall be equal to the FRONT SETBACK requirements for the ZONING
DISTRICT in which the LOT is located.
H. FLAG LOTS: Purpose. It is recognized that property owners and land planners should have full
opportunity for subdivision of land and at the same time avoid certain subdivision restrictions such as
FRONT AGE schedules that mitigate against legitimate use of rear acreage, that are consistent with objectives
expressed in the adopted COMPREHENSIVE PLAN encouraging infill development and reducing negative
impacts of sprawl. It is the intent of these regulations to permit utilization of some parcels of land that have
been restricted by other land use standards.
I) A FLAG LOT shall have a minimum lot area equal to that of the zone within which it is located, not
including the FLAG ACCESS STRIP.
2) Only one FLAG LOT may be created per SUBDIVISION as a matter of right, provided all standards of this
section are in compliance
3) The PARCEL of land that mclude.s the FLAG LOT shall have no ability to be further subdivided according to
the minimum lot size requirements of the zone in which the parcel is located.
4) The FLAG ACCESS STRIP shall be a minimum of 25 feet for its entire length from the STREET to the
flag portion of the lot.
5) No FLAG LOT ACCESS STRIP shall be more than four hundred (400) feet long as measured from the
center line of its connection with the PLJBLIC STREET and the point'line where the FLAG LOT is contiguous
to the access strip.
39
6) FLAG LOTS shall not be permitted within a proposed new SUBDIVISION containing five (5) or more
LOTS.
7) The TOWNSHIP shall not be responsible for the maintenance of the FLAG ACCESS STRJP portion of the
created FLAG LOT. The ovmer shall assume all responsibility and liability for normal surface repair,
reconstruction, snow and ice control and any other costs associated with such access provided within this area
of the LOT
503 EASEMENTS
503.1 EASEMENTS with a mmimum width of twenty (20) feet shall be provided as necessary for stom1
DRAINAGE STRUCTI3RES, swales. sanitary SEWERS and other utilities from the center of said pipe or swale.
503.2 To the fullest extent possible, EASEMENTS shall be located adjacent to REAR LOT LINES or SIDE LOT
LINES.
503.3 111e DEVELOPER shall properly GRADE, provide fencing (when deemed necessary by the TO\VNSHIP
ENGINEER), and stabilize the slopes of open ditches and drainage swales.
503.4 Where a SITE is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a DRAINAGE EASEMENT or
RIGHT-OF-WAY conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to
preserve natural or man-made DRAINAGE, as determined by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, or as may be required or
directed by DEP.
503 .5 \Vhere STOR..i\1 WATER or surface water will be gathered within the SUBDIVISION or LAND
DEVELOPMENT and discharged or drained in volume over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the
SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOP:VIENT before discharging into an existing stream or STORM WATER
management structure, the APPLICANT or OWNER shall reserve or obtain EASEMENTS over all lands affected.
Such EASEME1'<TS shall be adequate for such discharge of DRAINAGE and for the carrying such water off-site, and
for the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of the EASEMENT, including provisions for the right of passage by
vehicles, machinery and other equipment for such purposes. Such EASEMENTS shall be of sufficient width, as
determined by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER for such passage and work. The OWNER shall convey such
EASEMENTS upon demand and at no cost to the TOWNSHIP.
503.6 The EASEMENTS at the rear of LOTS facing on curvilinear streets should consist of straight lines with a
minimum number of points of deflection.
503.7 RIGHTS-OF-WAY or EASEMENTS for any purpose whatsoever shall be described in the deed, and such
RIGHTS-OF-WAY or EASEMENTS shall be shown on the approved PLAN.
503.8
LOTS.
D1e APPLICANT shall provide a method of physically delineating pedestrian EASEMENTS across private
Such method may include shrubbery, trees, rvIARKERS, or other method acceptable to the Board of
Commissioners.
503.9 for a TOvVNHIP maintained and owned DETENTION FACILITY, the APPLICANT shall convey the
PARCEL of land on which the DETENTION FACILITY lies to the TOWNSHIP and shall indicate said dedication on
the PLAT.
504 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION LAND
504. I OPEN SPACE and recreation land requirements for all SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT shall
comply with the provisions as recommended by the COivIPREHENSIVE OPEN SPACE A1'.'D RECREATION
PLAN as adopted by the I30ARD of COMMISSIONERS and incorporated into this ORDINANCE ..
504.2 The preservation of natural features, including large trees, groves, waterways, WETLANDS, historic sites.
other community assets and those areas identified in TO\V0!SHIP and COUNTY heritage inventories shall
be considered in the design and layout of the DEVELOPMENT.
40
504.3 Where the SUBDIVISION contains a park, playground, school, or other PUBLIC site shown in the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or the PARKS AND RECREATION COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, the
DEVELOPER shall give consideration to the dedication of such to the PUBLIC or its reservation for purchase
by the appropriate PUBLIC body within a specified period of time. Any such agreement shall be between the
DEVELOPER or O\VNER and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and shall establish the SITE AREA, time
and method of acquisition and the cost thereof.
504.4 Developed OPEN SPACE shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the
DEVELOPMENT. Undeveloped OPEN SPACE shall be designed to preserve important SITE amenities and
environmentally sensitive areas.
504.5 The area of each PARCEL of OPEN SPACE within a DEVELOPMENT which is designed for active
recreational purposes shall be of such minimum din1ensions as to be functionally useable. In no case shall such
a PARCEL be less than the minimum LOT size for that ZONING DISTRICT.
504.6 As a general principle, undeveloped OPEN SPACE should be left in its natural state. A DEVELOPER may
make certain IMPROVEMENTS such as the DEVELOPMENT of trails for walking or jogging, or the
provision of picnic areas. In addition, the PLANNING COMMISSION may require a DEVELOPER to make
other IMPROVEMENTS, such as removing dead or diseased trees, thinning trees or other vegetation to
encourage more desirable growth, GRADING and seeding.
505 FLOOD PLAINS
505 .1 In addition to the requirements of this Ordinance, all DEVELOPMENT in FLOODPLAIN areas shall comply
with the standards of the TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE (Section 812), the North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP
FLOOD PLAIN Management Ordinance, Chapter 80 of the CODE and other applicable regulations of the
TOWNSHIP, COUNTY, State and Federal codes and statutes.
505.2 No new CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT shall be allowed in a FLOOD PLAIN unless a permit is
obtained from DEP, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management, and unless a special permit has been obtained from
North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP in compliance with the Floodplain Management Ordinance, Chapter 80 of the CODE.
506 !WINED LAND AREAS
506.1 The DEVELOPER shall certify by note on the PLAN that any proposed BUILDING or STRUCTURE OR
STREET of any type is not within any SUB SURFACE MINED AREA with less than one-hundred (100') feet of
overburden according to official mining maps produced by the Bureau of Mines. No CONSTRUCTION of any
BUILDING or STRUCTURE or STREET of any type may be initiated on or within these areas until a
GEOTECHNICAL investigation. as specified herein, has been completed and the REPORT with recommendations has
been approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
506.2 Prior to the initiation of the CONSTRUCTION of any STRUCTURE or BUILDING or STREET in areas
identified in Section 506.1, a project geotechnical engineer shall be retained and a detailed geotechnical investigation
and SUBSIDENCE RISK ASSESSMENT REPORT prepared by a Pem1sylvania licensed Professional Engineer
qualified in the field of mined land reclamation shall be submitted and approved as a part of the APPLICATION FOR
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL The REPORT shall include an evaluation of the potential SITE engineenng and
structural modifications which would minimize any hazards of CONSTRUCTION on the SITE.
506.3 The geotechnical investigation for areas of past subsurface mining activity shall include a core borings as
recommended by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. The DEVELOPER shall submit a Mine SUBSIDENCE RISK
ASSESSMENT REPORT which identifies and recommends the most suitable CONSTRUCTION location and
practices for the proposed DEVELOP:vl.ENT of the SITE.
506.4 A mine subsidence risk assessment report for subsurface mined areas shall include a detailed evaluation of the
integrity and nature of the overburden and the risk of subsidence, which may occur naturally or may be caused by the
loading of the overburden. The REPORT shall include a review of the proposed CONSTRUCTION and shall
recommend specific C01\STRUCTION and SITE DEVEi ,OPMENT procedures for the proposed SITE
DEVELOPMENT that shall be required as part of the site development andior conditions imposed on the issuance of
any building permit by the TOWNSHIP.
41
506.5 A mine subsidence risk assessment report for surface mined areas shall include a detailed evaluation of the
character and stability of the material used to fill the mine excavation and the risk of potential settlement which may be
caused by the loading of said material by proposed STRUCTURES. The REPORT shall include a review of the
proposed CONSTRUCTION and shall recommend specific CONSTRUCTION and SITE DEVELOPMENT
procedures for the proposed SITE DEVELOPMENT.
506.6 The geotechnical investigation for all previously mined land shall accurately locate and map all known mine
features whether on or off the development site, within three hundred (300) feet of proposed STRUCTURES. Such
mapping shall include the known limits of the mine, and any surface features resulting from mining activity such as
mine \Vaste dump areas, seepage areas and WETLANDS.
506.7 The geotechnical investigation shall identify any environmental problems associated with the previously
mined land such as subsidence, acid run-off, residual ponding, disturbed DRAINAGE patterns, unstable spoils piles or
decreased water quality which may affect COKSTRUCTION occupation or environmental integrity of the SITE.
506.8 The APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY AP PROV AL shall include the geotechnical investigation, a mine
subsidence risk assessment report , all approvals for necessary permits or APPLICATIONS for such permits and a
statement of the ways in which the proposed DEVELOPMENT avoids or eliminates potential hazards of the previously
mined site which shall be certified by a Pennsylvania registered Professional Engineer having a specialty in this area of
practice.
506.9 All PLANS for STRUCTURES and IMPROVEMENTS on the SITE submitted with the APPLICATION
FOR DEVELOPMENT shall clearly delineate the limits of previous mining activity and the limits of the area
susceptible to potential subsidence or settlement. All such delineation shall be clearly labeled as to effect, limitations,
and existing conditions.
506.10 No FINAL APPROVAL shall be granted until the DEVELOPER proves to the satisfaction of the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS that:
A. No known hazard will result from the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
B. All modifications recommended in the SL13SIDENCE RISK ASSESSMENT REPORT have been
incorporated into the DEVELOPMENT proposal.
C. All necessary permits and approvals have been granted and evidence of such has been presented by the
DEVELOPER.
D. Any continuing negative effects of past mrnmg activities will be eliminated by the proposed
IMPROVEMENTS.
E. All current Federal. STATE, COlJNTY, or TOWNSHIP standards for environmental and water quality shall
be equaled or exceeded by the proposed DEVELOPMENT of the SITE.
507 STEEP SLOPES AL'lD POOR SOILS
507.1 No alteration, disturbance or CONSTRUCTION of any type shall be approved or initiated, and no
APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL shall be approved for SITES having any portion of their area proposed for
DEVELOPMENT on or within fifty (50) feet of any STEEP SLOPE or any area of slope over I 5'/u with POOR SOILS
until the provisions of the ZONf\IG ORDINANCE and any other applicable Federal, State, COUNTY, or TOWNSHIP
regulations have been satisfied.
507.2 No FINAL APPROVAL of the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT shall be given until all required
STA TE and COUNTY and SEDIMENTATION and EROSION control permits have been issued and submitted to the
TO\VNSHIP.
507.3 "Die DEVELOPER shall clearly delineate all STEEP SLOPE area(s) and slopes greater than 15% with POOR
SOILS. as part of the ENVIRONME'.\iTAL CONSTRAINTS STUDY and on certified SC"RVEY maps submitted with
all APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOP'.v1ENT. If no POOR SOILS areas or slopes of 25%, or greater exist, the
DEVELOPER shall certify the non-existence of such features.
42
507.4 I\o BULDIT\G SITES shall be designated or improved in POOR SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas except as
permitted by this ORDINANCE.
507.5 When DEVELOP'.vIENT activity, as defined m areas identified 111 507.3, is proposed, a geotechnical
investigation and report shall be required to assess the sho11 and long-term stability of the SITE and the possible effects
on neighboring properties of developing the proposed SITE in the proposed manner. These areas and the
proposed DEVELOPMEJ\T shall be investigated and documented ma statement by a registered Professional Engineer
prior to FINAL APPROVAL. This slope investigation shall determine the engineering characteristics and physical
propct1ies of the slopes, soil deposits and underlymg rock strata, which are proposed for use in strucntral foundations.
\fatcrials used for ea11hwork construction shall be s1rrnlarly e\·aluated.
507 .6 A geoteclmical in\·estigation report prepared by or under the direction of a professional engineer, experienced
m soil and foundat10n cngmecnng, shall he submitted for SITE PL\:\S located m potent1ally E>IVIROJ\0.lE::\TALLY
SENSITIVE areas and for such other sites where special soil or water conditions are deemed by the TO\VNSIIIP
E)'.;Cill\EER to be potentially hazardous. The required soils REPORT must be prepared in accordance \\·ith this
ORDl0iA:'."-JCE and other applicable State, or COUJ\TY regulat1ons.
507.7 TI1e SITE geoteclmical mvestigat10n should include, but not be limited to, the following detailed factual
infom1ation, analysis. and recommendations:
A. Surface Features - Surface contours, old CO>JSTRL'CTION, rock outcrops (if any), watercourses, ditches,
ponds, wooded areas, filled-m areas. and old slide areas.
B. Hydrologic Features - The presence of seepage zones, depth to groundwater, and the possible fluctuations with
the seasons.
C Suhsurface Features
I) A plotted, horizontal and vertical record of the stratification of the soil and rock deposits.
2) Infom1att011 on the relati\ c dens it\· of granular snils in the different strata and on the consistencv of
cohesive soils.
3) lnfom1ation on subsurface geologic features and past mining activity 111cluding depth of overburden.
D. Exploration Methods - Physical explorations can be carried out by several methods. Field explorations should
follow the applicable standards or the procedures and practices recommended by the American Society for Testing
and \Iatenals (AST'.\l). It is generally sufficient to secure soil samples at intervals of five feet in depth or at
changes in the material. The intervals should be detennined by such conditions as the soils encountered and/or the
type of STRUCTURE.
E. TI1e spacing and depths of bonngs should also be based on SITE conditions and proposed constrnction.
l\laximum spacing between borings should not exceed 250 to 300 feet. One boring for every 6,000 to I 0,000
square t'cct of Bl '11.Dl"'.\Ci area shuuld he a 1111111111um for a high-rise structure, and a minimum of one bonng per
STRCCTURE is recommended for s1nglc-family residences.
F. Grnumhvater :Vleasurements -- Infonnatton is required on groundwater ekvations, includ111g depth of
pcnnancnt and perched water tables. Water le\·els should be detem1ined on completing the bonng and again,
approximately 24 hours later.
Ci. Classifications and Descnptll)ns - Direct ohsef\·at1on of soils samples from various depths and locations \VIII
he required for correlation with the known geology of the area. C\assificat10n and description of soils will be done
by the l'rnfied Classification System (AST\! Specification 02487), and by the Visual Manual Identification
Procedure I AST\! Spcc1ficat1ons D24SS ).
IL Labmatory Tcstmg - The laboratory test mg program should be dependent upon the characteristics of the soils
and the anticipated gcotechnical problems analysts.
43
I. The recommendations of all such investigations and REPORTS of POOR SOILS , STEEP SLOPES and other
identified soil or water condition hazards shall be revie\ved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. Incorporation of said
recommendations may be required as conditions for PRELIMINARY APPROVAL and/or FINAL AP PROV AL .
J. All PUBLIC and PRIVATE ROADS, bridges, utilities and other facilities shall be located, designed and
constructed to avoid POOR SOILS and STEEP SLOPE areas or to withstand any anticipated soil or rock
movement.
K. ROAD and utility alignments and GRADES shall minimize cuts and fills.
L. Hazardous slope conditions that may be present on a SITE must be corrected prior to completion of the
DEVELOPMENT.
M. Cut and FILL Slores
N. General. The setbacks and other resh·ictions specified by this section are minimum and may be increased by
the TO\VNSHIP on the recommendation of the ZONING OFFICER or by the recommendation of a civil engineer,
geotechnical engineer, or engineering geologist with the approval of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, if necessary for
safety and stability or to prevent damage of ABUTTING properties from SEDIMENTATION, or EROSION or to
provide ACCESS for slope maintenance and DRAINAGE. RETAINING WALLS may be used to reduce the
required SETBACKS when approved by the ZONING OFFICER.
0. Setbacks from Property Lines. The tops of cuts and toes of FILL slopes shall be set back from the outer
boundaries of the area to be disturbed including slope return areas and EASEMENTS.
507.8 DRAINAGE AND TERRACING
A. DRAINAGE FACILITIES and te1Tacing shall confom1 to the provisions of DEP regulations, DEP EROSION
and SEDIMENTATION Control Handbook, and STORM WATER MANAGEMENT Ordinance provision of this
section.
B. Subsurface DRAINAGE. Cut and FILL slopes shall be provided with subsurface DRAINAGE as necessary
for stability. All nmoff calculations shall be provided for review by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
C. Disposal. All DRAINAGE FACILITIES shall be designed to carry \Vaters to the nearest practicable
DRAINAGE way approved by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER andlor other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place
to deposit such waters. EROSION of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of stilling
basin, energy dissipaters or other approved devices at the outfall of storm pipes.
507.9 EROSION CONTROL
A. Slopes. The faces of cut and FILL slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against EROSION.
All such slopes shall be protected in compliance with Westmoreland Conservation District regulations.
B. Temporary EROSION control devices or methods shall be employed prior to and during site constmction.
C. Permanent EROSION control procedures or devices shall be establisheJ and approved prior to the release of
any guarantees or securities.
507.10 SANITARY REGULATIONS
A. O'\f-SITE soil absorption and SE\VAGE disposal systems or any part thereof shall be prohibited in POOR
SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas. as regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
B. ON-SITE soil ahso1ption and SE\VAGE disposal systems (septic tanks, abso1ption fields, and seepage beds
and pits) shall require permit approvals before any patt of any such system shall be installed within fifty (50) feet
of POOR SOILS or STEEP SLOPE areas. TI1e APPLICATION shall include a map delineating the topography
and the boundaries of regulated slopes and shall be in conformance with all PA DEP and COUNTY regulations.
507.11 VEGETATION
44
:\11 existing vegetation on STEEP SLOPES shall be preserved in its natural condition. Where slope alteration
necessitates disturbance of existing vegetation, both temporary and long-tcnn vegetation shall be established within
sixty ( 60) days of the mitial disturbance. The TO\V>ISHIP E:\"GGEER may extend this time lin1it at the request of the
developer on the recommendation of the TO\NKSHIP Engineer if such extension shall not contribute to increased
potential for landslide activity. EROSION or lowside SEDI\1E\iTATION or sediment pollution to a wate1way.
507.12 ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTIOJ\i
A. Operations or activities that increase loads, reduce slope support or otherwise cause instability are prohibited
in these areas.
B. The licensed professional engineer 1vho prepared the soils geotechnical REPORT shall rcvievi the preliminary
and final DEVELOP:vIE:\'T PLAN for compliance witluecommcndations expressed in the RL'.PORT.
C Inspections shall be performed at critical stages of the work. Such inspections shall be at the expense of the
DEVELOPER. The OW~ER must notify the TO\\ :-;SHIP of the need for inspection at each of the followmg
stages:
I) Lnitial Inspection - When work is ready to begin, but before any GRADING or bmsh removal is
started.
2) Toe Inspection - Aftt:r the natural ground is exposed a prepared to receive FILL, but before any FILL
is placed.
3) Excavation Inspection - After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation
exceeds I 0 feet.
.+) FILL Inspection - After the fILL emplacement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts
exceeds I 0 feet. Stmctural fills shall be inspected more regularly by the 0:\-SITE inspector
according to a schedule determined by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
5) Drarnage Device Inspection - After fom1S and pipes are in place, but before any concrete 1s poured.
6) Rough GR/I.DING - When all rough GR..'\Dr\G has been completed. This inspection may be called
for at the completion of the rough GRADING.
7) Final - When all work has been completed, including installation of all DR..'\f:\AGE STRCCTIJRES
and other protective devices, and the GRADING PLAN and required REPORTS have been
submitted.
S) "Certified record" dra\vmgs or "as-built" dra1vings showing all completed work. including the
topography. and all STRUCTCRES A:\'D l\1PROVEMEl\iTS within one-hundred (I 00) feet of the
STL'.FP SLOPES shall be provided to the TO\VJ\iSI!IP prior to the issuance of any OCCUPANCY
PER\11TS and prior to the release of all guarantees and securities of the DEVELOPER by the
TOWNSHIP. Said drawings must consist of two (2) sets of reproducible plans labeled as "Record
Plans." Said drawmgs must be submitted in a digital format st.;~'.1 that they may be directly imported
into the TOW-:\SHIP'S geographical information system 111 a manner consistent with the standard
outlined m Appendix B of this ORDI~Al\CE.
508 \\ATER
~08.1 PU31 IC WATER SUPPLY
A. [f \Yater within a SUBDIV!SI0'-.1 or l.A.'.\D DI:\'ELOl'\IENT is to be provided by means other than by
pm ate \\ells owned and maintained by the mdi,·idual OW:\ERS of LOTS wttlun the SUBDIVISIO~. the
Dl'\'ELOPER shall present evidence to the PLAl\0ilNU COMMISSION that the SuBDIVISIOJ'\ or
DE\'ELOP\IENT is to be supplied by a ce111fied public utilitv, a bona fide cooperative association of LOT
O\\.\:ERS. or by a mu111c1pal corporat10n, c\CTHORITY or utility. A copy nf a Certificate of Public Convenience
from the Pennsylvania Public Utility C'omm1ssmn (PUC) or an APPl.ICA T!ON for such certificate, a cooperative
.+5
agreement or a conunitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
B. Where an approved PUBLIC water system is within one thousand (1,000) feet from the SUBDIVISION or
LAND DEVELOPMENT, all necessary MAINS and LATERALS for connection from the LOTS to the system, as
shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN and FINAL PLANS, shall be installed by the DEVELOPER.
C. The DEVELOPER shall construct water MAINS in such a manner as to make adequate water service
available to each principle BUILDING or dwelling unit within the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT.
The entire system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the TOWNSHIP and
MA WC and shall be subject to its approval. The water supply must comply with the regulations and standards of
DEP.
D. l'vlA.INS must be sized to provide for adequate pressure and supply for the anticipated demands of the
SUBDIVISION or LA0i'D DEVELOPMENT and to meet the minimum requirements for fire protection
established by the American Insurance Association and the National Board of Fire Underwriters . .Ylinimum MAIN
sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the MA WC.
E. If adequate source of supply is available, fire hydrants shall be installed at a maximum spacing so that
properties to be built upon shall be within six hundred ( 600) linear feet of the fire hydrant. A fire hydrant shall be
located at the entrance of each cul-de-sac of 500 feet in length. If adequate supply is not available, fire hydrant
connections shall be provided for future installation. Review and approval by the appropriate TOWNSHIP fire
prevention official shall be required in order to insure that adequate fire protection is provided and shall be at the
expense of the DEVELOPER. The TOWNSHIP shall identify fire hydrant locations, and fees for these hydrants
shall be paid by the DEVELOPER prior to the recordation of the PLAN.
F. All water l'vL\INS proposed to be installed in or along RlGHTS-OF-WA Y shall be located in accordance with
MA WC regulations.
G. Water MAI'.'IS shall be extended to the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT boundary when required
by the PLANNING COMMISSION.
H. All water line design and CONSTRUCTION shall be revie\ved and approved by the MA WC Engineer.
I. If a PUBLIC water supply system is to be provided to the SITE within a six-year period as indicated in the
MA WC Water Master Plan, the North Huntingdon TO\VNSHIP Capital IMPROVEMENTS Program, or other
official document; the TOWNSHIP may require installation of a CAPPED SYSTEM, or DRY LINES (tvfAINS
only), within the ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY; or the TOWNSHIP may require a payment in lieu of the
IMPROVEMENT.
J. Average daily residential demand shall be computed in accordance with the housing unit type and size data.
K. NON-RESIDENTIAL demand shall be computed in accordance with use and size data.
L. The entire cost of all work shall be borne by the DEVELOPER, except if approved for the difference in the
cost of PUBLIC facilities required for the proposed use and the cost of more adequate PUBLIC F i\CILITIES
requested by the TOWNSHIP that will permit additional service for other areas.
508.2 PRJVATEWATERSUPPLY
A. Vv11ere PUBLIC water is not accessible, or cannot be extended to the SITE, the DEVELOPER shall furnish
water for all new SUBDIVISIONS and by the LOT OWNER on an individual LOT basis.
B. In all cases where the water supply is from a well, the O\VNER shall obtain a certificate that he has complied
with the applicabk STA TE and COUNTY health regulations and shall submit such cenificate and copies of \veil
logs from adjacent wells to the PLAI\'NING COMMISSION. This certificate will be a prerequisite to the FINAL
APPROVAL or issuance of a BUILDING permit for any and all BUILDINGS erected under approval of this
Ordinance.
46
C Indi\·idual pri\·ate \\·ells shall be located a honzontal distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from property
Imes. approximately one hundred ( 100) feet from all tile disrosal fields and other SEWAGE disposal facilities; ten
( 10) feet from all PVC or cast iron sewer lines; thirty (30) feet from any vitrified sewer tile !mes; and shall not be
located withm any FLOODPLAIN.
D. As a precaution against seepage, a water-tight seal shall be provided around the pump mounting.
E All abandoned \\ells shall be sealed in a manner that \\ill render them 1\atcr-tight m accordance with DEP
regulations.
F In all cases \\here it has been determined that individual water supplied from private \\ells is not feasible, a
PLI3LIC water distnhurron system \\'!II he required.
Ci \\l1ere no PUI3L!C \\ater suprly is availah!t· to the SUBDIVISION. the BOARD OF C01v!:'vIISSIONERS
shall require the DEVELOPER to obtain from the proper health officer, certificates of approval as to the quality
and adequacy of the \vatcr supply proposed to he utilized by the DE'vT~LOP:VfE;-.;T.
509 SA:\ITARY SEWERS
509.1 PljBL!C SANITARY SEWERS
:\. ~o sarntary SE\\':\GE facility shall be constructed until plans and specifications ha\'e been submitted to DEP
and approved in accordance with existing laws and until such plans and specifications have been approved by the
North Huntingdon Township :Vlunicipal Authority and AUTHORlTY Engineer.
B. All sanitary sewers must be desigm:d and constrncted in accordance with DEP regulations and shall meet the
standards contained in the following:
I) DEP Bureau of \\'ater Qualny \fanagcment Scv.:erage Manual, Publication ~o. I. latest edition.
2) NHTMA TV1anual of procedures and requirements for the constmction of samta1y sewers.
C \\l1ere an approved sa111tary sewer system is \vithin one thousand ( 1,000) feet of the SUI3D!VISION or
LA1'TI DEVELOPMENT, all necessary l'vlATNS and LATERALS for cormection from the LOTS to the system,
shall be shown on the PRELI\IINARY PL\!\ and Fil'<AL PLA'.\, and shall be installed by the DEVELOPER,
subject to review and approval by the DEP and the NHT:V!A.
D. The N l!TI'v1A should be contacted rrior to the submission of an /\!'PUC ATlO>l proposing sanitary SC\verage
systems.
F. If no such existing sanitary sewer facilities arc available, but will become available within ten ( 10) years,
accordmg to the Capital l\1PROVEl'v1ENTS Plan for the North Huntingdon TO\VNSll!P P.lunicipal Authonty
( \; llT\1.-\ ). the D E\'ELOPER shall install sewer lines. including LATERAL connections. \\hi ch will provide
sernce to each LOT when connection \Vi th the l'U BLIC sa111tary se\vcr system rs made. The new sewer lines shall
be suitably capped at the limits of the SUBDIVISION and the LATERALS shall extend from the new sewer !me
am: be capped at the RIGHT-OF-WAY !me. The sewer mstallation shall mclude CONSTRLCTIO'.'J \\'ithin
RICJHT-OF-\VA Y or EASE\lE'.'\TS to lmng the new sewer to the future cormection with the TO\VNSHIP sanitary
sewer system.
F. All capped PU3LIC sa111tary sewer Imes and LA TER1\LS shall be tested for leaks and other deficiencies pnor
to connection to the Pt:BLIC sewage system. The DEVELOPER shall deposit funds in ESCROW, or furnish
bonds or other securit\' to meet the cost of such testing.
G. \\lien capped sewers and LA TERA LS are required, 0:\-SITE disposal facilities shall also be provided, in
accordance with the pro\·isions of this ordin:mce (Section 510.2).
fl 1l1e DEVELOPER shall make the connection to the TOW\:Sllll' sanitary sewage facilny for all dwellmgs
withm sixty (00) days after notification 111 writmg that such conncct10ns arc authorized. ESCROW funds or other
guar:mtL'C of compktion shall be established and remain 1n effect until permanent connection is made to the
system. The amount of such security shall be determined by the NHTMA but shall be no greater than 110% of the
cost of such connection as estimated by the NHTMA ENGINEER.
I. The DEVELOPER shall prepare PLANNING MODULE COMPONENTS (PMC) including PLANS and
specifications for sanitary sewers, for submission to the DEP. The PMC, along with any required fees, shall be
submitted to the TOWNSHIP for transmission to the appropriate agencies. No APPLICATION FOR FINAL
APPROVAL shall be approved and no work shall be done in connection with the SUBDIVISION until a permit is
granted and submitted to the TOWNSHIP.
J. A full-time NIHMA approved inspector shall be required during the entire CONSTRUCTION period for all
lines and LATERALS intended for immediate or future com1ection to the PUBLIC wastewater treatment system.
509.2 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
A. If PUBLIC sewer facilities are not available, the DEVELOPER shall provide for private sewage disposal in
conformance with TOWNSHIP and DEP specifications prior to the approval of any APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
B. All sewage disposal systems must be designed and constmcted in accordance with STA TE DEP regulations
and shall meet the standards contained in the DEP Bureau of Water Quality Management Sewerage Manual,
Publication No. 1, latest edition
C. If PUBLIC sewer facilities are not available, the DEVELOPER shall install an individual ON-LOT SEW AGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS for each LOT.
D. All PLANS and specifications for ON-LOT SE\VAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, private sanitary SEWERS,
sewage pumping stations, and sewage treatment plants shall be submitted to and approved by the SEWER
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, the DEP, and other regulatory agencies prior to the FINAL APPROVAL of any
PLAT.
E. \Vhere the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT will be served by ON-LOT sewage disposal systems,
the PLANNING COMMISSION shall require the DEVELOPER to submit PERCOLA Tl ON TESTS and a
sanitary feasibility REPORT prepared by a Pennsylvania Licensed Professional Engineer in accordance with the
methods and procedures set f011h by the Department of Environmental Resources DEP
F. A written REPORT from DEP shall be submitted to the PLANNING COMMISSION indicating the suitability
of all LOTS for ON-LOT sewage disposal. The location of the ON-LOT sewage system and the well, and the
measured distance between them, must be shown on the PLAN prior to the issuance of a BUILDING PERMIT and
shall be reviewed and approved by the SEWER ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
G. TI1e DEVELOPER shall provide each OWNER or occupant of a dwelling unit with ON-LOT facilities with a
PLAN of the system and an instruction manual for the use, operation, and maintenance of the system.
H. Existing ON-LOT systems shall be shown on any PLAN. The PLANNING COMMISSION shall review the
existing ON-LOT sewage disposal system for any LOT being made smaller through a SUBDIVISION and may
require any additional REPORTS as necessary to venfy the ability of the ON-LOT sewage disposal system to
function on the smaller LOT.
I. When PLBLIC sanitary sewage ts available or becomes available all DEVELOPMENTS shall be reqmred to
connect to the PUBLIC system. Initial CONSTRUCTION and IMPROVEMENTS to the proposed
DEVELOPtvIENT. SITE shall include all connectors needed to facilitate the eventual connection to the PUBLIC
samtary sewage system. as requtred in Section S 1 O. l.2 of this ORDINANCE.
J. A full-time TO\VNSHIP (or municipal A LTHORITY, as applicable) appointed inspector shall be required
during the entire CONSTRlTTION period for all lines and LATERALS intended for immediate or fuhire
connection to the PUBLIC wastewater treatment system. Said inspection shall be in compliance with this
ORDINANCE. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Sewage Enforcement Ofiicer (SEO) appointed by the
TOWNSHIP, if applicable.
48
510 LITILITIES
510.1 Every LOT in a Sl.'BDIVISION shall be capable of being served by a gas distribution system, electric
distribution system. cable tele\ ision and a telephone distribution system constructed and connected in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the TOWNSHIP and appropriate PUBLIC utility, where concerned.
Letters shall be provided certifying ability for each LOT to be served by such utilities.
510.2 TI1e gas distnbution system may be waived if the energy supply is to be all-electric.
510.3 All utility lines including. but not limited to, electric. natural gas, street light supply, cable T\/. and telephone
shall be placed underground. except where it 1s demonstrated to the satisfaction of the PLAN'NING COMMISSION that
the underground installatlon required herein is not feasible because of the physical condition of the lands involved.
51 O . .+ A cable television conduit to provide LATERAL connection between trunk Imes and each residential unit in
the PL\:\ shall be required as a Pt:BUC I\IPROVF\1E'.\'T. TI1c design standards for such unckrground cable
tdevision lines shall be 111 accordance with the laws of the Commomvealth of Pennsylvania or. in lreu thereof, the
st:mdards shall comply \\·ith those for telephont.' lines or electTic lines as they may reasonably apply.
510.5 Where practicable. all utilities shall be located within the STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. but not under the
CART\\".-\ Y or SIDEWALKS. otherwise EASE:\IE>.'TS or RIGHTS-OF-\VA Y across private property of sufficient
width for mstallallon and maintenance shall be provided.
510.6 /di utilny EASE'.\1E"\:TS shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and placed so as to service the LOT inrnlved
with the least practical difficulty to the LOT O\VNERS and the TO'vVNS!lIP, and all EASE'.'vlENTS shall be dedicated
for municipal purposes.
510.7 LOTS that abut existing EASEMENTS or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY where overhead electTic or telephone
distribution supply Imes and service connections ha\'e previously been installed may be supplied with electnc and
telephone service from those O\erhead Imes, but the service connections from the utilities' merhead lines shall be
installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities. should a ROAD widening, or an extension of seTVice,
or other such condition occur as a result of the SLBDIVISION and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such
utilities. such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
510.8 Where overht.'ad lint's are pern1itted as the exception. the placement and alignment of poles shall be designed
to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations
along hoiizons: clearing swaths through tTet.'d areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a staggered alignment;
trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to mirnmize the view of the poles and the alignments: and
alignments shall follow REAR LOT LINES and other alignments.
510.9 Y car-round screening of landscaping of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of the ground. other
than utility poles, shall be required.
510.10 FI0:AL PLANS shall be coordrnated with requll"ed tree planting. and "as-built" PL\ NS shall show locations
or all utilities and all STREET trees.
511 OFF-STREET PARKI~G
511.1 OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards of the
ZONI>:Ci ORDI1'<A:JCE.
511.2 OFF-STREET PARK!l\"G AREAS in NON-RESIDENTIAL USE districts shall be located to the side and rear
of BUILDINGS \\here\·cr possible.
'\ 11.3 PARKI>.'G AREAS for all commercial uses and MlJLTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS. shall be paved with a
bituminous surface. such as asphalt or concrete. (]ravel surfaces are not acceptable.
:' 11 . ..+ l'edestnan CROSS\\' A I KS and refuge ISLANDS shall be provided at intervals not ~xceeding two hundred
1200) lcct along the length of each P . .\RKl:\G :\REA
511.5 The minimum width or ISLANDS shall be 10'.
511.6 PARKING AREAS shall be designed to pemlit each vehicle to proceed to and from the PARKING SPACE
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other vehicle.
511. 7 ACCESS shall be designed so as to allow vehicles to enter a PUBLIC STREET in a forward direction. Parking
aisles or drives shall be designed to as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular ACCESS to a street in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movements. No driveway entering a PUBLIC STREET at the CURB shall exceed
a width of twenty-five (25) feet.
511.8 The edge of any PARKING AREA shall not be closer than 1 O' to the outside wall of the nearest BUILDING.
511.9 All dead-end PARKING AREAS shall be designed to provide sufficient area for backing and turning
movements from the end PARKING SPACES of the PARKING AREA.
511.10 No less than a 5' foot radius of curvature shall be pemlitted for CURB lines in a PARKING AREA.
511.11 TI1e layout of every PARKING AREA shall be such as to permit safe and efficient internal circulation in
accordance \vith standards, including truck traffic \Vhere applicable.
511.12 Every OFF-STREET PARKING AREA shall include sufficient stacking space to accommodate entering and
exiting vehicles without overflowing into adjacent STREETS.
511.13 All PARKING SPACES shall be marked so that individual spaces are identifiable.
511.14 All OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS in a commercial, industrial, or MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
shall be suitably illuminated for night use. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed
away from property in a residential area. All luminaries shall have a total cutoff angle no greater than 90 degrees from
the vertical. Lighting standards shall conform to those in the ZONING ORDINANCE.
511.1 S All Off-Street Parking Areas shall meet landscaping requirements of this ORDINANCE and the ZONING
ORDINANCE.
S 11.16 All public parking shall conform to requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act..
512 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
All loading facilities shall conform to the standards and regulations of the ZONING ORDINANCE, Section 819, and
shall be designed to mininlize conflicts with pedestrian and with passenger automobile circulation.
513 STORlW \VATER MANAGEMENT
S 13.1 The DEVELOPER shall construct and/or install such DRAINAGE STRUCTURES as necessary to:
A. Prevent EROSION damage and to carry off or to detain and control the rate of release of surface waters in
compliance with the TOW;-JSHIP STOR!\1 \VATER MANAGEMENT Ordinance.
I3. Fncourage all run-off control measures to percolate the STORfvl WATER into the ground to aid in the
recharge of ground waters. TI1is may include constructing several smaller stonnwater retention/recharge areas in
lieu of one large facility.
C. Carry surface water to the nearest adequate STREET, STORLvI DRAIN, DETENTION BASIN, and natural
watercourse or drainage facility.
D. Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead \Vatcr a\vay from springs, and to avoid
excessi\'e use of cross GUTTERS at STREET mtcrsections and elsewhere.
E. Handle the anticipated peak discharge from the SITE and also the existing run-off being contributed from all
land at :i higher elevation in the same watershed.
50
F Maintains the adequacy of the natural stream CHANNEL. Accelerated bank EROSION shall be prevented by
controlling the rate an velocity of run-off discharge to these water courses, so as to avoid increasing occurrence of
stream bank overflow.
G. PrescrYe the adequacy of existing CUL VER TS, and bridges by suppressing the new FLOOD peaks created by
new LA:\D DEVELOP\IENT.
IL Design and build facilities for STORtvf \\/ATER quality and qu:mtity.
I. Encourage the construction of stornwvater facilities that blend into the natural landscape of the site.
513 .2 Retention of existing watercourses and natural drainage features:
A. Whenever a watercourse, stream, or intermittent stream is located within a DEVELOP'.\1ENT site, it shall
remain open in its natural state and location and shall not be piped, unless a DEP pcnnit is obtained and in
accordance with TOWNSHIP approval.
13. TI1e existing points of nahiral DRAC\AGE discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered without the
written approval of the affec:cd OWNERS and the approval of the TO\Vl\SHIP ENGINEER.
C. ?\o stmrn water run-off or natural DR.1'i..Jl\AGE shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage facilities,
or create flooding or the need for addit10nal DR.A.fNAGE struchtres on other private properties or PUBLIC lands.
513.3 STOR\1 \VATER l'v!ANAGE\1EJ\T PLAN
The STOR...\1 WATER MANAGEMEl\iT PLAN included in the APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL shall
include all inforn1ation required by and consistent with the standards of the TOWNSI!ll' STORM WATER
:VL.\:\AGE\lL\:T Ordinance. ii820 as enacted and amended, conformance wnh the Pennsylvania STORM \VA TER
MANAGEMENT Act (Act 167), Turtle Creek and Youghiogheny Watershed Ordinances, and other STATE,
COUNTY and TOWNSHlP regulations may also be applicable. The STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN must
be approved by the Westmoreland County Consen·at1on District. TI1e TO\VNSH!P E\IC~!NEER and the \Vestmoreland
County Consen·at1on D1stnct shall review the STOR\1 WATER \lAi\AGEMENT PLAN. TI1c APPLICATION shall
not be approved by the GOARD OF COMMISSlONERS if the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and the \Vcstmoreland
County Consen·ation District docs not approve the STOR\11 \VA TER \L:\.>IAGEMENT PLA>I. The TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER shall present a REPORT to the GOARD OF COi\1\HSSIO:\ERS stating the deficiencies with the STOR\1
WATER iv!ANAGEMENT PLAN and those reasons shall be a basis for denial of the APPLICATION FOR
DEVELOPME\JT.
514 EROSION and SEDIMENTATION
5 l-U EROSION and SEDI\1E);TATIO'./ CONTROLS
A. GRADNG and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control procedures and STRUCTURES shall comply
\\1th all applicable regulations and all required approvals including the approval of the Westmoreland County
Conscn·at1on District shall be granted prior to 1-T\AL APPROVAL of the proposed SCBDIVISIO>I or LA\:D
DEVELOPMENT.
I3. TI1e followmg shall apply to all SlI3D!VlSION and LAND DEVELOPMENTS in the TO\VNSIIIP
1) Pennsylvania STOR:Vl \VATER \i!A>IAGF'v!E\T Act Guide Imes (P. L 864, Act 167 )
2) PA DEP Sod EROSfON and SEDI\1E~TA TION Control l'vlanual, latest edition.
3) Turtle Creek Watershed Act l 0-:- STOR\! \YATER \1A\:AGE\1ENT Plan prcp:ned for Allegheny
County and Westmoreland County.
4) STOR\I \\ .. \TER \l.\".\GE\IF:\T ord111ancc .. ":'\20. as amended.
5) NPDFS regulations and pern1its:
51
514.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND COMPLIANCE
A. No changes shall be made to the contour of the SITE, and no GRADING, excavating, removal or destruction
of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the SITE, shall be commenced until such time as a PLAN for
minimizing EROSION and SEDIMENTATION as been processed, and reviewed by the PLANNING
COMMISSION, the Westmoreland COUNTY Conservation District and the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS,
and soil and EROSION approval received.
B. Approval by the Board of Commissioners of all PRELIMINARY PLANS and/or FINAL PLANS does not
relieve the DEVELOPER of his obligation to execute the EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control measures as
contained in this section.
C. All sites with greater than five ( 5) acres of disturbance or deemed ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE by
the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER and/or the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT shall require a preconstruction
meeting behveen the TOWNSHIP, the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT, the
property ov.ner and the excavator.
D. FINAL APPROVAL of PLANS and specifications by the WEST:vtORELAND CONSERVATION
DISTRICT for the control of EROSION and SEDL.VJ:ENT A TION shall be concunent with the approval of the
PLANS of SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, and become a part thereof. FINAL PLANS for
minimizing EROSION and SEDIMENTATION as approved, will be incorporated in the DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT and PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE, as required by the TOWNSHIP.
E. At the time a BUILDING PERMIT is applied for, a review shall be conducted by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER to insure conformance with the PLAN as approved. During CONSTRUCTION, further consultative
technical assistance may be required to insure compliance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
F. During the DEVELOPMENT phase, the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall inspect the DEVELOPMENT SITE
and enforce compliance with the approved EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control PLANS.
G. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION controls shall be provided both during and after CONSTRUCTION in
accordance with the provisions in this ORDINANCE.
H. Proposed EROSION and SEDIMENTATION controls should be submitted with the STORM WATER
l\!IANAGEMENT PLAN as part of the APPLICANT'S PRELIMINARY PLAN.
I. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding phase has been inspected and
considered stabilized and approved. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall
issue a written description of the required corrections and establish the time by which they shall be made.
514.3 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. Measures used to control EROSION and reduce SEDIMENTATION shall, as a minimum, meet the standards
and specifications of the Westmoreland County Conservation District.
B. The following measures to minimize EROSION and SEDIMENT f,TION shall be included, where applicable,
in the EROSION and SEDIMENTATION control plan:
1) Stripping of vegetation. GRADING or other DEVELOPMENT shall be done in a way that will
minimize EROSION in compliance with the TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE, and the
STORM WATER YlA.>IAGE:\1ENT Ordinance.
2) The DEVELOPME)JT PLAN shall preserve salient natural features, keep FILL operations to a
minimum. and ensure confom1ity \Vith topography so as to create the least EROSION potential and
adequately handle the Yolume and velocity of surface water run-off.
3) \Vhenever feasible. natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
52
514.4
4) The disturbed area and the duration of temporary exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum, but
shall not exceed the time limits established in the DEP Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
l\fanual, latest edition.
5) Disturbed soils shall be permanently stabilized as quickly as practical, but within a time not to exceed
twenty (20) days.
6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
DEVELOP\IE:\T.
7) 111e pem1anent yegetation and mechamcal EROSION control and DRAINAGE shall be installed as
soon as practical in the DEVELOP\i!E\IT.
8) Provisions shall be made to accommodate effectively the increased run-off caused by changed soil
and surface condn1ons during and after DE\TI.OP\!E::-\T within the SITE. \\l1erc necessary, th<.".
rate of surface water run-off will be rm:chanically retarded.
9) Sediment in the nm-off water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of
sediment traps. sediment basins, or similar measures. Maintenance of these items is the responsibility
of the DEVELOPER until all construction of PLBLIC IMPROVE\iIE:\TS on the SITE is completed
and the entire SITE is stabilized to seventy (70) percent of GRO\.Jl\DCOVER at which point the
DEVELOPER shall remove said traps and basins.
SITE GRADll\G
In order to pronde more suitable SITES for BLilLDr\IG and other uses, improve surface DRAINAGE, and control
!:ROSIO!\, the f"l.lllO\"Vll1g requirements shall be met:
A. All SITES and LOTS, shall be graded to provide proper DR/\INAGE away from BULDrl\GS and dispose of
it without ponding, and all land within a DEVELOPMENT shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water
without ponding, except where ponding (DETEl\TIO>l" BASD\S and RETE>l"TION Bi\SNS) is pan of the
STOR.:\f \VA TER \L\"'.\AGE\1El\T plan for the site.
B. Concentration of surface water run-off shall be permitted only in swales, watercourses, or DETF\TION
BASINS. Subject to the approval of the TO\Vl\SHIP ENG!l\EER, swales shall be sodded, utilize jute matting, or
other similar measures to insure proper grO\vth of the GROUND COVER.
C GR/\DI:-JG shall in no case be done in such a way as to divert \Valer onto the propeny of another OWNFR.
D. During GRADI!\G operations, necessary measures for dust control must be exercised.
E. GRADl:\G equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams. Provisions shall be made for the installation
of temporal)' CUL VER TS or bndges.
F. Tire cleaning areas shall be provtded at each pomt of ACCESS on the DEVELOP\i1E>JT SITE.
G. EROSION controls shall be installed pnor to the mass grading of the s1t<'
514.5 Excavations and FILLS
A :\o exea\·ation shall be made with a face steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (I) ve11ical, except under the
following conditions:
I) A concrete. timber. masonry or other approved RETAl~TNG WALL constrncted in accordance with
appro\ed standards is provided to support the face of the excavation.
2) ,·\ sods (geutcchmcal) engmccnng RF PORT documents sod stability for the proposed slopes m
excess of 2: I on this site and the TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER approves the proposed slopes and the
proposed method of CONSTRLCT!O:\.
53
B. Edges of slopes shall be a rrummum of five (5) feet from property lines or RIGHT-OF-WAY lines of
STREETS or as directed by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge
without encroaching on the ABUTTING property.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the CUT face of excavations and
the sloping surfaces of FILLS.
D. CUT and FILL shall not endanger adjoining property.
E. FILL shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or EROSION of the soil.
F. FILLS shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed CHANNELS.
G. FILLS ABUTTING natural watercourses or constructed CHANNELS shall have suitable protection against
EROSION during periods of flooding.
514.6 RESPONSIBILITY
A. Whenever SEDI.i\!IENTATION is caused by stripping of vegetation, GRADING or other DEVELOPMENT, it
shall be the responsibility of the DEVELOPER causing such SEDIMENTATION to remove it from all affected
surfaces, DRAINAGE SYSTEMS and watercourses ON-SITE and OFF-SITE, and to repair any damage at his
expense as quickly as possible.
B. It is the responsibility of the DEVELOPER doing any work on or across a stream, watercourse, or swale, or
upon the FLOODPLAIN or RIGHT-OF-WAY during the period of the work, to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
C. The DEVELOPER shall not block, impede the flow of alter, constrnct any structure, deposit any material, or
perfom1 any \Vork which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream or watercourse without having obtained
prior approval from the TOWNSHIP and/or DEP, whichever is applicable.
D. 111e DEVELOPER who makes any surface changes shall be required to:
1) Collect ON-SITE surface run-off and control it to a point of discharge into the natural watercourse of
the DRA.INAGE area.
2) Handle existing Off-SITE run-off through his DEVELOPMENT by designing it to adequately
handle all upstream nm-off.
3) Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with TOWNSHIP requirements, all DRAINAGE
and EROSION control IMPROVEMENTS (temporary and permanent) as required by the approved
EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Control Plan and the approved STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT Plan.
515 MONUMENTS AND l\'L.\RKERS
S 15.1 Permanent reference MONl.JYIENTS or MARKERS shall be located at the boundary comers of each SITE
or SUBDIVISION according to the following standards:
A. A minimum of two (2) or one third of the number of points of intersection. w"hichever is greater. shall be
concrete MONUMENTS at least four ( 4) inches square at the top, six ( 6) inches square at the bottom and at least
30 inches in length. Any fr;Ktion resulting from computing the required number of reference MARKERS shall he
raised to the next whole number. All exterior I30UNDAR Y CORNERS shall be marked with concrete monuments.
B. The remainmg intersection points shall be located with solid metal pins of at least 518 inch diameter \vith a
minimum length ofthi11y (30) inches.
515.2 All LOT corners shall be located \Vith solid metal pins of at least five-eighths inch diameter with a minimum
length of thirty inches. Prior to the issuance of an OCCUP A'.'JCY PER!V1IT, it shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to mstall the metal property pins.
54
515 .3 MONUMENTS and MARKERS shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with
the intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the l'vIONUMENT or MARKER is level with
the surface of the surrounding ground as finally graded.
The MONUMENTS and pins as required shall be shown on the FINAL PLAT with the distance between them and
with sufficient curve data plainly marked. If such MONUMENTS have not been set at the time the FINAL PLAT is
submitted to the TOWNSHIP a certified check, payable to the TOWNSHIP shall be deposited with the
TOWNSHIP. The amount of the check shall be sufficient to cover the cost of setting the required MONUMENTS
and pins as estimated by the TOWNSHIP. [f the MONUMENTS and pins have not been set within thirty days after
the expiration of the street maintenance bond, the MONUMEJ','TS will be set by the TOWNSHIP and the check
forfeited.
516 STREET TREES, LANDSCAPING, AND TREE PRESERVATION
516.1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND SU!v1MARY OF REQUIREMENTS. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. The TOWNSHIP institutes the provisions of this Section for the following purposes and in order to:
1) Enhance the aesthetic quality and character of new SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS;
2) Preserve existing natural resources through innovative design;
3) Enhance the general health and safety of the public by protecting ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE
AREAS and replacing valuable natural resources such as trees and other vegetation in such areas;
4) Provide for effective buffer areas betvveen SUBDIVISIONS and where desirable, betvveen LAND
DEVELOPMENTS and betvveen different ZONING DISTRICTS;
5) Retard glare, heat and pollution;
6) Stimulate air purification and oxygen regeneration;
7) Prevent soil erosion.
B. ZONING ORDINANCE. Landscaping requirements per the ZONING ORDINANCE which are stricter than
those of this Section shall supercede lesser requirements of this Section. Said requirements shall be included in
the LANDSCAPING PLAN and approved, bonded, and regulated per the regulations of this Section.
516.3 TREE PLANTING QUANTITIES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
A. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. For all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS involving the CONSTRUCTION of new
STREETS, trees shall be required at the following rates and standards:
1) Trees shall be required to be planted on a TREE LAWN within the RIGHT-OF-WAY along all
new STREETS, for all MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS, according to the specifications detailed below:
(a) Trees shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of each tree. In no instance shall large trees, as
listed in Section 5l6.3(D)(1) of this ORDINANCE, be closer than fifty (50) feet from each other
and shall be planted on alternate sides of the STREET . As an alternate to planting larger trees,
small flowering trees, per section 516.3(D)(2) of this ORDINANCE may be planted twenty five
(25) feet apart.
(b) Street trees shall be planted according to the specifications detail as indicated in Appendix A.
Street trees shall be planted within a four ( 4) foot TREE LAWN between the property line of
each lot and the SIDEWALK, unless otherwise provided for in section (c) below. At intersections,
trees shall be located no closer than fifty ( 50) feet from the intersection of the curbs. In the event
that SIDE\VALKS are waived under the provisions of this ORDINANCE, STREET TREES shall
be planted no fu11her than seven (7) feet from the edge of the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(c) Street trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with SIDEWALKS, EASEMENTS, or UTILITY
LINES. In order to accomplish the objectives of this section, the DEVELOPER may propose an
alternate design for the planting of required trees and installation of SIDEWALKS that includes
those requirements as well as the required CARTW A Y and CURBING within the area of the
required RIGHT-OF-\VAY. Alternate plans must be reviewed by the utility companies and
authorities serving the DEVELOMENT, with written approval by same. The TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER shall review such plans and make a recommendation to the BOARD OF
COMMISSINERS.
55
(d) Size, type and quality standards. Street trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in CALIPER.
Trees shall meet the general specifications for height and spread in relationship to CALIPER for
shade trees as stated in the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
(e) The TOWNSHIP shall exercise powers authorized by the First Class Township Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to establish maintenance responsibilities for TREES located
within PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
B. Additional Tree Planting Requirements and/or Tree Preservation.
1) Including the required planting of STREET TREES, the SITE must have a total tree coverage of five
percent (5%) of the total site area as measured by the standards contained in this section.
2) All new tree planting shall meet the species and CALIPER standards of this Section. The
DEVELOPER shall calculate the projected tree coverage for the SITE based upon the area of the DRIP LINE
of all newly planted trees at maturity and the existing total area of DRIP LINE of trees to be credited per
section 516.3 of this ORDINANCE.
3) Due consideration should be given to planting new trees in the following locations based upon the
characteristics of the site, in the following order of priority:
(a) On hillsides within the PLAN either on lots or in designated OPEN SPACES or buffer areas;
(b) Along existing streams as buffer;
( c) On portions of proposed lots;
(d) In designated recreation areas, active or passive;
( e) In DETENTION POT\TI areas as a buffer, not in embankments or near outlet strnctures
4) In meeting the requirements of this section, the DEVELOPER may utilize covenants to assure tree
planting on locations within the PLAN owned by individual property owners. These covenants shall be indicated on the
recorded PLAN. Tree planting areas owned by either the developer or a homeowners association shall be indicated on
the recorded PLAN.
C. Credit for Preservation of Existing Tree Stands and Individual Trees. DEVELOPERS are strongly encouraged to
preserve existing TREES on the site. The amount of new tree planting may be reduced by the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS upon recorrunendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION provided existing trees are preserved
on the SITE according to the following requirements:
1) In order to qualify for credit for the preservation of trees, the developer shall submit a TREE
PRESERVATION PLAN demonstrating the relationship of tree preservation on the SITE to the five (5%) percent
requirement of total tree coverage with said exclusions. The PLANNING COMMISSION through a SITE
visitation and/or review of the TOWNSHIP WOODLANDS OYERLA Y will perform the review of this PLAN.
The DEVELOPER is encouraged to consult with the TOWNSHIP on this plan prior to submission of an
APPLICATION. The PLANNING COMMISSION may require submission of this plan by a licensed landscape
architect for larger developments. The TREE PRESERVATION PLAN shall include, at a minimum:
(a) Location of existing trees requested to be credited.
(b) Species of existing trees requested to be credited.
( c) Determination of percentage of trees in any cluster (one acre c ~ more) that have a CALIPER have of
6" dbh or greater as a percentage of the entire cluster.
( d) Designation of any individual trees, not in a cluster (Jess thar. one acre) than have a dbh of 6" or
greater.
( e) ·rne total acreage of site coverage of all preserved trees that can be counted toward meeting the 5%
requirement according to standards contained in this section.
2) TI1e following shall not be counted toward meeting the five percent ( 5%) tree coverage requirement cited in
this section.
(a) Trees located on STEEP SLOPES as regulated by Section 507 of this ORDINANCE.
( b) Identified diseased trees.
( c) Clusters of trees that have a majority of trees with less than 6" CALIPER dbh.
(d) Individual trees with less than 6" CALIPER dbh.
56
D. APPROVED STREET TREES AT\D PLANT MATERIALS. TI1e following plant materials are approved for use
with the TOWNSHIP provided the specific SITE is suitable. The DEVELOPER may propose alternate species, subject
to the approval of the TOWNSHIP.
1) Large Trees.
a) Fraxinus americana - While Ash
b) Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata - Green Ash
c) Gleditsia tricanthos inennis - Thornless Honey locust
d) Liguidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
e) Liriodendron tulipera - Tulip Tree.
f) Phellodendron amurense - Amur Cork Tree
g) Plantanus acerifolia - London Plane Tree
h) Quercus alba - White Oak
i) Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak
j) Quercus phellos - Willow Oak
k) Robina pseadocacia inennis - Thomless Black Locust
I) Tilia - Linden
m) Zelkova serrate - Japanese Zelkova
2) Small Trees
a) Acer ginnala - Amur Maple
b) Comus florida - Flowering Dogwood
c) Crataegus phaenopyrnm - Washington Hawthorn
d) Gingko biloba - Gingko (male only)
e) Prnnus kwanzan - K wanzan Cherry
f) Sophora Japonica - Japanese Pagodatree
E. The WOODLANDS OVERLAY. The APPLICANT and the TOWNSHIP may utilize the WOODLANDS
OVERLAY in the development and evaluation of proposed TREE PRESERVATION PLAN.
S 16.4 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND DEVELOPMENTS
A Purpose and Applicability. The standards contained in this section are intended to improve the appearance of
LAND DEVELOMENTS as well as prevent EROSION, in1prove STORM WATER management, enhance visual
character, and improve the natural environment. All landscaping, screening and BUFFER ZONE plantings required by
this ORDINANCE shall be in addition to those included in the ZONING ORDINANCE. In particular, any required
planting shall meet the plant size requirements of the applicable sections of the ZONING ORDINANCE. However, the
DEVELOPER may establish to the satisfaction of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS that plants of smaller size will
equal or exceed the perfom1ance of required plants both at the time of planting and within three (3) years of planting.
B LAND DEVELOPMENT Requirements. All LAND DEVELOPMENTS shall include at a minimum ten (10°/ci) of
the total SITE AREA in landscaping IMPROVEMENTS. 'D1is requirement is in addition to other stated requirements
contained in this ORDINANCE and the ZONING ORDINANCE. Description of proposed landscaping shall be
provided in the landscaping plan as submitted in the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. The LANDSCAPE
PLAN shall be of sufficient detail to list the type of the proposed planting, the size of the planting at planting and
maturity and the number of plants and calculations that satisfy requirements of this Section.
C Landscaping shall be used in all open areas not covered by BUILDINGS, required parking areas,
SIDEWALKS or other IMPERVIOUS SURF ACES. Landscaping shall be a mixture of HIGH-LEVEL PLANTING,
LOW-LEVEL PLANTING and GROUND COVER, >vhich shall be of a type, size and placement compatible with
the LAND DEVELOPMEKT and the surrounding land uses.
D OFF-STREET PARKJ:'-JG AREAS. Parking lots for more than five (5) cars shall require additional landscaped
area equal to an aggregate minimum of five percent (5%) of the total paved area of the parking LOT. Such
landscaping shall be in addition to that required in this Section and in the ZONING ORDINANCE. In parking lots
designed to accommodate rows of parked vehicles, a ten (I 0) foot wide raised landscaping island shall be provided
along every other row of parking spaces. No more than t\venty (20) parking spaces or 180 feet shall be pem1itted in
a continuous row without being interrupted by a ten ( 10) foot wide raised separation to provide areas for
landscaping per provisions of this ORDINANCE.
57
E Unless \Vhere a stricter requirement is required by the ZONING ORDINANCE, a landscape periphery shall be
provided at a depth of five (5) feet along all public RJGHTS-OF-WA Y, as measured from the property line, for all
LAND DEVELOPMENTS in the TO\\lj\;SHIP, and shall be considered a part of the ten percent (10%) of required
landscaping area for LAND DEVELOPMENTS.
F Within the SITE AREA, landscaping shall be required for the following areas: the side and rear perimeters of
the site; the BUILDING perimeter; parking lots; dumpsters; screening areas adjacent to residentially zoned
properties and STORM WATER DETENTION and STORM WATER RETENTION FACILITIES, and loading
docks and shall be considered a part of the ten percent (I 0%) of required landscaping area for LAND
DEVELOPMENTS.
G The location and size of landscaped plantings shall not adversely affect SIGHT DISTANCE. Consideration
shall be given to future growth potential of all planted materials in reviewing SIGHT DISTANCE issues.
H HIGH-LEVEL PLANTING shall be required at the rate of one ( 1) per 1,000 square feet of total landscaping.
LOW-LEVEL PLANTING shall be required at the rate of one per 200 square feet of total landscaping. HIGHLEVEL
PLANTING and LOW-LEVEL PLANTING may be grouped. All other areas fulfilling the landscape area
requirements of this Section and the ZONING ORDINANCE shall contain GROUND COVER.
516.5 INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED LANDSCAPING I.tvf PROVEMENTS AND BONDING
A. In order to minimize any potential conflict with housing construction activity, STREET TREES may be
planted at the same time any required SIDEWALKS are installed according to provisions of Section 414 of
this ORDINANCE.
B. Seasonal Constraints. In lieu of planting due to seasonal constraints, the DEVELOPER shall be required to submit
to the TOWNSHIP an agreement signed by the purchaser at the time of settlement. Said agreement shall indicate
the following:
I) The locations and types of proposed vegetation on the submitted and approved LANDSCAPE PLAN shall be
planted when weather pem1its or within six months of the signing of the agreement.
2) The purchaser grants the DEVELOPER the right to plant trees or other agreed upon vegetation as indicated on the
LANDSCAPE PLAK
C. The TOWNSHIP may require the DEVELOPER or OWNER to deposit with the TOWNSHIP a sum of money
in the form of cash, certified check, letter of credit or bond equal to a minimum of fifteen ( 15%) percent of the
total landscape costs to cover the cost of replacing, purchasing, planting and maintaining all dead, dying,
defective or diseased plant material \Vithin the guaranteed period of 18 months.
A. Installation. Plant materials must be installed consistent with standards of the American Standards for
Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington. D.C.
B. The TOWNSHIP shall make a final inspection for acceptance at the end of the guaranty period of 18
months. This inspection \vill be performed when plant materials are in full leaf, May !51 through November 15'h.
All ESCROW funds \Viii be released upon acceptance following the end of the guaranty period.
C. Conditions of Occupancy. TI1e completion of all requirements of this Section or a guaranty thereof shall be
instituted before the issuance of an occupancy pe1111it as described in the Zoning Ordinance. In the event that all of
the required landscaping improvements cannot be installed at the time of request for an OCCUPANCY PERl'v1IT
due to the loss of the planting season. a temporary OCCUPANCY PERMIT may be granted for a period not longer
than nine months to allow for landscaping IMPROVEMENTS to be installed during the next planting season.
D. Maintenance. Maintenance of landscaped areas within approved LAND DEVELOPMENTS is the ongoing
responsibility of the property OWNER. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy
manner. Plants that die must be replaced with a similar or acceptable substitute. Failure to maintain required
landscaping shall result in an enforcement action by the Code Enforcement Officer as a violation of this
chapter 1nd shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in Article 7 of this ORDINANCE.
58
516.6 MODIFICATIONS
A. At the request of the DEVELOPER and the recommendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION, the
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may modify or waive the landscaping standards of this Section where one
or more of the following conditions occur:
1) There are special considerations of SITE design and/or topography.
2) There is existing healthy vegetation that is sufficient to meet the requirements. Existing vegetation shall be
used to meet all or part of the requirements of this section wherever possible.
3) There is a unique relationship to other properties.
4) Landscaping would interfere with utilities, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, EASEMENTS, sight distance or other
vegetation.
ARTICLE 6 CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
601 PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE
After FINAL APPROVAL has been granted by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS but before the start of
CONSTRUCTION, a PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE shall be held at the TOWNSHIP Offices. 111ose
required to be in attendance at this meeting are the TOvVNSHIP ZONING OFFICER, TOWNSHIP ENGINEER,
TOWNSHIP ROAD Superintendent, the DEVELOPER, the WESTMORELAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT and
the prime contractor and construction inspectors.
602 PROGRESS INSPECTIONS
602.1 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall appoint one or more qualified inspectors at the DEVELOPER'S
expense, to enforce the provisions of this ORDINANCE and the accompanying design standards and IMPROVEMENT
specifications.
602.2 Fees for inspection of required IMPROVEMENTS. 111e COMMISSIONERS shall establish, by resolution, a
schedule of fees for the TOvVNSHIP'S inspection of IMPROVEMENTS required under the provisions of this Chapter,
including but not limited to the payment of fees charged by the TOWNSHIP'S professional consultants for their
inspection. Such resolution shall be duly recorded in the Resolution Book of the TOWNSHIP, and such FEE
SCHEDULE shall be reproduced and made available upon request at the TOWNSHIP BUILDING. The resolution
providing for the various fees shall be periodically reviewed and amended, when necessary, by resolution of the
COMMISSIONERS The release, in whole or in part, of any FINANCIAL SECURITY posted in connection with such
IMPROVEMENTS and, if applicable, the acceptance of such IMPROVEMENTS by the TOWNSHIP shall be
contingent upon the payment of the proper fees as established by the resolution and the FEE SCHEDULE. The
DEVELOPER shall provide the TOWNSHIP a sum equal to two (2%) percent of the total bonded amount of PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS as a deposit for inspection fees. ln the event that the total inspection fees incurred are less than the
deposited amount, according to the aforementioned fee schedule, the difference shall be returned to the DEVELOPER.
In the event that the inspection fees exceed the deposited amount, according the aforementioned fee schedule, the
additional sum shall be invoiced to the developer, with contingency that the bonding shall not be released until fmal
payment i~ made to the TOvVNSHlP.
The TOWNSHIP reserves the right to require inspections of PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS that impact the public,
health, safety and \velfare and are approved as part of a LAND DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN. Any such costs for
those inspections shall be borne by the DEVELOPER who shall pay such fees prior to the issuance of any
OCCUPANCY PER..\!HT.
602.3 In the event the APPLICANT disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the inspection
of Hv1PROVEMENTS, the APPLICANT shall, within ten ( 10) working days of the billmg date, notify the
TOWNSHIP that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the TOvVNSHIP shall
not delay or disapprove a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOP\-1ENT APPLICATION or any approval or permit
related to DEVELOPME:H due to the APPUCANT's request over disputed inspection expenses.
59
602.4 Dispute resolution. If within 20 days from the date of billing, the TO\VNSHIP and the APPLICANT
cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the APPLICANT and the
TO\VNSHIP shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in MPC section 51 O(g).
602.5 Criteria for fees. Review and inspection fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or consultant for similar services in the TOWNSHIP, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the ENGINEER or consultant to the TOWNSHIP when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on APPLICANTS.
602.6 Notification. The DEVELOPER shall notify the PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT at least
seventy-two (72) hours prior to beginning any installation of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS in an approved PLAN.
While work is in progress, the DEVELOPER shall notify the Inspector at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the time
that the follo\ving required progress inspections are desired:
A. Inspection of the sub-GRADE of streets prior to laying of the base;
B. Inspection of the base as it is being constructed and prior to final PA YING of streets;
C. Inspection of street PA YING during constmction;
D. Inspection of the installation of storm sewers and drainage facilities as they are being constructed and
prior to final PA YING of streets;
E. Inspection of all utilities and street crossings within the public right-of-\vay;
F. All grading being performed.
The INSPECTOR shall prepare a written REPORT of all inspections in duplicate on OFFICIAL FORJvIS provided by
the TOWNSHIP. The TO\VNSHIP shall retain one ( 1) copy, one ( 1) copy shall be retained by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER, and one (1) copy shall be forwarded to the DEVELOPER.
603 TESTING
All construction materials, whether for public or PRlV A TE IMPROVEMENTS, shall be tested by a qualified
independent testing laboratory, unless notified by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. The costs for such tests shall be borne
by the DEVELOPER.
604 FINAL INSPECTION AND APPROVAL
604.1 When the DEVELOPER has completed all of the necessary and appropriate PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the
DEVELOPER shall notify the TOWNSHIP, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and shall send a copy thereof to the TOWNSHIP and the TOWNSHIP'S ENGINEER.
The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall, within ten ( 10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER to inspect all of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall,
thereupon file a REPORT m writing, with the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, and shall promptly mail a copy of
such REPORT to the DEVELOPER by certified or registered mail. The REPORT shall be made and mailed within
thi11y (30) days after receipt by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER of the aforesaid authorization from the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS. Said REPORT shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS, either in whole or in part. If said PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, or any part thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the TO\V0JSIIIP ENGI:\"EER, said REPORT shall contain a statement of reasons for
such non-approval or rejection.
604 2 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall notify the DEVELOPER, within 15 days of receipt of the
TO\:\TNSHIP ENGINEER'S REPORT, in writmg, by certified or registered ma1L of the action of the BOARD Of
COM\1ISSIONERS with relation thereto.
60
604.3 If the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein. all PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS will be deemed to have been approved and the
DEVELOPER shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its security.
604.4 Completion of rejected PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. If any of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS shall not be
approved by the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, the DEVELOPER shall proceed to complete the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS or rectify any deficiencies and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined
herein, shall be followed.
604.5 No limitation of DEVELOPER'S rights. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the
DEVELOPER'S right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS or the TO\VNSHIP ENGINEER.
605 ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
605.1 No property or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT shown on a FINAL PLAT shall be considered to have been
accepted by the TOWNSHIP until a formal DEDICATION thereof has been officially accepted by adoption of an
ORDINANCE of the TOWNSHIP, duly enacted and advertised in accordance with the Law.
605.2 Upon completion of the final inspection and approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the DEVELOPER
shall request in writing that the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS fornrnlly accept the DEDICATION of the PUBLIC
IMPRO\lEMENTS. The request for acceptance shall be accompanied by a legal description of all rights-of-way and
property, to be dedicated to the public. The ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS request shall be received
by the TOWNSHIP no more than ten (10) days before the next regular meeting of the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS in order to be scheduled for that meeting. Upon approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and
the DEVELOPER posting a MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE as defined in Section 609 and the BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS shall enact an ordinance accepting the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS as part of the TOWNSHIP'S
PUBLIC FACILITIES.
605 .3 Prior to the acceptance of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, and the return of any remaining APPLICATION
and reviev-i fees, the DEVELOPER shall submit to the TOWNSHIP the following:
A. Written REPORT certified by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER that all required PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS are completed according to specifications including ROADS, SIDEWALKS, utilities and
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT facilities. The written REPORT is to include boundary designations of
STREETS and EASEMENTS.
B. Evidence certified by the TOWNSHIP ZONING OFFICER that all pem1anent STREET SIGNS and other
SIGNS required by this ordinance, the DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT or any other applicable code have
been installed.
C. Two sets of As-built drawings of completed IMPROVEMENTS, clearly labeled as such by a Professional
Engineer or Land Surveyor, to the Board of Commissioners and to the Western Westmoreland Municipal
Authority, North Huntingdon TOWNSHIP Municipal Authority, and the Municipal Authority of
\Vestmoreland County. Said drawings must be submitted in a digital format such that they may be directly
imported into the TOWNSHIP's geographical information systems in a manner consistent with the standard
outlined in Appendix B of this ORDINANCE.
D. Certification of CO!\STRUCTION costs.
E. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE for ROAD Il'v1PROVE:vfENTS, utility extensions, STORNl WATER
facilities and other PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS pursuant to Section 609.
F. MAINTE:'-JANCE GUARANTEE for \vater line extensions and other structures to the Western
Westmoreland tvlunicipal Authority.
G. A written request that the TOWNSHIP and the N1ffl\1A accept the IMPROVEMENTS.
H. lv!AINTENANCE GUARANTEE for sevver line extensions. structures, and ancillary equipment.
61
606 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
606.1 Upon approval of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS in the PLAN, the DEVELOPER shall be released from
any liability pursuant to the FINANCIAL SECURITY posted to guarantee the proper installation of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
606.2 From time to time, during the installation of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, the DEVELOPER may request
partial release of the FINANCIAL SECURITY. Any such request shall be in writing and shall be addressed to the
BOARD of COMMISSIONERS. The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt
of such request to allow the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER to certify, in '-"Titing, that such portion of the installation of
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this ORDINANCE and the
APPROVED PLAT.
606.3 Upon such certification by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall
authorize release of all or a portion of the FINANCIAL SECURITY in an amount as estimated by the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER which fairly represents the value of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS completed. The BOARD of
COMMISSIONERS may require retention of ten percent ( 10%) of the estimated cost of such PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS until such tin1e as all PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS have been installed and the FINANCIAL
SECURITY is released in its entirety.
607 POSTING OF lWAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall require a MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE when accepting the
DEDICATION of PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The purpose of the MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE is to secure the
structural integrity of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and to guarantee the proper functioning of those
IMPROVEMENTS in accordance with the Article 4 and Article 5 of this ORDINANCE. The amount of the
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE aforesaid shall be fifteen percent ( 15'Ya) of the actual cost of the installation of such
IMPROVEMENTS for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of the ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATION.
608 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IlVIPROVEMENTS
608.1 TOWNSHIP remedies. In the event that PUBLIC IMPROVE!v1ENTS, which have been required have not
been installed as provided in this ORDINANCE vvithin 24 months, or additional time period as mutually agreed upon
by the TOWNSHIP and the DEVELOPER, of the FINAL PLAT approval, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall
enforce remedies provided under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to effect completion of the PlJBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
608.2 Installation by the TOWNSHIP; use of security proceeds. If proceeds of the FINANCIAL SECURITY are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS covered
by the FINANCIAL SECURITY, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may install all or part of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS in all or part of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT and may institute appropriate
legal or equitable actions to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the FINANCIAL SECURITY or from any legal or
equitable action brought against the DEVELOPER, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the PUBLIC
IMPn,OVEMENTS covered by the FINANCIAL SECURITY and not for any other municipal purpose.
ARTICLE 7 MODIFICATIONS A~D E~FORCEl\IENT
701 MODIFICA TIOl\"S
701.1 If any mandatory provisions of this ORDINANCE are shown by the APPLICANT, to the satisfaction of the
BOARD Of COl\evHSSIONERS to be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship, or that an alternate standard can provide
equal or better results, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may grant a modification to that provision. A modification
62
may be granted provided it \Viii not be contrary to PUBLIC interest and provided the purpose and intent of this
ORDINANCE is maintained.
701.2 All requests for modification shall be in writing and signed by the APPLICANT. The request shall fully state
the reasons and grounds for why the provision(s) is umeasonable or the hardship imposed, and shall discuss the
minimum modification necessary.
701.3 It is not sufficient proof of hardship to shmv that greater profit would result if the modification were granted.
Furthermore, a hardship cannot be claimed by one who purchases with or without knowledge of restrictions; it must be
from the APPLICATION of this ORDINANCE; it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence
of a modification granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered.
701.4 TI1e BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall consider modification requests that are necessary to meet
objectives of this ORDINANCE and the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, that encourage flexibility and creativity in design
of PLANS to protect ENVIRO:!\iMENT ALLY SENSITIVE AREAS, and otherwise are consistent with the objectives
of this ORDINANCE and the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
701.5 The BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall request an advisory opinion from the PLANNING
COMMISSION and from the TOWNSHIP Engineer on the modification request.
701.6 In granting modifications, the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS may in1pose such conditions as will, in its
judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
701. 7 The TO\VNSHIP shall keep a written record of all requests for modifications.
701.8 If a modification is granted it shall be referenced in the conditions of approval of the PLAN, and shall apply
only to that PLAN.
701.9 The written request for a modification shall be included in the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. Such
request shall cite the section(s) of the ORDINANCE to be modified, the extent of modification and the reasons for the
modification.
701.10 Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS setting
forth the reasons \vhich, in the opinion of the BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS justified the modification.
702 VIOLATIONS Ai"/\l'D PENALTIES
702.1 Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this ORDINANCE shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding cormnenced by the TOWNSHIP, pay a judgement
of not more than $500 plus all cmn1 costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the TOWNSHIP as a result
thereof. No judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the dete1mination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgment in a timely manner, the
TOWNSHIP may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determines that there has been a violation or
further deternunes that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ORDINANCE to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the distnct justice
and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
702.2 TI1e description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
702J TI1e O\VKER or tenant of any STRUCTUTZE or premises or land or LOT or part thereo( or any agent,
architect attorney, banker. builder, contractor or other PERSON who commits, panicipates in, assists in or maintains
such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
702.4 TI1e TO\VNSHIP may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or
develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a SCBDIVISION of real property in
violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this article.
63
702.5 Nothing herein shall prevent the TOWNSHIP from taking such other legal action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
64
OFFICIAL
NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF 2002.
ORDINANCE NUMBER 1051
AN ORDINANCE OF NORTH HUNTINGDON TOWNSHIP, WESTMORELAND
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ORDINANCE #1011, SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, BY ADDING THERETO AS PART ARTICLE 5,
SECTION 504 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION LAND; REPEALING THE
CURRENT PROVISIONS UNDER THE AFOREMENTIONED SECTION.
WHEREAS The Township of North Huntingdon, on March 15, 2000, has adopted a
Comprehensive Plan, entitled "Our Collective Vision for the Future"; and
WHEREAS Chapter 10 of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, entitled Community
Facilities: Parks and Recreation, cited the need to provide for the recreational needs
created by new residential developments within the Township; and
WHEREAS The Township of North Huntingdon, on August 16, 2000, has adopted a
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance containing provisions encouraging the
dedication of Open Space and Recreation Land and Environmentally Sensitive Areas;
and
WHEREAS The Township of North Huntingdon, has concurrently adopted a Parks,
Recreation, and Open Space Plan which makes recommendations for future
development of recreational facilities, funding for those facilities, and the amount and
type of recreation needed for Township residents; and
WHEREAS The Township of North Huntingdon desires to protect its natural resources,
provide for the recreational needs of its residents, and implement the goals and
directives of the Comprehensive Parks, Open Space, and Recreation Plan.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED that the North Huntingdon
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Article 5, Section 504 is
repealed in its entirety and the following substituted therefor:
504 IMPACT REGULATIONS, MANDATORY LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
AND FEE IN LIEU THEREOF
504.1 The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this section:
A. Active Recreation: Baseball/Softball fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, play
grounds, and other similar facilities which offer the ability to play an active sport and
constructed in conformance with national standards including those of the National
Recreation and Parks Administration.
1
B. Multi-Family - Dwellings units other than single family, including but not limited to
duplex, mobile homes in mobile home parks, condominium or group unit
development, and high and low rise apartment buildings as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.
C. Recreation Capital Improvements Program: A capital improvements program used to
guide the allocation of land to be developed or funds received in lieu of mandatory
land dedication, said plan being included in the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation,
and Open Space Plan, as amended from time to time by the Tovvnship.
D. Recreation Service Area: The service radius of existing or proposed Township parks
and recreation facilities as defined by National Recreation and Parks Administration
Standards as outlined in Section 504.18 of this ordinance.
E. Single Family Dwelling Unit: Single family dwelling units as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.
504.2 The provisions and requirements of this section shall apply to all FINAL LAND
DEVELOPMENTS and FINAL SUBDIVISIONS which would, upon buildout,
result in the creation of three (3) or more dwelling units.
504.3 The DEVELOPER shall dedicate land to be used for purposes of recreation
and open space at a per unit amount for multifamily units as specified in
Section 504.17 of this ordinance, which may be amended in the future by
resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners.
504.4 The DEVELOPER shall dedicate land to be used for purposes of recreation
and open space at a per unit amount for single family units as specified
in 504.17 of this ordinance.
504.5 Land offered for dedication shall meet the following criteria:
A. The land shall be physically and legally accessible to all residents of the
proposed DEVELOPMENT. The land may be an integrated part of the
DEVELOPMENT; within the recreation service area of the DEVELOPMENT.
The land, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, may be land
provided for use by all residents of the Township. Said land shall be centrally
located and dedicated for the purpose of a community center or similar
centralized recreational function as recommended by the Comprehensive
Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan.
8. No more than 25% of the land offered for dedication shall be located within
the ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE OVERLAY.
C. No more than 50% of the land offered for dedication may possess more than
5% slope.
D. At least 50% of land offered for dedication shall be developed as active
recreation with at least two types of active recreational opportunities offered.
Additional facilities may be required by the. Board of Commissioners. The
Board shall apply national standards including those of the National
Recreation and Parks Administration to determine the needs of the assumed
population of new developments and shall require corresponding facilities
accordingly.
E. All playing fields and associated structures shall be set back at least 30 feet
from all property lines.
2
F. A trail system, if accepted by the Township Board of Commissioners, may
substitute for one of the required active recreation types.
G. Land offered for dedication shall, where possible, be situated such that the
parcel abuts adjacent open space and recreational facilities thus creating an
integrated network of open space, trails, and recreational areas.
H. Land offered for dedication shall possess at least 100 feet of FRONTAGE
along a PUBLIC STREET.
I. The minimum total acreage of contiguous tracts of land to be offered shall be
equal to the minimum lot size, per the Zoning Ordinance, in the District in
which the PLAN is located.
504.6 The Township incorporates all rights granted in Section 705(f) of the
Municipalities Planning Code regarding the maintenance of common
open space including the right of the Township to maintain property
which the owner of homeowners' association fails to maintain and to file
liens against all properties having an interest in said association.
504. 7 The dedication of land to the Township shall be a general warranty deed. In
lieu thereof , the Township Board of Commissioners, at its discretion,
may require the creation of a homeowners' association or similar entity
charged with the maintenance of the facilities. The Board of
Commissioners may also grant the DEVELOPER permission to retain
ownership. In all cases, ownership by any entity other than the
Township, shall require deed restrictions requiring the maintenance of
the approved facilities on the SITE. The Township shall be a party to an
agreement providing for the enforcement of the aforesaid restrictions.
504.8 The DEVELOPER may pay a fee in lieu of land dedication at a per unit
amount for multifamily units as specified in Section 504.17 of this
ordinance.
504. 9 The DEVELOPER may pay a fee in lieu of land dedication at a per unit
amount for single family units as specified in Section 504.17 of this
ordinance.
504.10 The fee in lieu paid by the DEVELOPER shall be offered in the form of cash,
bond, cashier's or certified check, or held in an escrow account payable
upon FINAL APPROVAL of a PLAN. Payment of said funds shall be a
condition of FINAL APPROVAL of the PLAN and its release for
recordation. In lieu of payment as a condition of FINAL APPROVAL, the
DEVELOPER may elect to place a note on the PLAN which states that
the issuance of a building permit for each LOT or dwelling unit is
conditioned upon the payment of the fee in lieu amount specified in this
ordinance at the time of FlNAL APPROVAL.
504.11 All such fees collected shall, upon receipt by the Township, be deposited in an
interest-bearing account, clearly identifying the specific recreation
facilities for which the fee was received. Interest earned on such
accounts shall become funds of that account. Funds from such accounts
shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost incurred
3
to construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds were
collected.
504.12 Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection, the
Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from
the date of payment, if the Township had failed to utilize the fee paid for
the purposes set forth in this section within three years from the date
such fee was paid.
504.13 Use of Fees Collected. The Township shall use fees collected within the
recreation service area from which funds were collected for the purpose
of purchasing land or constructing or purchasing any equipment,
structures, courts, fields or other recreational facilities. All improvements
or purchases shall be associated with facilities accessible to the
residents of the DEVELOPMENT. Fees collected may also be used for
facilities accessible and designed for use by all residents of the
Township. Said facilities shall be centrally located and dedicated for the
purpose of a community center or similar centralized recreational
function as recommended by the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and
Open Space Plan.
504.14 The allocation of all fees collected shall be based upon recommendations of
the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Plan as well as
the Recreation Capital Improvements Program.
504.15 The DEVELOPER may offer, in lieu of both land dedication requirements and
associated fees in lieu thereof, to pay for 75% of the required fee to be
deposited in an interest bearing account for the purpose of repairing or
upgrading existing equipment noted in the Comprehensive Parks,
Recreation, and Open Space Plan as in need of improvement. Said
funds may only be used for equipment repair and upgrades in public
parks in the recreational planning area in which the associated PLAN is
proposed. The decision of accepting the offer of such funds rests solely
with the Board of Commissioners based on current needs and
recommendations from the Comprehensive Parks, Recreation, and Open
Space Plan as well as the Recreation Capital Improvements Program.
504.16 Exemptions. The following are exempt from the mandatory land dedication
requirements of this section:
A. Group Residence and Group Care Facilities as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.
504.17 Calculation of Mandatory Land Dedication and Fee in Lieu Thereof:
A. Land dedication required by single family dwelling units shall be .026 acres
per dwelling unit.
8. Land dedication required by multi-family dwelling units shall be .020 acres per
dwelling unit.
C. Fee in lieu of land required by single family dwelling units shall be calculated
as follows: $11 ,540 (estimated fair market value per acre) x .026 acres per
unit+ $200 per unit (assessed for improvements to public park lands)= $500
(fee per unit)
4
D. Fee in lieu of land required by multi- family dwelling units shall be calculated
as follows: $11,540 (estimated fair market value per acre) x .020 acres per
unit+ $200 per unit (assessed for improvements to public park lands)= $430
(fee per unit)
504.18
Chart 504-1
Par!< ClaS1ilicalioo
---
N~
Corrni.Dty
MetropoliW>
--
11.egional
-~
Spec:WAdMty
Recreation Service Areas. Chart 504-1 shall define the radius of existing
and proposed parks and recreation facilities based on their size and
usage. Indian Lake Park shall be categorized as a special activity per
the said chart with a service area radius of three (3) miles.
I
I
1 s..rvlc:e · IN=• ~·mt
Min. M!.1 I par 1,000
Size Radlu• Pao.
IJ@flnltlon Fadlttlet acre mile acre•
Walk ta pan:; intllnoe ~Ids, pl~rot.nds, let
recre.ation;1I activities; multi-put?O!"
1O O'!b developed fiardcourts, recreation cenll!I', 0.25-5 o.s 2.0
picnicklng
Orm. IC p;uk; lnCe<>Se S4llM a.o neif!hoomOOCl plus
recre.alkll'lal Ktlvltles; swimming pool,~
ll1JIL 80% deYl!loped and slngle-U!e h rts, 20 3 2.0
mu ltipurpo1e buildins
community center
Drive ID =r.:mati ly - , unlit
~rce BCtivitles pi;;ylielrU,. playwoundi,
with 10me lneue picik:lclng.. hiklng.iblkin&'
recrea. tio nal a clfvi ties; walic, natu ... Cflftter, 100 12 5.0
max. 4Q%. dewlcped amphl , group camping.
swimming beaches, boating
•rl!ll
Drive \0 paric; nmir.tl 3.1'1!» waw nsouii:&-orlenled,
wllti '°me *l>Urce baled CQl'M>'Vlltlon ·-·(flood
;i.Cllvitles; max 20% coMd/m~ll, developed 00.ches, 1'11.l!Jre nud)I, ~ 250 30 20.0
ampln~ AJstlc areas, brid
tr.I.I 15, p cnicking
: lands ~lcaied tD Ille lhunling ar~ and genenl Ip reservatl oo of na1ural Of>"" 'P'I"" 250 25 NA n!SOUllJ!S .nd wl ldllre
man•S'!"'..,t
I JPeClal ized reaeatlcnal a.motl!la, historical sites,
rac111t1es SPQ<\I compleoces, s<>lf
COUl'RS and traib 1"A NA NA
I
~ . - . - --·- - -
5
DULY ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present this .2 o .fh day of £drvt7ry , 2002.
I
Attest:
/
(SEAL)
fi
BOARD OF COMM1SS10NERS
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
By~~
Thomas L. Kerber, President
OFFICIAL
TOWNSIDP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. _l!L_ of 2010
ORDINANCE NO. 2151
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH
HUNTINGDON AMENDING ORDINANCE 765 (ZONING
ORDINANCE) PROVIDING FOR TEXT REVISIONS TO
TABLES IN SAID ORDINANCE.
WHEREAS, the Township Planning Commission has recommended to the Township
of North Huntingdon to revise certain text provisions of its Zoning Ordinance related to the C-
1 A Zoning District; and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners have held public hearings on the proposed
revisions pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code on July 21 and September 15, 2010;
and
WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners deem it in the best interests of the public's
health, safety and welfare to enact an Ordinance amending the present Zoning Ordinance,
Ordinance No. 765, to reflect the changes as follows.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Commissioners of
the Township of North Huntingdon, at a meeting assembled, by and with the authority of the
same as follows:
SECTION 1. Article V, Table 2 - Rear Yard Setback Requirements is
replaced with a revised Table 2, attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and made part of this
Ordinance.
- 1 -
SECTION2. Article V, Table 5 - Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted
Uses is replaced with a revised Table 5, attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and made part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION3. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township
Commissioner that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 20th day of October, 2010.
ATTEST: ://f7/L (----- M. Shepliera :rownship Secretary _,,. -:~ ,_..
' ~
SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSI NERS
- 2 -
EXHIBIT "A"
TABLE2
Rear Yard Setback Requirements
District Abutting Zoning Districts
Where (Distance in Feet)
Site is
Located R-1 R-lA R-2 R-3 R-4 PRD c C-1 C-lA C-2 I
R-1 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-lA 30* 30 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-2 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-3 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
R-4 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
c 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 30 30 30 30 30
C-1 30* 30* 40* 40* 40* 40* 30 20 20 20 20
C-lA 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30*+ 30 20 20 20 20
C-2 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30* 30 20 20 20 20
I 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 50* 30* 30 30 30 30
* Buffer Zone required - 10 foot planting (see definition).
+ Additional rear yard setback required in the C-1 A zoning district for buildings in excess of
three stories; 10 feet additional setback for every story over three stories.
Exhibit A
EXHIBIT "B"
North Huntingdon Township
Zoning Ordinance #765
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses
Use
1. Sinole Dwellino Unit
2. Duolex Dwellino Units
3. Multiple Dwellinq Units (Low rise)
4a. Hiqh Rise Multiple Dwellinq Units (up to 3 stories)
4b. Hioh Rise Multiole Dwellinq Units (4 to 8 stories)
Sa. Hiah Rise Office Units Cuo to 3 stories)
Sb. High Rise Office Units (4 to 8 stories)
6. Aqencies: Real Estate, Insurance & Travel
7. Amusement Enterorises: Non-retail
8. Amusement Enterorises: Permanent
9. Animal or Waste Reduction, Incineration or
Processino (includino oumos and fill\
10. Art & Antique Shops
11 . Assembly of Appliances & Prepared Parts
12. Automobile Sales Area
13. Automobile Reconditionina & Reoair
14. Automobile, Truck, Airplane Assembling and
Remodelinq
1 S. Bakery: Commercial or wholesale
16. Bakery: Retail
17. Banks & Other Financial Institutions
18. Barber and Beautv Shoo
19. Book or Stationery Store
20. Bottlinq Works
21 . Brewery & Distillery
22. Buildinq Materials: Non-retail
23. Buildino Materials: Sales vard & Storaae
24. Bus and Taxi Service
25. Canvas Products: Fabrication & Sales
26. Carpenter or WoodworkinQ Shop
27. Caroet Cleanina Establishments
28. Casting: Liaht, non-ferrous metals
29. Cemeteries & Mausoleums
30. Chemical ManufacturinQ & Storaqe
31 . Dav Care Centers & Group Day Care
32. Churches & Reliaious Institutions
33. Clubs and Lodges (Non-orofit)
34. Clubs and Lodqes (Profit)
3S. Colleoes & Dormitories
36. Commercial Boardina Home
37. Community Center Bu ildings
38. Community Garaqes (No trucks >3/4 ton)
39. Cosmetic or Pharmaceutical Manufacturinq
40. Crematory (Except in cemetervl
41 . Custom Tailor, Dressmaker, Milliner
42a. Department, Shoe & Clothing Stores (<1S,OOO SF
footorintl
42b. Department, Shoe & Clothing Stores (1 S,000 SF or
I greater footprint)
43. Druostore, Dry Goods or Notion Store
44. Enamel, Japanning, Lacquering, Galvanizing &
Platinq of Metals & Plastics
4S. Entertainment: Transient
46. Essential Structures
47. Farm: Livestock/Poultry (Section 8.18)
48. Farm: Aqriculture
49. Fat Renderinq
SO. Feed Store, Seed Store, Lawn and Garden Shoo
S1. Felt Manufacture
District District
c C-1
p p
c
c
c
c
p
s
c
p
p
s
p
p
p
p
p p
p
s
p
p
p
p
p
s
p p
s
p
p p
p
p
p p
s
p p
p p
p
p
p
p p
p
p p
p p
p p
p
Page 1
Exhibit B
C = Conditional Use
P = Use by Right
S = Special Exception
District District District District District
C-1A C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
p
p c
c c
p c c c
c c c c
p p p p
p p
p p
p
p p
c p p p
p
p
p p p
p p p
p p p
p p p
p p
p p s
p
p p
s p
p
p p p
p p p
p p
s s p
p
p p
p p p
s
s
s
c p
s
p
c
p
p p p
p p
p
p p p
s s p
s
p p
p
p
p
p p
p
North Huntingdon Township
Zoning Ordinance #765 C = Conditional Use
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses P = Use by Right
S = Special Exception
Use District District District District District District District
c C-1 C-1A C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
52. Fertilizer Manufacture p
53. Fire Station p p s p
54. Flea Market s
55. Florist p p p p p
56. Food Stores p p p p
57. Food Processing: Retail (on premises) p p p p
58. Food Processing: Wholesale (Excluding meat, fish,
vineaar, veast & fat) s s p
59. Freight Classification Yard p p
60. Funeral Parlor p p
61. Furniture, Interior & Uoholsterv Shoos p p
62. Gas Manufacturina or Storaae. Coke Ovens s p
63. Gasoline Stations c c c c c c
64. Glass Fabrication and Install ation p p p
65. Glass Manufacturina p
66. Glue and Size Manufacturina p
67. Golf Courses p p p
68. Gymnasium or Health Spa p p s p
69a. Hardware, Electrical Appliances & Music Store
1{<1 5,000 SF footprint) p p p
69b. Hardware, Electrical Appliances & Music Store
1115,000 SF or areater footorintl p p
70. Hotel or Motel p p s
71. Ice Manufacturinci & Storacie p s p p
72. Intermediate Care Faci litv s s
73. Jewelrv Store & Repairing p p p
74. laboratories: Research p p s s p
75. laundrv. Cleanina & Dveina Aaencv - Retail p p p p p p
76. laundry, Cleaning & Dyeing Plant p p p p
77. library p p p p
78. Machine Shop: Stamping Press, Plumbing and
Blacksmith Shop s p
79. Machine Shoo: Non-forae, non-foundrv p p
80. Manufacturinci & Assembly from prepared materials s c p p p
81. Manufacturing: Brick, Ti le, Terra Cotta, Cement
Block, Cast Stone s p p
82. Manufacturinq: China. Potterv & Porcelain p p
83. Manufacturina: Fire Arms p
84. Mass Transit Stations & Right of Ways p p s p s
85. Massacie Parlor (Ordinance 481) s
86. Meat Processing (Excluding slaughtering, curing &
smoking) p p
87. Metal Fabrication. liaht p p p p
88. Metal Fabrication, Heaw p
89. Microbreweries/Brew Pubs p
90. Mineral Removal c c c c c c
91. Mobile Home Park p
92. Mobile Home Sales lot s
93. Municioal Buildinas p p p p p p p
94. Offices: Business & Professional p p p p p
95. Optical, Scientific & Jewelry Manufacturing s s p p p
96. Paint Stores, Sian Paintinq Shoos p p
97. Pawnshop, Second Hand Store, Auction Store p
98. Personal Care Boarding Home for Adults s s
99. Petroleum products & fuel manufacturing and
storaae p s
100. Photographic Services, Supplies & Equipment p p p p
101. Printinci. Industria l: Wallpaper. etc. ' p p p p
102. Printi nci, Publish inci & Reproduction Establishments p p p p p
Page 2
North Huntingdon Township
Zoning Ordinance #765 C = Conditional Use
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses P = Use by Right
S = Special Exception
Use District District District District District District District
c C-1 C-1A C-2 PEDD-1 PEDD-2 I
103. Public Charitable Institutions p p p p
104. Public clinic, medical clinic c c c c
105. Public Garages. Parking Lot p c p
106. Public Utilities: Maintenance garage and service
area p s s
107. Public Parks. Plavarounds & Other Recreation p p c p
108. Pulp, Paper, Cardboard and Building Board
Manufacturina p
109. Quarry, rock crusher (See Mining Ord.) p
11 O. Radio & Television Stations and Masts s s p p s
111 . Restaurant, Tavern, Cafe (Includes entertainment
and liauorl p p p p
112. Sand and Gravel Pit (No crushing or clay extraction
See Mining Ord.) p
113. Saw Mill, Planina Mill p
114. Schools: Public & Private p p c p
115. Shoe Reoair Shoo p p p p p
11 6a. Sians - Business !Article 8) p p p p p p p
11 6b. Sians - Advertising and Billboards (Article 8) p p s p p p p
11 7. Shopping Center (3 Acres+) c c c
118. Skilled Nursina Facilitv s s
119. Slauahter House, Abattoirs, Stock Yards p
120. Stone and Monument Works p
121 . Storage, Sorting, Baling and Processing Uunk,
wood, glass & paper) p
122. Swimmina Pool (Commercial Use) p
123. Svnthetics and Plastics Manufacturina p
124. Tannina, Curina or Storino Hides p
125. Telecommunications Facilites c c c p
126. Tourist Courts and Homes p
127. Truck Terminals, Storaae & Parkina p p p
128. Veterinary Hospitals, Kennels, Bird Store &
Taxidermist p p
129. Wearina Aooarel: Fabrication & orocessina s p p p
130. Wholesale Distribution Plants p s s p
131. Wholesale Business, Storage Building,
Warehouses & Mini Warehouse p p p p
132. Wool Pulling or Scouring; manufacturing of shoddy - p
133. Wool or Bone Distill ation p
134. Yards for Storage and Reoair p
• Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration
under a Special Exception.
Page3




0 F F I C I A L

TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON

PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 1  OF 1995

ORDINANCE NO. 867



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 765 BEING THE ZONING ORDINANCE ENACTED FEBRUARY 20, 1991 FOR THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON AND SPECIFICALLY AMENDING SECTION 801 .3 RELATING TO ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED AND IT IS HEREBY

ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the	Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania following a public input hearing held on Wednesday, March 15 , 1995 at 6:45 o'clock P.M. at 11279 Center Highway, North Huntingdon, Pennsylvania 15642, that Zoning Ordinance No. 765, Section 801 .3 be amended as follows:
SECTION 1 :	Resolution No. 110 of 1995 is attached hereto,

made a part hereof and marked Exhibit "A" and incorporated by reference

thereto as fully as though the same has been set forth herein at length.

SECTION 2:	The proposed amendment to Ordinance No. 765, Section 801 .3 is as follows:
"801.3	No accessory building or structure or use that exceeds

the maximum height at the peak of the roof of fourteen (14) feet or a maximum area o f624 square feet shall be permitted in the required rear yard in a residential district.	Accessory structures including antennaes in excess of the maximum requirements may be granted by Special Exception.	No Special Exception will be granted for an accessory structure other than an antennae unless the lot area is in excess of one (1)acre."
-1-
 


SECTION 3:	All other provisions contained in Ordinance No . 765 or prior amendments thereto remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
SECTION 4:	The Code of the Township of North Huntingdon adopted by the Board of Commissioners as Ordinance No. 443 on 10-16-75 provides at Chapter 135 for the Zoning Ordinance, making reference thereto to Zoning Ordinance No. 765 adopted on 2-20-91 and advising that same is on file in the Township offices where it may be examined during regular office hours.
SECTION 5:	Severability clause.	Each section of this

Ordinance is an independent section and the holding of any section, or part thereof, to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or or parts thereof.
SECTION 6:	The effective date of this Ordinance shall be

Thursday, March 16, 1995.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the 15th day of March, 1995.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON



 

ATTEST:

 

 
SEAL
 


-2-
 


REVIEWED AND APPROVED:


 
Township Manager



SOLICITOR:	Thomas P. Cole, II
















































-3-
 
PROPOSED ORDINANCE	3	OF 2004








Township	of North Huntingdon Stormwater	Management Ordinance


























Prepared For:

The Township of North Huntingdon Prepared By:
SKELLY and LOY, Inc.
2500 Eldo Road, Suite 2
Monroeville, PA 15146-1456



February 2004
 








TABLE OF CONTENTS






Article I - General Provisions	1
Article II - Definitions	5
Article Ill - Stormwater Management	15
Article IV - Stormwater Management Best Management Practices, Operations, and Maintenance Plan Requirements	27
Article V - Operating and Maintenance Requirements	33
Article VI - Inspections and Rights-of-Entry	37
Article VI I - Prohibitions	39
Article VI 11 - Fees and Expenses	41
Article IX - Enforcement and Penalties	43

APPENDICES

Appendix A - Municipal Stormwater Management District Map Appendix B - Low Impact Development Practices
Appendix C - Non-Structural and Structural BMPs

Appendix D - Specific Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Controls Appendix E - Property Owner Operations and Maintenance Agreement
 












STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE

Implementing the Requirements of the

Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan and NPDES Phase II








ORDINANCE NO. 2011	OF








TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA








Adopted at a Public Meeting Held on

_M_a_r_c_h_l 7	,  2004















11
 
OFFICIAL
TOWSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROPOSED ORDINANCE _l_ OF 2004
ORDINANCE NO. 2011



AN ORDINANCE BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON, COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND, COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA, PROVIDING	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION/LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN CRITERIA; OPERATIONS		AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST	MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, OPERATIONS, AND MAINTENANCE PLAN REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTIONS AND RIGHTS-OF-ENTRY; PROHIBITIONS; FEES AND EXPENSES; ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.




ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS


Section 101.        Short Title


This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of North Huntingdon Stormwater  Management  Ordinance".

Section 102.        Statement of Findings


The governing body of the Township finds that:

A.	Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtax the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, and greatly increases the cost to the public to manage stormwater.

B.	Inadequate planning and management of accelerated stormwater runoff from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can  harm surface water resources by changing natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows elevating sedimentation, destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings (sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens).  Inadequate management of stormwater runoff can also undermine  floodplain  management  and hinder flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge areas.

C.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of land development and redevelopment activities causing loss of natural infiltration and causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the
 
protection of the people of the Township and all the people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

D.	Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams.

E.	Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in successfully  addressing  stormwater  management.

F.	Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).

G.	Non-stormwater  discharges  to  Municipal  Separate  Storm  Sewer  Systems  (MS4s)  can contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth.

Section 103.	Purpose


The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare in the Township of North Huntingdon by minimizing the damages and maximizing the benefits described in Section 102 of this Ordinance through provisions designed to:

A.	Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.

B.	Provide review procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for watershed­ wide stormwater planning and management.

C.	Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.

D.	Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems.

E.	Focus on infiltration of stormwater in order to maintain groundwater recharge and to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality.

F.	Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the Township and the Commonwealth.

G.	Preserve and restore the flood-carrying  capacity of streams.

H.	Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations of 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 93. 4a to protect and maintain "existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and to protect and  maintain water quality in "special protection" streams.

I.	Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.


2
 
J.		Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater best management practices (BMPs) that are utilized in the Township.

K.	Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES permit requirements.

L.		Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to address non­ stormwater discharges  into the Township's separate storm sewer system.

Section 104.	Statutory Authority


The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect stormwater impacts by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167) Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management Act, and the Township of North Huntingdon Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Ordinance #1011 adopted August 16, 2000).

Section 105.	Applicability


A.	This Ordinance applies to any Regulated Earth Disturbance activity within the Township, and all stormwater runoff entering the Township's separate storm  sewer  system  from lands within the boundaries of the Township.

B.	Any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration  or development  of  land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures  consistent with the provisions of the Turtle  Creek Stormwater Management Plan. This Ordinance shall apply to those areas of the Township that are located within the Turtle Creek watershed  and Youghiogheny watershed, as delineated on the map in Appendix A which is hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance.

C.	The following activities are included within the scope of this ordinance:

1.	Land development;

2.	Subdivision;

3.	Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces (driveways, roadways, parking lots, buildings and additions thereto, etc.) which increases the rate of runoff equal to or more than 0.30 cubic feet per second (cfs) as calculated using the Rational Formula for a 10 year storm, except that residential construction creating less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surfaces shall not apply;

4.	Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made drainage channel;

5.	Installation of stormwater  systems  or  appurtenances  thereto,  except  those  areas covered by PENNDOT or other governmental agencies; and

6.	Any earth moving activity.


3
 
Section 106.      Repealer

Any other ordinance or ordinance provision(s)  or  regulation of the  Township  inconsistent  with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the  extent  of the  inconsistency only.

Section 107.        Severability


Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 108.        Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements


A.	Approvals issued pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, statutes, or ordinances.

B.		Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to  affect  any  of  the  Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not conflict  with the provisions of this Ordinance, such as local stormwater management design criteria (e.g. inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be construed to retain the requirements of this ordinance addressing State Water Quality Requirements.

Section 109.        Liability Disclaimer and Landowner Responsibility

A.		Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater management provisions of the Ordinance, nor the compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or with  any condition imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall  relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Township of North Huntingdon for damages to persons or property.

B.	The granting  of a permit which includes any stormwater management facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township of North Huntingdon, or by an official or employee  thereof, of the  practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.











4
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Section 201.        Interpretation

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other similar entity.

D.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory;  the  words  "may"  and  "should"  are permissive.

E.	The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained".

Section 202.        Definitions

Accelerated Erosion - The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.

Act - The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 No. 167; 32 P.S. Sections 680.1-680.17, as amended by Act of May 24, 1984, No. 63).

Agricultural Activities - The work of producing crops or raising livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.

Alteration - As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.

Applicant - A landowner or developer who has filed an application for approval to engage in any Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities as defined in Section 105 of this Ordinance.

BMP (Best Management Practice) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from Regulated Earth Disturbance activities, to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance.  BMPs include but are not limited to infiltration, filter strips, low impact design,


5
 
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed  swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.

Channel - A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which confine the water.

Channel Erosion - The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large floods.

Cistern - An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater. Conservation District - The Westmoreland County Conservation District.
Culvert - A structure with appurtenant works which carry a stream under or through an embankment or fill.

Dam - An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.

Design Criteria -  (1)  Engineering guidelines  specifying  construction  details and materials.	(2) Objectives, results, or limits which must be met by a facility, structure, or process in performance of its intended functions.

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g. a 5-year storm) and duration (e.g. 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems.

Designee - The agent of the North Huntingdon Planning and Zoning Department and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance by contract or memorandum of understanding.

Detention Basin - An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.

Detention District - Those subareas in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act  167.

Developer - A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity of this Ordinance.

Development - Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use or practice that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.

Development Site - The specific tract of land for which a Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity is proposed.

6
 
Discharge - The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel or other hydraulic structure.

Diversion - A channel and a ridge constructed to a pre-determined grade across a slope, and designed to collect and/or divert runoff from slopes which are subject to erosion.

Downslope Property Line - That portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.

Drainage - In general, the removal of surface water from a given area; commonly applied to surface water and ground water.

Drainage Area - (1) The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square miles, or other unit of area. Also called catchment area, watershed, river basin. (2) The area served by a sewer system receiving storm and surface water, or by a watercourse.

Drainage Conveyance Facility - A Stormwater Management Facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.

Drainage Easement - A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.

Drainage Permit - A permit issued by the Township after the drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the final Township approval.

Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but  not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth material.

Encroachment - Any structure or activity that in any manner changes, expands or diminishes, the course, current or cross section of any watercourse, floodway or body of water.
Erosion - The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other natural forces. Erosion and Sediment  Pollution Control Plan - A  plan that is designed to minimize accelerated
erosion and sedimentation through the use of BMPs.

Erosion Control - The application of measures to reduce erosion of land surfaces.

Existing Conditions - The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered  as "meadow" in good condition unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" values, such as forested lands.

Flood - A general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the Commonwealth.

7
 
Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP).

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated  on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where  no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.

Freeboard - A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.

Grade - A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade - to finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.

Grassed Waterway - A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water from cropland.

Ground Cover - Materials covering the ground surface.

Groundwater - Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from which wells and springs are fed.
Groundwater Recharge - Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies. Hydraulic Grade Line - A line joining points whose vertical distance from the center of the cross
section of the fluid flowing in a pipe are proportional to the pressure of the pipe at the point.

Hydraulic Gradient - The slope of the hydraulic grade line.

Impervious Surface - A surface that prevents the percolation of water into  the  ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.

lmpoundment- A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.

Infiltration - (1) The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores of a soil or other porous medium. (2) The absorption of liquid by the soil.


8
 
Infiltration Structures - A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g. trench drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).

Inlet - A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.

Land Development - (1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings, or (b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.	(2) Any subdivision of land.  (3) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

Land/Earth Disturbance - Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.

Main Stem (Main Channel) - Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the Turtle Creek hydrologic model.

Maintenance - The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of physical properties.

Manning Equation (Manning formula) - A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g. feet per second) and flow rate (e.g. cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.

Natural Stormwater Runoff Regime - A watershed where natural surface configurations, runoff characteristics, and defined drainage conveyances have attained the conditions of equilibrium.

NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.

Nonpoint Source Pollution - Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.

NRCS - Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).

Open Channel - A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.

Outfall - "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the Commonwealth.

Outlet - Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.





9
 
Outlet Control Structure - The means of controlling the relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge, placed at the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which water may flow.

PADEP - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

Parking Lot Storage - Involves the use of impervious parking areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
Peak Discharge - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event. Performance Standard - A standard which establishes an end result or outcome which is to be
achieved but does not prescribe specific means for achieving it.

Pipe - A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.

Planning Commission - The planning commission of the Township of North Huntingdon.

PMF - Probable Maximum Flood - The flood that may be expected from  the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

Point Source - Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in State regulations of 25 Pa. Code 92. 1.

Private Entity - A partnership, corporation, Homeowner's Association, Condominium Association or any other similar associations as distinguished from an individual lot owner.

Project Site - The specific area of land where any Regulated Earth Disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.

Rational Formula - A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow, expressed by the following formula:

Q = CIA, where


Q = peak runoff rate in cfs C = runoff coefficient
I = design rainfall intensity (in/hr) lasting for a critical time, Tc or longer Tc= time  of concentration
A = drainage area in acres

Redevelopment - Earth disturbance activities on land which has previously been disturbed or developed.


10
 
Recurrence Interval - The average interval of time, stated in years, within which a given storm "event" will be equaled or exceeded once.

Regional Stormwater Detention Facility - A stormwater facility that controls runoff from more than one development site used by developers when it is more cost effective than providing a stormwater management facility for each development separately.

Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities - Earth disturbance activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or the Township's storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance  on  any  portion of,  part,  or during any stage of, a larger common plan  or  development.  This  only  includes  road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of earth disturbance.

Release Rate - The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the post development  peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.

Retention Basin - An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.

Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average once every twenty-five years.

Riser - A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.

Road Maintenance - Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross-section, such as grading and repairing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.

Rooftop Detention - Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.

Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.

Runoff Characteristics - The surface components of any watershed that affect the rate, amount, and direction of stormwater runoff. These may include, but are not limited to, vegetation, soils, slopes, and man-made landscape alterations.

Sediment Basin - A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by water.

Sediment Pollution - The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into the waters of the Commonwealth occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.




11
 
Sedimentation - The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.

Seepage Pit/Seepage Trench - An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.

Seepage Tank - A subsurface concrete tank surrounded by stone into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.

Separate Storm Sewer System - A conveyance or system or conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.

Sheet Flow - Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.

Small Development - Any subdivision or land development which results in (or will result when fully constructed) the creation of 5,000 or less square feet of impervious area.

Soil-Cover Complex Method - A method of runoff computation developed by the  NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).

Soil Group, Hydrologic - A classification of soils by the NRCS into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.

Spillway - A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond.

State Water Quality Requirements - As defined under state regulations - protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 PS. Code Chapters 93 and 96) - including:

A		Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use", such as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply", which is listed in Chapter 93. These  uses must be protected and maintained, under state regulations.

B.	"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated Earth Disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams.

C.	Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical characteristics of surface water bodies. After Regulated Earth Disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to prevent these impacts.

12
 
Storage Indication Method - A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.

Storm Frequency - The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is exceeded on average in a stated period of years. See "Return Period".

Storm Sewer - A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, excluding domestic sewage and industrial wastes.

Stormwater - The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground.

Stormwater Management Facility- Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.

Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan- The plan prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff and operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities will be managed in the Township of North Huntingdon.

Stream Enclosure - A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream, that encloses a regulated water of the Commonwealth.

Subarea - The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan.

Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development: Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.

Swale - A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.

Time of Concentration (Tc) - The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.

Township - Township of North Huntingdon, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.

Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan - A watershed-wide plan developed by Allegheny and Westmoreland Counties for the Turtle Creek watershed to identify stormwater management problems, corrective actions, and to establish hydrologic and hydraulic modeling requirements for existing and future stormwater management methods and facilities.


13
 
Watercourse - A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.

Watershed - The entire region or area drained by a river or other body of water whether natural or artificial. A "designated watershed" is an area delineated by PADEP and approved by the Environmental Quality Board for which counties are required to develop watershed stormwater management plans. There are two such watersheds in the township: Turtle Creek and Youghiogheny.

Waters of the Commonwealth - Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the Commonwealth.

Wetlands - Those areas that are inundated  or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.










































14
 

ARTICLE Ill - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT


Section 301.	General Standards

A.	The following provision shall be considered the overriding performance standard against which all proposed stormwater control measures shall be evaluated and shall apply throughout the Township of North Huntingdon. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property.  Such measures shall include:

1.	To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater than the designated	percent release rates after development, or no greater than predevelopment runoff if no release rates are designated;

2.	To manage the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health and property from possible injury;

3.	To manage erosion and sediment during the earth disturbance activities; and

4.	To implement water quality protection measures after completion of earth disturbance activities, including subsequent operations and maintenance.

B.	No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until the requirements of this Ordinance are met.

C.	Erosion and sediment control during Regulated Earth Disturbance activities shall be addressed as required by Section 310.

D.	Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as required by Section
304.  Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by Article V.

E.	All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall conform to the State Water Quality Requirements, and any more stringent requirements as determined by the Township.

F.	Techniques described in Appendix 8 (Low Impact Development) of this Ordinance are encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this Ordinance and the State Water Quality Requirements.

G.	The Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan for the development site must consider all stormwater runoff flowing over the site.

H.	No discharge of prohibited materials as defined in Article VII shall be permitted into any stormwater management system.


15
 

I.	Stormwater Management Performance Districts.

1.	For purposes of stormwater management, the Township of North Huntingdon is divided into the following stormwater management districts:

a.	Turtle Creek
b.	Youghiogheny River

These  districts  may  be  further  subdivided  into  subareas  which  have  similar hydrological characteristics and drain to a common point.

2.	The  location and  boundaries  of the watersheds  and subareas  in the Turtle  Creek watershed   are   shown   on   the   "Turtle   Creek   Stormwater   Management   Plan, Assigned  Release Rate Percentages"  map which  is hereby adopted as part of this section  and presented  in Appendix  A	No release  rates have been developed  for the Youghiogheny  watershed.    For the purposes  of this Ordinance,  a 100 percent release  rate  will   be  used  for   all  areas  within  the  Youghiogheny   stormwater management  district  until  a  Stormwater  Management  Plan  is  completed  for  the Youghiogheny   watershed  that  develops  such  release  rates.	At  such  time,  the Youghiogheny   Stormwater  Management  Plan  release  rates will  be  incorporated into this Ordinance by reference when that Plan is adopted.

3.	A  Stormwater  Management  Plan  has  been  developed  for  the  Turtle  Creek watershed.	No	Stormwater	Management	Plan	currently	exists	for	the Youghiogheny River.	This Ordinance is based on The Turtle Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan and the NPDES MS4 requirements.	The rules in this  Ordinance  are  applicable  to  both  the  Turtle  Creek  and  Youghiogheny Stormwater Management Performance Districts.



Section 302.	Stormwater Discharge Calculation Requirements

A	The requirements contained in this section are intended to implement the standards and criteria contained in the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan, adopted and approved in accordance with the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act. If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this section and the standards and criteria of the plan, or if the watershed plan is subsequently amended, then the standards/criteria of the current watershed plan shall govern.

B.	Storm Frequencies: Stormwater management facilities on all development sites  shall control the peak stormwater discharge for the 2-, 10-, 25-, and  100-year  storm frequencies. The SCS 24-hour, Type 11 Rainfall Distribution shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff for both pre- and post-development conditions.  The  24-hour  total rainfall for these storm frequencies in the watershed are:






16
 
TABLE 111-1
24-HOUR RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS STORM EVENTS

Storm Frequency	Rainfall Depth (inches)
2-year	2.50
10-year	3.61
25-year	4.31
100-year	5.71


(For additional information or data on other storm return periods, consult the "Rainfall Duration Frequency Tables for Pennsylvania" produced by PADEP, Office of Resource Management, Bureau of Dams and Waterways Management, Division of Stormwater Management, Harrisburg, (February 1983).

C.	Calculation Methods

Stormwater  runoff from all development  sites shall be calculated  using either the  Rational Method or a soil-cover complex methodology.

1.	Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater than 200 acres, including  on- and off-site  areas, shall use a generally  accepted calculation technique  that is based on the NRCS soil-cover complex method. Table 111-2 summarizes acceptable computation methods.  It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the  design  professional  based  on the  individual  limitations  and suitability  of each  method for a particular site. The Township may approve the use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres.

2.	All calculations consistent with this Ordinance  using  the  soil-cover  complex method  shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms presented in Table 111-1 of this Ordinance.  If a hydrologic computer model  such  as  HEC-1  is  used  for  stormwater  runoff  calculations,   then  the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.   The NRCS 'S' curve shall be used for the rainfall distribution.

3.	All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from PA Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986).  Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology   presented  in  Chapter  3  of  Urban  Hydrology  for  Small Watersheds,  NRCS,  TR-55 (as amended or replaced  from  time  to  time  by NRCS).  Times of  concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.

4.	Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in the soil-cover complex method shall be obtained in accordance with the map in Appendix A of this Ordinance.   For existing conditions, the land use shall be


17
 
considered as "meadow" in good condition unless the land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or rational "C" values, such as forested land.

5.	Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be obtained from readily available and acceptable sources.

6.	Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with readily available and acceptable sources.

7.	Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the performance standards of this Ordinance using any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.

8.	The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance standards of this Ordinance shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.

9.	The Township has the authority to require that computed existing runoff rates be reconciled  with   field   observations   and   conditions.   If  the   designer   can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration	values  should  be  utilized  at   a   particular   site,   then appropriate variations may be made upon review of the Township. Calibration shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in question.

TABLE 111-2
ACCEPTABLE  COMPUTATION  METHODOLOGIES FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS


METHOD	METHOD DEVELOPED BY	
		APPLICABILITY
TR-20 or commercial Package Based on TR-20	
USDA-NRCS	When use of full model is desirable or necessary
TR-55 OR Commercial Package Based on TR-55	
USDA-NRCS	Applicable for plans within the models limitations

HEC-1	
U.S. Army Corps of Eng.	When full model is desirable or necessary
Rational Method or commercial
package based on Rational Method	
Emil Kuiching (1889)	
For sites less than 200 acres (as approved by the Township)
Other Methods	Various	As approved by the Township



18
 
D.	Release Rate Percentage


1.	Definition: The release rate percentage defines the percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff that can be discharged from an outfall on the site after development. The percent release rates apply uniformly to all land development or alterations within a subarea. A listing of the  release   rate percentage by subarea appears in the subarea map in Appendix A of this Ordinance.

2.	Procedure for Use:

a.	Identify the specific subarea in which the development site is located from the watershed map and obtain the  subarea  release  rate  percentage  from Appendix A.
b.	Compute the pre- and post-development runoff hydrographs for each stormwater outfall on the development site using an acceptable calculation method for the 2-, 10-, 25-, and 100-year storms. Apply no on-site detention for	stormwater management but include any techniques to minimize impervious surfaces and/or increase the time of concentration for stormwater runoff flowing from the development site.
c.	Multiply the subarea release rate percentage by the predevelopment rate of runoff from the development site to determine the maximum allowable release rate from any detention facility for the four prescribed storm events.
d.	If the post-development  peak runoff rate and volume  are greater than the
allowed release rate of the predevelopment peak runoff rate and volume, then stormwater detention will be required and the capacity of the detention facility must be calculated in the manner prescribed in Section 311.
e.	Design the outlet control facilities and size the volume of the detention facility using the calculated post development hydrograph and accepted hydrograph routing procedures in consideration of the maximum allowable release rate.

E.	No Harm Evaluation


1.	An applicant may seek to exceed the otherwise applicable subarea release rate percentage by performing the "No Harm Evaluation". This evaluation requires an independent engineering analysis to demonstrate that other reasonable options exist  to prevent the occurrence of increased stormwater runoff discharge  rates and/or   velocities or that measures can be provided to prevent increased stormwater  discharge rates and/or velocities from increasing flood elevations and accelerating erosion at all downstream points in the watershed.

2.	A "No Harm Evaluation" will be considered only in instances where the discharge to a  stream channel from the development occurs directly through a properly sized and designed regional stormwater detection facility.

3.	Regional Detention Alternatives - For certain areas within the study area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for more than one development site than to  provide  an individual  control facility  for  each development  site.   The


19
 
initiative and funding for any regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The basins shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of Section 312 of this Ordinance.

4.	The analysis for the no harm evaluation shall be submitted to the Township and Westmoreland Conservation District for review and approval.

Section 303.	Protection of Water Quality General Requirements

A.	No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until approval by the Township of a plan which demonstrates compliance with State Water Quality Requirements after construction is complete.

B.	The BMPs must be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet State Water Quality Requirements and any other more stringent requirements as determined by the Township.

C.	To control post-construction stormwater impacts  from Regulated Earth Disturbance activities, State Water Quality Requirements can be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for the generation of pre-construction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that post-construction stormwater discharges do not exceed designated release rates from the site or degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As described in the PADEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy (#392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the following:

1.	Infiltration - replication of pre-construction stormwater infiltration conditions;

2.	Treatment - use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff; and

3.	Streambank and streambed protection - management of volume and rate of post­ construction stormwater discharges to prevent physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).

D.	PADEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design, implementation and maintenance of BMPs that control runoff from new development and redevelopment after Regulated  Earth  Disturbance  activities  are  complete.    These  requirements  include  the need  to  implement  post-construction   stormwater  BMPs  with  assurance  of  long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.

E.	Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office must be provided to the Township.

F.	BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article V of this Ordinance.


20
 
Section 304.	Protection of Water Quality Specific Requirements

A.	All projects subject to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be required to capture and treat 90 percent of the average annual stormwater runoff post-release rate volume at all development sites. This volume of stormwater runoff, the Water Quality Volume (WQv). is equal to the following:

WOv  = [(P90)(Rv)(A)]/12,   where

 
WOv	=
Peo	=

Rv	=

A	=
 
Water Quality Volume (in acre-feet)
90-Percent Storm (90 percent of the annual rainfall will occur in storms of equal or smaller magnitude)= 1.60 inches
0.05 + 0.009(1), where (I) is the percent impervious cover of the development site
development site (in acres)
 

B.	The following assumptions may be made when designing stormwater  management facilities for treatment of the WOv:

1.	For residential subdivisions, the procedures presented in the Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (October 2000) shall be used  to establish the impervious coverage for the calculation of the WOv· A Pennsylvania design manual is currently being developed and will be similar to the Maryland design manual. At this time, PADEP recommends using the Maryland design manual until the Pennsylvania manual is available. The Maryland manual has made available on the PADEP website.

2.	When a  development site  has more than  one  drainage  area,  a WOv  shall  be calculated for each drainage area.

3.	If the development site is located in a drainage area that encompasses area outside of the development site, only the proposed impervious coverage on the development site shall be used to calculate the WOv.

4.	The WOv calculated for a development site may be reduced in accordance with the use of the non-structural BMPs outlined in Appendix C of this Ordinance.

5.	If off-line stormwater management facilities are proposed for the treatment of the WQv, the small storm hydrology method, presented in the Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (October 2000), shall be used to design stormwater runoff bypass structures.

C.	To accomplish A and B above, the land developer may submit original and innovative designs to the Township for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water quality protection objectives through a combination of the BMPs (Best Management Practices) outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (1998).




21
 
D.	In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the land developer shall consider the following:

1.	Total contributing area;

2.	Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils;

3.	Slope and depth to bedrock;

4.	Seasonal high water table;

5.	Proximity to building foundations and well heads;

6.	Erodibility of soils; and

7.	Land availability and configuration of the topography.

E.	The following additional factors should be considered when  evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given development site:

1.	Peak discharge and required volume control;

2.	Streambank erosion;

3.	Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality problems;

4.	The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated;

5.	The nature of the pollutant being removed;

6.	Maintenance requirements;

7.	Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and

8.	Recreational value.

9.	Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.

Section 305.	Maintaining Groundwater  Recharge


A.		In order to maintain predevelopment hydrologic conditions at a development site, opportunities must be provided for the infiltration of rainfall directly into the ground and to pond runoff on the ground surface from which it is ultimately  evaporated  or  infiltrated. The objective for the Township of North Huntingdon will be to capture and  retain 60 percent of the annual rainfall. The 60-Percent Storm (P60), or the runoff capture design storm for the Township of North Huntingdon area (60 percent of the annual rainfall will occur in storms of equal or smaller magnitude) is 0.63 inches of rainfall. The Runoff Capture Volume (Rs) is the quantity of water that shall be captured and retained onsite to


22
 
prevent runoff from occurring during the runoff capture design storm and is calculated as follows.

Rs= (A/12)(P60 - 0.2S)2/[(P60 - 0.2S) + S] Where S = (1,000/CN) - 10

 
Rs	=
A	=
Peo	=
s	=
CN	=
 
Runoff Capture Volume (in acre-feet) development site (in acres)
60-Percent Storm, 0.63 inches
potential maximum retention after runoff begins (inches)
NRCS post-development, composite runoff curve number (CN)
 

8.	The Rs is considered part of the WOv (see Ordinance Section 304) that must be treated by the stormwater management facilities designed for a development site. Both structural and non-structural practices can be used to capture and retain the Rs· If subsurface conditions on a proposed land development site do not allow for the design of viable stormwater infiltration facilities that will allow for the complete infiltration of the Rs within 48 hours after the end of the P60, then stormwater treatment facilities shall be designed to treat the entire volume of stormwater runoff generated by the P60 .

C.	The Rs will not apply to development sites with the following  land uses and any other land uses that are comparable to the listed land uses:

1.	Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;

2.	Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;

3.	Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;

4.	Fleet storage areas (trucks, heavy equipment, buses, etc.);

5.	Industrial sites that have permit coverage under an NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit;

6.	Outdoor liquid container storage;

7.	Outdoor loading/unloading facilities;

8.	Public works storage areas; and

9.	Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.



Section 306.	Preservation of Natural Drainage Features and Depressions


All  natural  streams,  channels,  swales,  drainage  systems,  and/or  areas  of  surface  water concentration shall be maintained in their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by



23
 
the Township.   All encroachment  activities shall comply with the requirements of 25 Pa.  Code Chapter  105 (Water Obstructions and Encroachments).

Section 307.        Avoiding Adverse Impacts on Downstream Properties


A	The natural stormwater drainage features and man-made drainage facilities that convey stormwater	runoff from a development site's discharge point(s) of concentrated stormwater runoff to a perennial stream must be located in a recorded drainage easement, or a public utility or road right-of-way with a minimum width of 20 feet.

B.	The quantity, velocity and direction of the stormwater runoff discharge must be evaluated in order to determine that there is no increase in the risk to the health and safety of the public and no damage to property for the 2-year through 1OD-year storm events following development.

C.	The following criteria shall be used for the stormwater runoff discharge evaluation.

1.	The capacity in the downstream natural or man-made conveyance system between a development site's discharge point(s) of concentrated stormwater runoff to a perennial stream may be used only in proportion to the development site's area relative to the total upstream area draining to the conveyance system (e.g., if a development site represents 10 percent of the upstream area draining to a  conveyance system, the development site may use 10 percent of the capacity available in the conveyance system).

2.	Open Channels must have the capacity to convey the peak rate of runoff for the 10-year storm event (permanent channels) or the 5-year storm event (temporary channels)  within  their  banks  at  velocities  that  will  not  lead  to  erosion  of  the channel.

3.	Open channels, in combination with the drainage easement  in which the channel is located, must have the capacity to convey the peak rate of runoff for the 25- year storm event within the drainage easement at velocities that will not lead to erosion of the channel or in the drainage easement.

4.	Storm sewers, culverts, bridges, or any other facilities in combination with the drainage easements in which the facilities are located must have the capacity to convey the peak rate of runoff for the 25-year storm event within the drainage easement at velocities that will not lead to erosion in the drainage easement.

Section 308.        Prevention of Stream Bank Erosion


In order to minimize the occurrence of critical erosive velocities in natural stream channels, stormwater runoff from new development sites must be gradually released. To attain this objective, stormwater runoff from new development sites for the 2-year, 24-hourstorm event
(2.5 inches) must be released over a minimum period of 24 hours.





24
 
Section 309.	Control of Over Bank Flooding and Extreme Flood Events


The post-development peak discharge of stormwater runoff from proposed land development sites for the 2-, 10-, 25-, and 100-year storm events shall not exceed the release rates as shown on the map in Appendix A.

Section 310.	Erosion and Sedimentation Controls


A.		Erosion/Sedimentation plan shall be provided in accordance with Chapter  102, Title 25, Rules   and   Regulations,	Part   I,   Commonwealth   of   Pennsylvania,	Department	of Environmental  Protection,  Subpart  C, protection  of Natural Resources, Article  II,  Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control''. the standards and guidelines of the County Conservation   District  and  in  accordance  with  the  Township	Land  Development Ordinance.

B.	In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a PADEP "NPDES Construction Activities" permit is required for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities.

C.	Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or County Conservation District must be provided to the Township.
D.	No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township shall commence until
approval by the Township of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for construction activities.

E.		Proposed erosion/sedimentation measures shall be submitted with the Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan as part of the preliminary and final applications.

F.	A copy of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any required permit, as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all times.

G.	Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and criteria that must be, or are  recommended to be, applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed include the following:

1.	Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as to maintain their  maximum infiltration capacity.

2.	Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has received final stabilization.

Section 311.	Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Controls

A.	Applicants  may select  runoff control techniques,  or a combination  of techniques,  which are  most suitable to control stormwater runoff from the development site. All controls must  be  subject  to  approval  of  the  Township.    The  Township may  request  specific


25
 
information on design and/or operating features of the proposed stormwater controls in order to determine their suitability and adequacy in terms of the standards of this Ordinance.

B.	The applicant should consider the effect of the proposed stormwater management techniques on any special soil conditions or geological hazards which may exist on the development site. In the event such conditions are identified onthe site, the Township may require in-depth studies by a competent geotechnical engineer. Not all stormwater control methods may be advisable or allowable at a particular development site.

C.	The stormwater management practices to be used in  developing  a  stormwater management plan for a particular site shall be selected according to the following order of preference:

1.	Natural area conservation;

2.	Infiltration of runoff on-site;

3.	Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions; and

4.	Stormwater  detention/retention  structures.

BMPs that can achieve these goals are presented in Appendices  B and C.	Specific design criteria for BMPs are presented in Appendix D.

D.	Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to reduce volume increases and promote groundwater recharge. A combination of successive  practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each of the preferred practices based on actual site conditions.


























26
 
ARTICLEIV-STORMWATERMANAGEMENTBMPs,OPERATIONS,ANDMAINTENANCE PLAN REQUIREMENTS


Section 401.	General Standards


A.		No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township shall  commence until approval by the Township of the Stormwater Management BMPs,  Operations,  and Maintenance	Plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,   post-construction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and maintained. The  requirements of this plan are defined in this Article.

B.	Exemptions for Small Developments:

1.	At the time of application, the Township shall determine if the subdivision/land development qualifies as a "small development" and therefore, is eligible for a simplified Plan submission. For the purposes  of  this  Ordinance,  a  small development is any subdivision or land development which results in (or will result  when fully constructed) the  creation  of  5,000  or  less  square  feet  of impervious area.

2.	Application for small developments shall include a plan which describes the type and location of proposed on-site stormwater management BMPs or the proposed connection to an existing storm sewer system. The plan should show accurately the boundaries, five-foot interval contours, locations of watershed and/or subarea boundaries on the site (if applicable) and  any watercourses, floodplains, or existing drainage facilities or structures located on the site. Contingent upon the approval of the Township, alternative runoff computational techniques such as the Rational Method may be used where applicable. The Township reserves the right to require that the plan be prepared by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect.

3.	The Township shall review and approve the proposed provisions for stormwater management	in accordance with the standards  and  requirements  of  this Ordinance.


Section 402.	Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan Requirements and Contents


A.	The Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan ("Plan") shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and sedimentation  control  plan  by  title  and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All Plan materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and  well organized; otherwise, the Plan shall be disapproved and returned to the Applicant.



27
 
8.	The following items shall be included in the Plan:

1.	General

a.	General description of project.
b.	General written description of permanent stormwater management BMPs, including construction specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities, and how BMPs will  be operated  and  maintained,  and the identity of the person(s) responsible for operations  and maintenance.
c.	Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all stormwater management facilities.

2.	Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch or 30-inch x 42- inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Westmoreland County. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:

a.	Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent stormwater  BMPs.
b.	The   location   of   the   project   relative  to   highways,   municipalities  or   other identifiable  landmarks.
c.	Existing contours at intervals of two feet.   In areas of steep slopes (greater than
15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
d.	Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the project area.
e.	Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
f.	The locations  of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary  sewers,  and water
lines within 50 feet of property lines of the site.
g.	An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
h.	Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added.
i.	Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
j.	Final contours at intervals of two feet.   In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
k.	The name of the development, the name and address  of the owner  of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
I.	The date of submission.
m.	A graphic and written scale of one (1) inch equals no more than fifty (50) feet; for tracts of twenty (20) acres or more, the scale shall be one (1) inch equals no more than one hundred (100) feet.
n.	A north arrow.
o.	The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the nearestfoot and bearings to the nearest degree.
p.	Existing and proposed land use(s).
q.	A  key  map  showing   all  existing   man-made  features   beyond  the  property boundary that would be affected by the project.
r.	Horizontal   and  vertical   profiles   of   all  open   channels,   including   hydraulic
capacity.
s.	Overland drainage paths.

28
 
t.	A fifteen-foot wide  access  easement  around  all  stormwater  management BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
u.	A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility formaintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in this Ordinance.
v.	A construction detail of any improvements  made to sinkholes  and the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this Ordinance.
w.	A statement, signed by the landowner,  acknowledging the stormwater management BMPs to be a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the Township.
x.	The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.

3.	Supplemental Information

a.	A written description of the following information shall be submitted:
1)	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
2)	Stormwater  runoff computations.
3)	Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during and after development.
4)	Operations and maintenance procedures and identification of responsible person(s).
5)	Expected project time schedule.
b.	A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,  including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP.
c.	The effect  of the  project (in terms  of  runoff volumes  and peak flows)  on
adjacent   properties   and  on   any   existing   municipal   stormwater   collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
d.	A Declaration of Adequacy  and Highway Occupancy  Permit from  PENNDOT District 12-0 when  utilization  of  a  PENNDOT  storm  drainage  system  is proposed.

4.	Stormwater  Management BMPs

a.	All stormwater management BMPs must be located on a plan and described in detail.
b.	When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
c.	All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater
management BMPs must be shown.

Section 403.	Plan Submission and Review Procedures


A.	For all activities regulated by this Ordinance, the steps below shall be followed for submission.	For any activities that require a PADEP Joint Permit Application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain  Management)   of  PADEP  Rules  and  Regulations,   require  a  PENNDOT


29
 
Highway Occupancy Permit, or require any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the plan.

1.	The Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and Maintenance Plan shall be submitted by the Developer as part of the Preliminary Plan submission for the Regulated Activity.

2.	Four (4) copies of the Plan shall be submitted.

3.	Distribution of the Plan will be as follows:

a.	Two  (2)  copies  to the Township  accompanied  by  the  requisite  Municipal Review Fee, as specified in this Ordinance.
b.	One (1) copy to the Township Engineer.
c.	One (1) copy to the Westmoreland County Planning Department.

8.	Plan Review


1.	The Township shall review the Plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and any permits issued by PADEP. The Township shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this Ordinance.

2.	The Township shall  review the  Plan for  any  submission  or  land development against the Township subdivision and land development ordinance provisions not superseded by this Ordinance.

3.	For activities regulated by this Ordinance, the Township shall determine within 90 calendar days whether or not the Plan is consistent with the Ordinance. Should the Plan be determined to be consistent with the Ordinance, the Townshipwill forward an approval letter to the Developer with a copy to the Township Secretary.

4.	Should the Plan be determined to be inconsistent with the Ordinance, the Township will forward a disapproval  letter to the Developer with a copy to the Township Secretary citing the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any disapproved Plans may be revised by the Developer and resubmitted consistent with this Ordinance.

5.	For Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities specified in  this  Ordinance,  the Township Building Permit Officer shall be notified in writing, within a time frame consistent with the Township Building  Code  and/or  Township  Subdivision Ordinance, whether the Plan is consistent with the Ordinance. The Township will forward a copy of the approval/disapproval  letter  to  the  Developer.  Any disapproved Plan may be revised by  the  Developer  and  resubmitted  consistent with this Ordinance.

6.	For Regulated Activities requiring a PADEP Joint Permit Application, the Township shall notify PADEP whether the Plan is consistent with the Ordinance and forward a copy of the review letter to the Developer. PADEP may consider the Township's review comments in determining whether to issue a permit.


30
 
7.	The Township shall not approve any  subdivision  or  land  development  for Regulated Activities specified in Section 105 if the Plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Ordinance.

8.	The Township Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit for any Regulated Activity specified in Section 105 if the Plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Ordinance, or without considering the comments of the Township Engineer.

9.	The Developer shall be responsible for completing an "As-Built Survey" of all stormwater management BMPs included in the approved Plan. The As-Built Survey and an explanation of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township for final approval. In no case shall the Township approve the As-Built Survey until the Township receives a copy of an approved Declaration of Adequacy, Highway Occupancy Permit from PENNDOT District 12- 0, and any applicable permits from PADEP.

10.	The Township's approval of a Plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed five (5) years. This five-year time period shall commence on the date that the Township signs the approved Plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved Plan have  not been constructed, or if an As-Built Survey of these facilities has not been approved within this five-year time period, then the Township may consider the Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits.	Plans that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 406 of this Ordinance.

Section 404.	Status of the Plan after Final Approval


A.	Upon final Plan approval and receipt of all necessary permits, the applicant may commence to install or implement the approved stormwater management controls.


B.		If the site development or building construction does not begin within two years of the date of final approval of the Plan, then before doing so, the applicant shall resubmit the Plan to verify that no condition has changed within the watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the previously approved stormwater management controls. Further, if for any reason development activities are suspended for two years or more, then the same requirement for resubmission of the Plan shall apply.

Section 405.	Modification  of Plans


A.	If the request for a plan modification is initiated before construction begins, the stormwater plan must be resubmitted and reviewed according to the procedures contained in Section 403 above.

B.	If the request for a plan modification is initiated after construction is underway, the Township shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the modification based on field inspection provided: (1) the requested changes in stormwater controls do not result


31
 
in any modifications to other approved Township land use/development requirements (e.g., building setbacks, yards, etc.) and (2) the performance standards in Article Ill are met. Notification of the action shall be sent to the Board of Commissioners which may issue a stay of the plan modification within five (5) days and require the permittee to resubmit the plan modification for full stormwater plan review in accordance with Section 403 above.

Section 406.		Resubmission of Disapproved Stormwater Management BMP, Operations, and Maintenance Plans


A disapproved Plan may be re-submitted,  with the rev1s1ons addressing the Township's concerns documented in writing, and be subject to review as specified in Section 403 of this Ordinance.	The applicable Township Review Fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved  Plan.

Section 407.        Adherence to Approved Plan

It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP required by an approved Plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved Plan, unless an exception is granted in writing by the Township.







































32
 
ARTICLE V - OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS

Section 501.	Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Stormwater BMPs

A.	The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement with the Township covering all stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix E of this Ordinance.

B.	Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township.

C.	Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned Stormwater Facilities

1.	Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan the property owner shall sign and record a maintenance agreement covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately owned. The agreement shall stipulate that:

a.	The owner shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and shall keep all facilities in a safe  and attractive manner.
b.	The owner shall convey to the Township easements and or rights-of-way to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Township of North Huntingdon and maintenance if required.
c.	The owner shall keep on file with the Township of North Huntingdon the name,
address and telephone number of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities;  in the event of a change, new information will be submitted to the Township of North Huntingdon within ten (10) days of the change.
d.	Maintenance by a private entity shall be secured by performance security in an
amount equal to 110 percent the cost as determined by the Township of North Huntingdon to be necessary to adequately maintain said system.
e.	If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities following due notice by the Township of North Huntingdon to correct the problem(s), the Township of North Huntingdon may perform the necessary maintenance work or corrective work and the owner shall reimburse the Township of North Huntingdon for all costs.

2.	Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township solicitor and Board of Commissioners. An example maintenance agreement is contained in Appendix E of this Ordinance.

D.	Maintenance Agreement for Township Owned Stormwater Facilities

1.	Storm management facilities shall be situated on a dedicated lot to North Huntingdon Township with access from a public road. Such lot shall be designated as "Stormwater Retention Area" and access to this area shall be clearly shown on

33
 
plans.   North Huntingdon Township reserves the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater management facilities.

2.		All storm management controls including the principal and emergency spillways shall be restricted to "Storm Water Retention Area" for future maintenance by Township  personnel.

Section 502.	Stormwater  Management Easements

A.	Stormwater management easements are required for all areas  used  for  off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Township.

B.	Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner if necessary for (1) access for inspections and maintenance, or (2) preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration,  and detention areas and other BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under Section 505.

Section 503.	Recording of Approved Plan and Related Agreements

A.	The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the Plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Westmoreland County, within 15 days of approval of the Plan by the Township:

1.	The Plan, or a summary thereof;

2.	Operations and Maintenance Agreements under Section 501; and

3.	Easements under Section 502.


B.	The Township may suspend  or revoke any approvals granted for the project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this Section.

Section 504.	Municipal Stormwater  BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund

A.	If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Township for dedication, the Township may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay for specified amount to the Township Stormwater Operation and Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:

1.	If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Township, the  amount  shall cover the estimated costs of operations and maintenance for ten (10) years, as determined by the Township.








34
 
2.	The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual series values.


B.	If the BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the Township may adjust the amount due accordingly.


Section 505.	Maintenance of Stormwater Management Controls

A.	Maintenance  Responsibilities

1.	The Stormwater Management BMPs, Operations, and  Maintenance Plan (the Plan) for the development site shall contain an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the developer and approved by the Township. The operation and maintenance	plan shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the facility(ies).

2.	The Plan for the development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following principles:

a.	If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the Township of North Huntingdon, stormwater control facilities should also be dedicated to and maintained by the Township of North Huntingdon.
b.	If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of stormwater control facilities should be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.

3.	The Board of Commissioners shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the Plan. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater management controls.

Section 506.	Dedication of Public Improvements


A.	When  streets,  sanitary  sewer,  stormwater  management  facilities,  water  lines  or  other required improvements in the development have been completed in accordance with the final approved plan, such improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they have been offered for dedication to the Township and accepted by separate ordinance or resolution or until they have been condemned for use as a public facility.

B.	Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the Township shall inspect it to ensure that it is constructed in accordance with the approved plan and is functioning property. In the case of any stormwater control facility, it must be free of sediment and debris.




35
 
C.	The owner shall submit as-built plans for all facilities proposed for dedication. Drawings shall  bear the seal of a registered engineer indicating the as-built improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans.





























































36
 
ARTICLE VI - INSPECTIONS AND RIGHTS-OF-ENTRY


Section 601.	Inspections

A.	The Township shall inspect all phases of construction, maintenance, and any other implementation of the temporary and permanent stormwater management system for the development site. The permittee shall notify the Township 48 hours in advance of the completion of the following key development phases:

1.	At the completion of preliminary  site preparation including stripping of vegetation, stockpiling  of topsoil  and construction  of temporary  stormwater  management  and erosion control facilities.

2.	At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage or other site development improvements and ground covers.

3.	During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such  times  as specified by the Township.

4.	Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities including established ground covers and plantings.

5.	Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures or other site restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan and permit.

B.	No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding one has been inspected and approved. If there are deficiencies during any Regulated Earth Disturbing activities, the Township shall issue a written description of the required corrections and stipulate the time by which they must be made. The Township may suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected.

C.	If during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies any site condition, such as subsurface soil conditions, alterations in surface or subsurface drainage which could affect the feasibility of the approved stormwater facilities, he/she shall notify the Township within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition and request a field inspection.	The Township shall determine if the condition requires a stormwater plan modification.

D.	In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of landslide-prone soils or other special site conditions exits, the Township shall, if sodetermined by appropriate engineering analysis, require special precautions such as soil tests and core borings, full-time inspectors and/or similar measures. All costs of any such measures shall be borne by the permittee.







37
 

Section 602.	Post-Construction  Maintenance  Inspections

A		Basins should be inspected by the land owner/developer or responsible entity on the following  basis:

1.	Annually for the first 5 years;

2.	Once every 3 years thereafter; and

3.	During or immediately after the cessation of a 100-year or greater storm event.

B.	The entity conducting the inspection shall submit a report to the Township regarding the condition of the facility and recommending necessary repairs, if needed.

Section 603.	Right of Entry

A		Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the condition, implementation, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs.

B.	BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this Ordinance.

C.	Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP.


D.	Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a BMP is a violation of this Article.






















38
 
ARTICLE VII - PROHIBITIONS


Section 701.	Prohibited  Discharges

A.		No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater  discharges into the Township's	separate storm sewer  system which  are  not   composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in subsection 8 below, and  (2) discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.

8.	Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the Township that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the Commonwealth, are:

1.	Discharges from fire fighting activities;

2.	Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire hydrant flushings;

3.	Irrigation drainage;

4.	Routine external  building washdown  (which  does  not  use detergents  or  other compounds);

5.	Air conditioning condensate;

6.	Water from individual residential car washing;

7.	Springs;

8.	Water from crawl space pumps;

9.	Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains;

10.	Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

11.	Lawn watering;

12.	Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used;

13.	Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and

14.	Uncontaminated  groundwater.







39
 
C.	In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the Township will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.


D.	Upon notice provided by the Township under subsection C, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.

E.	Nothing in this Section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under state law.

Section 702.	Prohibited  Connections


A	The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in Section 701.B above:


1.	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater, to enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks; and


2.	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the Township.

Section 703.	Roof Drains


A		Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers  or  roadside ditches, except as provided in Section 703.B.

B.	When  it  is  more  advantageous  to  connect   directly   to   streets   or  storm   sewers, connections of roof  drains  to  streets  or  roadside  ditches  may  be  permitted  by  the Township.

C.	Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable.

Section 704.	Alteration of BMPs

A		No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the Township.

B.	No person shall place any structure, fill,  landscaping  or  vegetation  into  a  stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or  alter  the  functioning  of the BMP, without the written approval of the Township.





40
 
ARTICLE VIII - FEES AND EXPENSES



Section 801.        Guarantee of Completion

A completion guarantee in the form of a bond, cash deposit, certified check or other negotiable securities acceptable to the Township, shall be filed. The guarantee  shall cover  all  streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities, water systems, fire hydrants, sidewalks and other required improvements; it shall be in the amount and form prescribed by the Municipal Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Section 509).

Section 802.        Release of Completion Guarantee

The completion guarantee shall be returned or released upon written certification by the Township or a designated agent that improvements and facilities have been installed and completed in accordance with the approved plan and specifications. The procedures for requesting and obtaining a release of the completion guarantee shall be in a manner prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Section 510 or as subsequently amended, revised or changed).

Section 803.        Default of Completion Guarantee

If improvements are not installed in accordance with the approved final plan, the Board of Commissioners may enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Board of Commissioners may at its option install part of such improvements in all or part of the development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All proceeds, whether resulting from the security or form any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other Township purpose.

Section 804.        Maintenance Guarantee

Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the applicant shall provide a financial security to secure the structural integrity and functioning of the improvements. The security shall: (1) be in the form of a bond, cash, certified check or other negotiable securities acceptable to the Township, (2) be for a term of 18 months, and (3) be in the amount equal to 15 percent of the actual cost of the improvements and facilities so dedicated.

Section 805.        Fee Schedule

A.	The Board of Commissioners  may adopt  by resolution from time to time  a reasonable schedule of fees to cover the cost of administration/clerical costs, review ofthe Plan by the  Township, site inspections including, but not limited to, pre-construction meetings, inspections   during   construction   of   stormwater   BMPs,   and   final   inspection   upon


41
 
completion  of the  stormwater  BMPs,  and  any  additional  work  required to  monitor  and enforce   any   provisions   of   this   Ordinance,   correct   violations,   and   assure   proper completion  of stipulated  remedial actions.   All fees  shall be set  in accordance  with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania  Municipalities  Planning Code and any dispute over the fee amount shall be resolved in a manner prescribed by the Planning Code.  No approval to begin any work shall be issued until the requisite fees have been paid.



B.	If it is determined that a modification to the existing stormwater management plan is required under Section 405 of this Ordinance, a new approval shall not be issued until the additional fees have been paid by the applicant.



















































42
 
ARTICLE IX - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Section 901.	Notification of Public Nuisance


A.		In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the  Township  shall provide timely written notification of the violation. The violation shall be deemed a Public Nuisance.

8.	Such notice may require without limitation:

1.	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

2.	The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;

3.	Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;

4.	The abatement  or  remediation  of storm water  pollution or contamination  hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

5.	Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;

6.	The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and

7.	Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.

C.	Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice  may  further  advise  that,  if  applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the established deadline, the work will be done by the Township or designee and the expense thereof  shall  be charged to the violator.

D.	Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provision of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and all other remedies  available  in  law  or equity.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and/or the signed Maintenance Agreement.

Section 902.	Preventive  Remedies

A.		In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and  maintain  appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building or premises.





43
 
B.	In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Sec. 515.1), the Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant approval to further improve or develop any property which has been developed in violation of this chapter.

C.	Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the Township may be suspended or revoked by the Township for:

1.	Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit;

2.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance; or

3.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.

D.	A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Township when:

1.	The Township or its designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater BMPs, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance, and/or;

2.	The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.

E.	A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated.
The  applicant  may  apply  for  a  new  permit  under  the  procedures  outlined  in  this Ordinance.

Section 903.	Enforcement  Remedies

A	Any person, who has violated or knowingly permitted the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $600.00 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of not more than threedays, or both. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.

B.	In addition, the Township, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.

C.	If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgement in a timely manner, the Township may enforce the judgement pursuant to applicable rules of civil procedure.

D.	Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the district justice further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation. In such case there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the

44
 
district justice's determination of a violation; thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.

E.	All judgements, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid to the Township.

F.	The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant or order  of  stay,  upon  cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgement.

G.	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.

Section 904.        Additional Remedies

In addition to the above remedies, the Township may also seek remedies and penalties under applicable Federal and Pennsylvania  statutes,  or  regulations  adopted  pursuant  thereto, including but not limited to the NPDES Phase II Regulations, Storm Water Management Act (32
P.S.	Section 693.1-693.27) and the Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102). Any activity conducted in violation of this Ordinance, NPDES Phase II permit, or the approved Turtle Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan may be declared a public nuisance by the Township and abatable as such.

Section 905.        Additional Legal Proceedings

In addition to the fines for violations, costs and penalties provided for by this Article, the Township may institute proceedings in Courts of Law or Equity, to collect damages to require owners and/or occupants of real estate to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 906.      Municipal Lien

The cost of removal, fine, and penalties herein above mentioned may be entered by the Township as a lien against such property in accordance with existing provision of law.

Section 907.        Existing Rights and Penalties Preserved

The collection of any penalty under the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed in estopping the Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania, the County, the Township  of North Huntingdon, or any aggrieved person from proceeding in Courts of Law or Equity to abate nuisances under existing law or to restrain, as law or in equity, a violation of this  Ordinance.  Moreover,  it is hereby declared to be the purpose of this Ordinance to provide additional and cumulative remedies to abate nuisances.

Section 908.        Appeals

Any person aggrieved by any action of the designee of the Township may appeal to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days of that action.


45
 
ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, at a meeting duly assembled this 17th day of March 2004.



TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON

 




 



SOLICITOR:  Bruce Dice


































46
 



















































APPENDIX A


Municipal Stormwater Management
District Map
 












. Turtle Creek Watershed


i
i'
North  Hu tingdc;in"  .,.,
Town h-ip	.














 





Legend:
 
Youghiogheny Watershed
 

# •I
I" , '.. )	...
''... "',..
t
 
Roads

Streams

Watershed Boundary

-Municipal Boundary
 
.   1	/	I North Huntingdon Township
Municipal Stormwater Managment Districts

0	0.5	1
Scale:	Miles
 

















































LEGEND:
@ Release Rate Areas I.D.

- Release Rate Area Boundary




Area	Release  Rate
0
6	50%
  7	50%		0	5450'	10900'
8	60%
9	50%
1	70%
11	70%
 31	50% 	 32	80%
33	60%
 36	70% 	 57	70%	Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan
	Assigned  Release Rate Percentages
	Based on Data Provided
by Chester Engineers
 


















































APPENDIX B


Low Impact Development Practices
 
APPENDIX B
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES ALTERNATIVE APPROACH FOR
MANAGING STORMWA TER  RUNOFF

Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned development practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces, destroying existing drainage swales, constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and changing local topography. A traditional drainage approach of development has been to remove runoff from a site as quickly as possible and capture it in a detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to the degradation of water quality as well as expenditure of additional resources for detaining and managing concentrated runoff at some downstream location.

The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will m1nrm1ze post­ development runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities. To simulate pre-development hydrologic conditions, forced infiltration is often necessary to offset the loss of infiltration by creation of impervious surfaces. The ability of the ground to infiltrate depends upon the soil types and its conditions.

Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative site design considerations. Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage. A well-designed site will contain a mix of all those features. The following describes various techniques to achieve the alternative approach:

•	Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage features, particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of their ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. However, this objective is often not accomplished in land development. In fact,  commonly held drainage  philosophy encourages just the opposite pattern -- streets and adjacent storm sewers typically are located in the natural headwater valleys and swales, thereby replacing natural drainage functions with a completely impervious system. As a result, runoff and pollutants generated from impervious surfaces flow directly into storm sewers with no opportunity for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration. Developments designed to fit site topography also minimizes the amount of grading on site.

•	Protecting Natural Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage areas have no surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event. They can be commonly seen as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season or after large runoff events. Traditional development practices eliminate these depressions by filling or draining, thereby obliterating their ability to reduce surface runoff volumes and trap pollutants. The volume and release-rate characteristics of depressions should be protected in the design of the development site. The depressions can be protected by simply avoiding the depression or by incorporating its  storage as additional capacity in required detention facilities.

•	Avoiding Introduction of  Impervious Areas. Careful site planning should  consider reducing  impervious  coverage  to  the  maximum  extent   possible.   Building  footprints,
 
sidewalks,  driveways  and  other  features  producing  impervious  surfaces  should  be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.

•	Reducing the Hydraulic Connectivity of Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surfaces are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected to an impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to reduce hydraulic connectivity are routing of roof runoff over lawns and reducing the use of storm sewers. Site grading should promote increasing travel time of stormwater runoff, and should help reduce concentration of runoff to a single point in the development.

•	Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns in most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts to storm sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping driveways and parking lots to the street. By routing roof drains and crowning the driveway to run off to the lawn, the lawn is essentially used as a filter strip.

•	Reducing the Use of Storm Sewers. By reducing use of storm sewers for draining streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for accelerating runoff from the development can be greatly reduced. The practice requires greater use of swales and may not be practical for some development sites, especially if there are concerns for areas that do not drain in a "reasonable" time. The practice requires educating local citizens and public works officials, who expect runoff to disappear shortly after a rainfall event.

•	Reducing Street Widths. Street widths can be reduced by either eliminating on-street parking or by reducing roadway widths. Municipal planners and traffic designers should encourage narrower neighborhood streets which ultimately could lower maintenance.

•	Limiting Sidewalks to One Side of the Street. A sidewalk on one side of the street may suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk could be replaced with bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot lines. Where appropriate, backyard trails should be constructed using pervious materials.

•	Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable interlocking concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete. Such materials should be considered as alternatives to conventional pavement surfaces, especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking lots, and emergency access roads.

•	Reducing Building Setbacks. Reducing building setbacks reduces driveway and entry walks and is most readily accomplished along low-traffic streets where traffic noise is not a problem.

•	Constructing Cluster Developments. Cluster developments can also reduce the amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest savings is in street length, which also will reduce costs of the development. Cluster development clusters the construction activity onto less-sensitive areas without substantially affecting the gross density of development.

In summary,  a  careful  consideration  of  the  existing  topography  and  implementation  of  a combination of the above mentioned techniques may avoid construction of costly stormwater
 
control measures. Other benefits include reduced potential of downstream flooding, water quality degradation of  receiving streams/water bodies and enhancement of aesthetics and reduction of development costs. Beneficial results include more stable baseflows in receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood flows, reduced pollutant loads, and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
 


















































APPENDIX  C


Non-Structural and Structural BMPs
 
APPENDIX C

ALTERNATIVE  RUNOFF CONTROL TECHNIQUES  AND THEIR EFFICIENCY IN THE WATERSHED



Various types of structural and non-structural stormwater best management practices (BMPs) that can be implemented on a site to meet the standards and criteria established for the Township of North Huntingdon are presented in this section. The primary sources for a majority of the information regarding the BMPs are "Maryland's Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I and II" and "Pennsylvania's Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas". PADEP  recommends  using  the  Maryland  Stormwater  Design  Manual  as  a  reference  for stormwater management guidance.  The Maryland Stormwater Design Manual is available on the PADEP website at www.dep.state.pa.us/dep/deputate/watermgmt/wc/subjects/stormwatermanagement.htm. Pennsylvania is in the process of developing its own stormwater management manual that will be similar to Maryland's manual.	The Pennsylvania manual should be used instead of the Maryland manual when it is issued.  Users of this ordinance should refer to these documents for additional information concerning BMPs.	Other sources of information regarding stormwater management  and watershed  planning are  available  from the  Maryland  Department  of the Environment's Nonpoint Source Program Publications List [(410) 631-3543] and the Center for Watershed Protection, [www.cwp.org or (410) 461-8323].


A.	SITE PLANNING WITH NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS



From a stormwater management perspective, the primary  benefit provided  by development site planning with non-structural practices is that less  stormwater  runoff  is generated, thereby reducing the required size  for  structural  stormwater  management  facilities and the cost to construct and maintain the facilities. In addition to this most obvious benefit, the use of non-structural practices also serves to reduce the quantity of pollutants that are conveyed in stormwater  runoff.
Six types of non-structural practices are presented for use in the Towrship of North

Huntingdon. For the purpose of promoting the use of non-structural practices in the planning of development sites, "structural facility size reduction (SFSR) credits" are included which may reduce the size of structural stormwater management facilities required to meet the standards and criteria established for the Township of North Huntingdon. The non-structural practices, the
 
criteria  that  must  be  met  to  be eligible  for  SFSR  credits,  and  the  structural  facility  size calculation modifications that must be applied to realize the SFSR credits are described below.


Natural Area Conservation


By guaranteeing the permanent preservation and protection of natural areas from disturbance, a developer can receive SFSR credits. The Natural Area Conservation SFSR Credits are realized by applying the following modifications to the structural facility size calculations.


•	The total natural land area that is conserved is subtracted from the total site area used to calculate the WOv. but the percent impervious cover (I), used to calculate the volumetric  runoff coefficient  (Rv). is still calculated  using the area of the entire site.

•	In the calculations to determine the post-development composite CN for the site, all conserved natural areas can be  assumed to be  forest in good condition.

In order to guarantee the permanent preservation and protection of natural areas, a conservation easement must be recorded for the preserved natural area. A conservation easement incorporates legal provisions into a property deed that limits the use of the property. Conservation easements allow for the continued private ownership of the land, but restrict land uses to current uses or to non-damaging activities.
Natural areas include forests, wetlands and associated buffers, floodplains, steep slopes, natural drainage ways and depressions, and meadows.


"Disconnection" of Rooftop Runoff



When developments are designed where rooftop runoff is allowed to discharge on to adjacent pervious area where the runoff can either infiltrate into the soil, or is "filtered" by flowing overland, SFSR credits are given. Typically, Rooftop Runoff SFSR credits are obtained by grading the development site to promote overland filtering. The Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits are realized by applying the following modifications to the structural facility size calculations.


•	The disconnected rooftop area is deducted from the total impervious area when calculating the percent  impervious cover (1), used to  calculate the volumetric runoff coefficient (Rv). Ultimately, the WOv will be reduced.
 
•	Disconnected rooftops can be used to meet the runoff capture volume (Rs) requirement by using the percent area method.

•	In the calculations to determine the post-development composite CN for the site, all disconnected rooftop area can be assumed to be forest in good condition.

The following restrictions must be considered prior to applying the modifications used to realize the Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits.


•	The maximum rooftop area contributing to any one down spout discharge shall be 500 square feet.

•	The distance from a down spout discharge point to an impervious surface must be equal to or greater than 75 feet.

•	Where the 75-foot distance is impossible to attain, and if the development site is located outside of the area of dry wells, french drains, or similar infiltration facilities may be used to compensate for disconnection lengths less than 75 feet.

•	The average slope of the overland flow area that receives the down spout discharge shall be no greater than five percent.

"Disconnection" of Impervious Surface Runoff



SFSR credits are also given when developments are designed to allow impervious surfaces to discharge onto adjacent pervious areas where the runoff can either infiltrate into the soil or be "filtered" by flowing overland. Typically, the Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR credits are obtained by grading the development site to promote overland filtering. The Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR Credits are realized by applying the following modifications to the structural facility size calculations.


•	The disconnected impervious area is deducted from the total impervious area when calculating the percent impervious cover (I), used to calculate the volumetric runoff coefficient (Rv).  Ultimately, the WOv will be reduced.

•	Disconnected impervious areas can be used to meet the runoff capture volume (Rs) requirement by using the percent area method.

•	In the calculations to determine the post-development composite CN for the site, all disconnected impervious area can be assumed to be forest in good condition.
 
The following restrictions must be considered prior to applying the modifications used to realize the Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR Credits.


•	The maximum impervious area contributing to any one discharge point is 1,000 square feet.

•	The maximum flow length across an impervious area, to a discharge point onto an adjacent pervious area, is 75 feet.

•	The distance from the discharge point of a "disconnected" impervious surface across a vegetated, pervious area to another impervious area must be equal to or greater than the flow length across the contributing impervious area.

•	The average slope across the vegetated, pervious area shall not exceed 5 percent.

•	"Disconnection" areas are encouraged for relatively permeable soils (B hydrologic soil group) without soil testing.

•	If the development site has less permeable soils (C hydrologic soil group), or the minimum pervious flow length can not be attained, a spreading device, such as a gravel trench is required to receive Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR Credits.



Stream Buffers



Vegetated riparian land adjacent to streams stabilizes the stream bank, filters pollutants from stormwater runoff, and provides habitat for a variety of amphibians, aquatic birds, and mammals that depend on their proximity to water for their life functions. A riparian forested buffer should be preserved or created along the banks of streams, wherever possible. Therefore, a Stream Buffer SFSR Credit will  be given when the riparian forested buffer is preserved or created and stormwater runoff is discharged to the buffer through overland flow. A Stream Buffer SFSR Credit is realized by applying the following modifications to the structural facility size calculations.


•	The area draining by overland flow to a stream  buffer is subtracted from the total site area in the WOv calculation.

•	The area draining by overland flow to a stream buffer can be used to meet the runoff capture volume (Rs) requirement by using the percent area method.
 
•	In the calculations to determine the post-development composite CN for the site, all area draining by overland flow to a stream buffer can be assumed to be forest in good condition.

The following restrictions must be considered prior to applying the modifications used to realize the Stream Buffer SFSR Credit.


•	The minimum width for the stream buffer is 50 feet.

•	The maximum flow length of the area draining to the stream buffer is 150 feet for pervious area surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces.

•	The average slope of the area draining to the stream buffer shall not exceed five percent.

•	Stormwater runoff must enter the stream buffer as overland flow. A level spreading facility shall be utilized wherever sheet flow cannot be maintained.

•	If Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits or Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR Credits have been applied to the overland flow entering the stream buffer, the Stream Buffer SFSR Credit is no longer available.

•	Other than the removal of trash, stream buffers shall not be managed.



Grass Channels



Grass channels filter pollutants as stormwater runoff moves along the open channel. In addition, grass channels reduce peak rates of runoff and increase opportunities for infiltration.
When designing a development site using open, grass channels, natural drainage ways on the site should be maintained and used as part of the open channel drainage  system wherever possible. Because of the benefits provided by grass channels, a Grass Channel SFSR Credit will be given when open channels are used. A Grass Channel SFSR Credit is realized by applying the following modifications to the structural facility size calculations.


•	The portion of a development site that is drained using open  channels  is subtracted from the total site area in the WOv calculation.

•	The area that is drained using open channels can be used to meet the runoff capture volume (Rs) requirement by using the percent area method.
 
The following restrictions must be considered prior to applying the modifications used to realize the Grass Channel SFSR Credit.


•	The maximum flow velocity for runoff from the 1.60-inch rainfall event shall be less than or equal to 1.0 fps.

•	The minimum bottom width shall be 2 feet and the maximum bottom width shall be 6 feet.

•	The side slopes shall be 3 horizontal to 1 vertical, or flatter.

•	The channel slope shall be equal to or less than 4 percent.

•	If Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits or Impervious Surface Runoff SFSR Credits have been applied to the overland flow entering the open channel, the Open Channel SFSR Credit is no longer available.



Environmentally Sensitive Development Credit



A Development SFSR Credit is given when specific criteria for environmentally sensitive site design are used in low density and rural residential development. When the specific criteria are m.et, the need to provide structural facilities to treat both the WOvand the Rs are eliminated.
For residential construction on a single lot, the criteria are as follows:



•	total impervious cover is less than 15 percent of the lot area;

•	minimum lot size is 2 acres;

•	all rooftop runoff is "disconnected" in accordance with the requirements for realizing Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits; and

•	grass channels are used to convey stormwater runoff in place of curb and gutters.


For a multiple-lot residential subdivision, the criteria are as follows:



•	total impervious cover is less than 15 percent of the lot area;

•	minimum lot size is 2 acres unless clustering techniques are used;

•	all rooftop runoff is "disconnected" in accordance with the requirements for realizing Rooftop Runoff SFSR Credits;
 
•	grass channels are used to convey stormwater runoff in place of curb and gutters;

•	at least 25 percent of the site is protected as natural conservation area (a conservation	easement must be recorded for the protected natural conservation area); and

•	structural stormwater facilities will still be required to  manage  stormwater runoff to meet  requirements for the prevention  of stream  bank erosion  and the control of over bank flooding and extreme flood events.


8.	STRUCTURAL  BMPS



Throughout Pennsylvania, the most common structural stormwater management facility that is seen at development sites is a dry detention basin. Dry detention basins are effective for providing the storage volume required for the following:


•	the extended detention  of stormwater  runoff from the  1-year, 24-hour  storm event to prevent erosion of stream channels;

•	to reduce the peak rate of runoff from the 10-year, 24-hour storm event for post-development conditions to the  pre-development  peak  rate  of  runoff, thereby, avoiding increases in the frequency of over bank flooding; and

•	to reduce the peak rate of runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event for post-development conditions to the  pre-development  peak  rate  of  runoff, thereby, avoiding increases in the 100-year floodplain area.



Dry detention basins, however, do not effectively improve  the  quality  of  stormwater runoff and only allow for a small amount of stormwater runoff to infiltrate. Therefore, at most development sites, non-structural controls in combination  with  more than  one  structural  BMP and, potentially, a dry detention basin will be required to meet all stormwater management requirements.
In this section, BMPs that have been found to be effective in stormwater quality control and/or the infiltration of stormwater runoff are presented. These BMPs have been separated into five general categories: stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, infiltration practices, filtering practices, and swales.
 
Stormwater Ponds


Unlike dry stormwater detention basins, stormwater ponds are designed to provide the entire WOv in a permanent pool, extended detention storage, shallow marsh, or a combination of these features.  Brief descriptions of four types of stormwater ponds follow.


•	Micro-pool extended detention pond - In a micro-pool extended detention pond, the WOv is provided by a combination of the forebay, the micro-pool, and the extended detention volume. The primary purpose for the micro-pool is to prevent resuspension of previously settled sediments and to prevent clogging of the low flow orifice.

•	Wet pond - A wet pond provides the entire WOv in the forebay and the pond's permanent pool.

•	Wet extended detention pond - The WOv is provided through a combination of forebay, permanent pool, and extended detention volume.

•	Pocket pond - In a pocket pond, the interception of the local groundwater table maintains the permanent pool in the pond. The WOv is provided by the forebay and permanent pool, plus, if necessary, the extended detention volume.



Stormwater Wetlands



In stormwater wetlands, shallow marsh areas in combination with small permanent pools and the extended detention volume provide the full WOv. Brief descriptions of four types of stormwater wetlands follow.


•	Shallow wetland - The WOv is provided in its forebay, a shallow permanent pool with a large surface area, and a deeper micro-pool.

•	Extended detention shallow wetland  - In combination with the forebay, shallow permanent pool, and deeper micro-pool, extended detention storage is used to provide the WOv in an extended detention shallow wetland.

•	Pond/wetland system - A pond is placed in advance of a wetland system that includes a plunge pool, shallow pool, and a deeper micro-pool. No extended detention storage is required to provide the WOv.

•	Pocket wetland - Similar to the pocket pond, in a pocket wetland the interception of the local groundwater table maintains the permanent pool in
 
the wetlands forebay,  shallow pool, and deeper micro-pool.	The WOv is provided by the permanent pool in the forebay, shallow pool, and micro-pool.



Stormwater Infiltration Facilities



Where soils and geologic conditions allow for the use of stormwater infiltration facilities, the WOv is captured and temporarily stored before allowing it to infiltrate. Obviously, infiltration facilities also meet the recharge requirement. Brief descriptions of two types of stormwater infiltration facilities  follow.


•	Infiltration trench - Typically used to receive stormwater runoff from small impervious areas, an infiltration trench can be designed to provide the WOv and Rs in one location.

•	Infiltration basin - The WOv and Rs are retained in an infiltration basin and allowed to infiltrate over a two-day period.



Stormwater Filtering Facilities



Stormwater filtering facilities are used to capture the WOv and pass it through a filter bed of sand, organic matter, soil, or other media. Following filtration, runoff may be returned to the stormwater conveyance system or an infiltration system. Brief descriptions of four types of stormwater filtration facilities follow.


•	Surface sand filter - A surface sand filter consists of a pretreatment sedimentation cell and sand filter bed. The pretreatment sedimentation cell is used to remove larger particulates that would tend to prematurely clog the sand filter bed. Typically, the sand filter bed would consist of 3 inches of topsoil planted with grass, 18 inches of sand, and a perforated pipe in gravel underdrain.

•	Underground sand filter - Where land area is limited, a sand filter can be constructed in an underground concrete box. In advance  of the  sand filter bed, stormwater conveyed by a pipe would flow through a wet pool chamber for the retention of debris and large particulates. The sand filter bed would consist of a gravel layer, 24 inches of sand, and a perforated pipe in gravel underdrain.

•	Perimeter sand filter - Also used where land area is limited, a perimeter sand filter can be constructed in an underground concrete box located where it could receive sheet flow from an impervious area.   Sheet flow would enter
 
the filter's sedimentation chamber through "at grade" inlet grates. The stormwater would then flow over a partition on to the sand filter that would consist of a gravel layer, 18 inches of sand, and a perforated pipe in gravel underdrain.

•	Bioretention - Bioretention facilities represent a unique combination of open space with stormwater treatment and some stormwater infiltration. A typical bioretention facility will have native plants in 4 feet of planting soil wth an optional sand filter layer and a perforated pipe in gravel underdrain. Excess stormwater can be allowed to overflow the facility through catch basins that are connected to a storm drain system.



Stormwater Swale Systems



A swale is defined as a low tract of land; especially moist or marshy ground. Stormwater swale systems are designed to capture and treat the full WOv They are formed by constructing check dams. Brief descriptions of two types of stormwater swale systems follow.


•	Dry swale - Typically used to receive stormwater runoff from low density residential development sites, or small impervious areas, dry swales have a pretreatment forebay separated from a "treatment" cell by a check dam. The "treatment" cell has 30 inches of sand and soil mixture over a perforated pipe in gravel underdrain. Grass is planted on the sand and soil mixture. The WOv is retained in the "treatment" cell by an outflow control pipe constructed through a berm at the "downstream" end of the dry swale.

•	Wet swale - similar to a dry swale with the exception that it intersects the water table, thereby providing a permanent, shallow pool that can be considered as part of the WOv.
 


















































APPENDIX D


Specific Design Criteria for Stormwater
Management Controls
 
APPENDIX D

SPECIFIC  DESIGN CRITERIA  FOR STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  CONTROLS


A	Criteria for Infiltration Systems (Single Residence)

1.	Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based upon local soil and groundwater conditions.

2.	Infiltration systems shall be greater than three (3) feet deep and shall be located at least twenty (20) feet front and ten (10) feet rear from basement walls.

3.	Infiltration systems shall not be used to handle runoff from commercial or industrial working or parking areas.

4.	Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire drainage area to the system has received final stabilization.

5.	The stormwater infiltration facility design shall provide an overflow system with measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along its length and at the outfall.

B.	Criteria for Stormwater Detention Facilities

1.	If detention facilities are utilized for the development site, the facility(ies) shall be designed such that post-development peak runoff rates from the developed site are controlled to those rates defined by the subarea release rate percentage for the 2-, 10, 25-, and 100-year storm frequencies.

2.	All detention facilities shall be equipped with outlet structures to provide discharge control for the four (4) designated storm frequencies. Provisions shall also be made  to safely pass, at minimum, the post-development 100 year storm runoff without  breaching or otherwise damaging (i.e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities.

3.	Shared-storage facilities, which provide detention of runoff for more than one development site within a single subarea may be considered and are encouraged. Such facilities shall meet the criteria contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the development sites involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a manner that avoids adverse impacts (such as flooding or erosion) to channels and properties located between the development site and the shared-storage facilities.

4.	Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple use facilities, such as wetlands, lakes, ballfields or similar recreational/open space uses are encouraged wherever feasible, subject to the approval of the Township or North Huntingdon.

5.	Other considerations which must be incorporated into the design of the detention facilities include:
 
a.	Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and installed to prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundment structures should be protected from soil erosion.
b.	Control and removal of debris both in the storage structure and in all inlet and
outlet devices shall be a design consideration.
c.	Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations, and other structures shall be designed and protected to minimize safety hazards.
d.	Restriction of access (fence, walls,  etc.) may be necessary depending on the location of the facility.
e.	Exterior side slope of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of two-and-one half to one. Interior side slop of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of three to one horizontal to vertical dimension.
f.	Landscaping shall be provided for the facility which harmonizes with the surrounding area.
g.	Facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance, considering the frequency and type of equipment that will be required.
h.	Spillway design - The outlets for the retention ponds shall consist of a combination of principal and emergency spillways. The outlets must pass the peak runoff expected from the drainage area for a 100-year storm without damage to the embankment of the pond. Runoff computations shall be based upon the soil cover conditions which are expected to prevail during the life of the basin.
i.	Principal Spillway - The principal spillway shall consist of a solid reinforced
concrete pipe joined by a water-tight connection to a 15 inches (minimum) horizontal reinforced concrete pipe (barrel) extending  through  the embankment and outletting beyond the downstream toe of the  fill.  The principal spillway shall have a minimum capacity of 0.2 cfs per acre of drainage area when the water surface is at the crest of the emergency spillway. The 25-year predevelopment  flow  will  be controlled  by  utilizing  a weir structure if the flow is less than the capacity of the 15" reinforced concrete barrel pipe. The construction materials must be approved by the Township of North Huntingdon.   Refer to Plate A.
j.	Design Elevations - When the principal spillway is used in conjunction with an emergency spillway, the crest of the principal spillway shall be a minimum of
2.0 feet below the crest of the emergency spillway. The crest of the principal spillway shall be a minimum of 3 feet below the top of the embankment. Refer to Plate A.
k.	Anti-vortex and Trash Rack - An anti-vortex device and trash rack shall be
attached to the top  of the principal spillway and  prevent floating debris from being carried out of the basins. The anti-vortex device shall be of the concentric type as shown in Plate B and Plate  C,  or  approved  equal.  A Typical Trash Rack Detail is  included herein to be used as a guide for the Developer.
l.	Base - The base of the principal spillway must be firmly anchored to prevent
its floating.	If the  riser of the spillway  is greater than  10 feet  in height, computations must be made to determine the anchoring requirements.  As a minimum, a factor of safety of 1.25 shall be used (downward forces- 1.25 x upward forces).	For risers 10 feet or less in height, the anchoring shall be done on the following way.	A concrete base 18 inches thick and twice the width of the riser diameter shall be used and the riser embedded 6 inches into the concrete. See Plate D for design details.
 
m.	Barrel - The barrel of the principal spillway, which extends through the embankment, shall be a minimum 15" reinforced concrete pipe and be designed to carry the 25-year predevelopment flow (or any required reduction thereof) provided by the  riser of the  principal spillway with the water level at the crest of the emergency spillway.  The connection  between the  riser and the barrel must be watertight. The outlet of the barrel must be protected to prevent erosion or scour of downstream area. This will include an end section or end wall with a designed rip-rap apron.
n.	Anti-Seep Collars - Anti-seep collars shall be used on the  barrel  of  the principal spillway  within the normal saturation zone  of the embankment to increase the seepage length by at least 1O percent, if either of the following conditions are met:
I)	The settled height of the embankment exceeds 10 feet; or
2)        The embankment has a low silt-clay content.
The anti-seep collars shall be installed within the saturated zone. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14 times the  projection  of  the collar above the barrel. Collars shall not be closer than 2 feet to a pipe joint. Collars should be placed sufficiently far apart to allow space for hauling and compacting equipment. Connections between collars and the barrel shall be watertight. The length of the barrel within the saturation zone can be obtained by entering Plate E with the variable "Y". "Y" is the depth of water at the principal spillway crest in feet. This chart will provide saturated length. This number is entered in Plate F to size the anti-seep collars. Refer to Plate G for details of the anti-seep collar.
o.	Emergency Spillway - The emergency spillway shall consist of an open
channel constructed adjacent to the embankment over undisturbed material (not fill). The spillway shall have a control section at least 20 feet in length. The control section is a level portion of the spillway channel at the highest elevation in the channel. The emergency spillway shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff expected from a 100 year storm, less any reduction due to the flow through the principal spillway. The spillway channel shall return the flow of water to a defined channel downstream from the embankment. The maximum allowable velocities in the emergency spillway channel will depend on the type of lining used. For vegetated linings, allowable velocities are listed in Table 4. For non-erodible linings, such as concrete, asphalt paving and rip­ rap, design shall return the flow to the natural channel at non-eroding velocities.  See Plate Hand Plate I for design of the emergency spillway.
p.	Embankment - The  material  for  the  embankment	shall  consist  of  all
excavation on the project except such material as may be determined unsuitable by the Township, which includes but is not limited to frozen material, and excessively wet or dry material. Acceptable material shall conform to the current PENNDOT Publication 408, Section on Embankment Material, or as approved by the Township.
q.	Rock Lining - The rock lining material used in stormwater management facilities should be a maximum of class R-5 to a nominal thickness of 24 inches according to PENNDOT Publication 408, Section on Rock Lining, or as approved by the Township.
r.	Fence  - A	chain	link  fence,	if  finally	determined	by  the	Board  of
Commissioners, may be required around the pond at a height of six (6) feet. A ten (10) foot wide gate shall be installed on retention ponds which said retention ponds are maintained by the Township of North Huntingdon so as to
 
permit vehicular access to the ponds. A Typical Detail of Fence is included herein to be used as a guide for the Developer.
s.	Access  Road  - Access  roads  situated  within  the  designated  storm management area designed to service one or more retention ponds within the said lot, shall have a maximum grade of 20 percent. The access road shall be constructed of 28 stone at a depth of four (4) inches with a double shot and chip treatment after construction and a second double shot and chip treatment after settling occurs, and approved by the Township.
t.	All final grading for the storm management facility  shall be restricted to the lot
in which this facility  will  be situated.   A ten  (10) foot  buffer strip shall be
provided around the perimeter of the bottom of the dike around the facility.
u.	All utility lines constructed within the designated storm management area shall be prohibited from the retention pond and dike area. Sanitary manholes constructed within the designated storm management area shall be provided with watertight lids.

C.	Criteria for Collection/Conveyance Facilities

1.	All stormwater runoff collection or conveyance facilities, whether storm sewers or other open or closed channels, shall be designed in accordance with the following basic standards:

a.	All sites shall be graded to provide drainage away  from  and  around  the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding damage.
b.	Lots located on the high side of streets shall extend roof and trench drains to the curb line storm sewer (if present). Low side lots shall extend  roof  and french drains to a stormwater collection/conveyance control system or natural watercourse in accordance with the  approved  stormwater  management  plan for the development site.
c.	Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel and close to
the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid the possibility of failing or causing the embankment to fail.
d.	All  collection/conveyance  facilities  shall  be designed  to  convey  the  25-year
storm peak flow rate from the contributing area to the nearest suitable conveyance system, such as an inlet, manhole (storm sewer) or natural swale, and shall be stored with a designated storm management facility as outlined in this Ordinance.
e.	Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall be suitably
lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid excessive velocities.

2.	Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they shall comply with the following criteria:

a.	Where practical, designed to traverse under seeded and planted areas. If constructed within ten (10) feet of road paving, walks or other surfaced areas, drains shall have a narrow trench and maximum compaction of fill to prevent settlement of the superimposed surface or development.
b.	Preferably installed after excavating and filling in the area to be traversed is
completed, unless the drain is installed in the original ground  within  a minimum of three (3) feet cover and/or adequate protection during the fill construction.
 
c.	Designed:  (1) with cradle when traversing  fill areas of indeterminant  stability,
(2) with anchors when gradient exceeds 20 percent, and (3) with encasement
or special backfill requirements when traversing under a paved area.
d.	Designed to adequately handle the anticipated stormwater flow and be economical to construct and maintain.  The minimum pipe size shall be fifteen
(15) inches in diameter,
e.	Drain pipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling  requirements  shall  conform  to the requirements of the Township of North Huntingdon and/or applicable PENNDOT 408 specifications.
f.	All corrugated metal pipe shall be polymer coated, with approved bonding, and inverts paved where prone to erode. Pipe within a municipal right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe with a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches.
g.	Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to  be adequate, safe, self­ cleaning, unobtrusive, and consistent with municipal standards.
h.	Appropriate  bicycle grates shall be designed  for  all catch basins,  stormwater inlets and other entrance appurtenances.
i.	Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finishing grade and sloped to conform to the slope of  the  finished  grade.  Top  castings  of structures located in roads or parking areas shall be machined or installed to preclude "rattling".
j.	Where proposed sewer connects with an  existing  storm  sewer  system,  the applicant shall demonstrate  that sufficient  capacity  exists  in the downstream system to handle the additional flow.
k.	Storm  sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy  dissipation devices to
prevent erosion and conform with applicable requirements of PADEP for stream encroachments (Chapter 105 of PADEP Rules and Regulations).
I.	Stormwater Inlets - The maximum spacing between stormwater inlets shall be
designed according to the 10-year storm flow and the capacity of the inlets, taking into account gradient of roadway, maximum allowable street flooding and drainageway capacity. When a possibility of clogging of grates, side opening, or combination inlets exists, use the capacity reduction factors shown in Table 1 applied to theoretical capacity of the inlet. The maximum amount of water that should be bypassed on to the next downstream inlet for inlets on continuous grades is 10 percent.
m.	Pipes - Horizontal and vertical curves with radii of 10 feet or greater are allowed for all pipe sizes. Friction losses to the pipe shall be calculated using the  Manning Formula: V = 1.49/n R 213   S 11,      ,   where V is velocity,  "n" is
Manning's roughness coefficient, R is hydraulic radius, and S is slope. Values for "n" are found in Table 2. The minimum value for "V" in pipes shall be 3.0 feet per second. The maximum value for "V" in pipes shall be based on engineering judgement and experience. Pressure flow is permitted in storm sewers. The elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be at least one foot below ground level.  Pressure heads of up to 25 feet can  be used with concrete pipe with rubber gasket joints.
n.	Spacing of Structures - The maximum allowable spacing between structures
to be used for inspecting and cleaning storm sewers shall be based on the pipe size and spacing shown in Table 3.
o.	Open Channels - Maximum allowable velocities of flow in swales, open
channels, and ditches in relation to slope and grass cover are shown in Table
4.	Higher velocities require invert stabilization. If they do not  present  a hazard, velocity dissipaters may be approved by the Township.
 
p.	Where seepage pits, seepage tanks, seepage trenches and/or trench drains are  proposed, the developer shall include an analysis of the potential for accelerated sinkhole development in the specific geology of the site due to the concentration of water introduction to the subsurface.
 







(SEE PLATE B)

GRASS  COVER  CN
:NTERIOR SLC S




CCNCRET-E ENDWALL



CONCRETE ENOWALL






 


ROCK UNING TO BE SIZED IN ACCCRDANCE TO ?ENNDOT PUBLIC).TJON  408  8 APPROVED SY ENGINEER
REFER  TO  PLATEK·



..A ..    •   WHEN  25 YEAR ?RE - DEVELOPMENT STORM RELEASE RATE REQUIRES AOOITIONAL CONTROL AT THIS POINT, A WEIR STRUCTURE SHALL BE IJTlUZEO.
 





BARREL PIPE SIZED FOR THE 25 YEAR  -
?RE-DEVELOPMENT
STORM RELEASE
RATE.
PIPE: DIAMEIER SHALL NOT BE LESS THAN 15-
 
= -.- I ROCK APRON    -
SIZED FOR THE 25 YR. PRE-DEV. STORM RELEASE RATE.
 























TYPtCAL	POND	WITH	EMERGENCY	SPILLWAY PLATE		A
 


,. MAXJMUM SPAC!NG AT ::ND SECTIONS TO SE 6""

I " I " 1/8 L (TIP.) GALVANIZEO METAL
OR  STAINLESS
STEEL


#4 BARS (TYP.) WELDED  TO
THE ANGLES 8 AT EACH  -­ INTERSECTION OF THE BARS..




TRASH   RACK



RISER	RISER	STEEL  rt
PIPE </J	PIPE	··t"REQ'D
 

s·-o·
 

8'-0"
 





 L • 0 • d • 2T    (MN.) 	
 
!MAXJ		TO 19'-0"
15"    a as	j e· - M	t· 1/4"   t
18"   3 as	8' - M	t 1/4"  t
18"   3 as	a· - 19·	;.   3/8"  t
24"   T 8 G	8' - M	t 3/8"  t
24"    TBG	a· - 19·	i 3/8"  t
30"  T8G	8' - \4	t 3/8"  t
30"   T8G	8' - 19'	.t_   3/8"  I
36"  T8G	8' - M	t 1/2" I
36"   TSG	a· -19'	t 1/2"  t
48"  TSG	8' - M	t 5/8"
48" T8G	a· -19'	t 5/8"
60"   TSG	8' - M	I	t 5/8"  I
 
1-·-o--
 


72"   TSG	8' - M    I	I
 



'\.
 


3/4"
 


ANTl - VORTEX DEVICE
 
60"  TSG	la· -19' I	t 5/8"

72"   TSG	8' - 19'  I	t 3/4"  I
84"   TBG	8' - M	I	it 3/4"
34"   7 3 :;		I	i =· - :9· !	't  3/4"  I	I = THICi<NE.SS OF PLATE
t = STE:'.L PU.TE
 




TYPICAL	TRASH	RACK	,8	ANTI-VORTEX	DEVICE PLATE		8
 
-

!::
G


3	:!
::)
I
 
CONCRETE REINFORCED
!SER PIP!::


D	15"  BARREL
PIPE
 
;..'..    x









D :DIAMETER  CF RISER  ?IPE

S8S • BELL 8 SPIGOT
T a G • TONGUE a GROOVE








M































ANCHOR	REQUIREMENTS FOR RISER PIPE LESS THAN 8'-0"




PLATE	D
 


CONCRETE   REJNFORCEO
iUSt:.q PIP


 


3
\]1
 
D	1 · BARREL
PIPE CM/NJ





·· :....··.· 1
 
_, --·--12"  .".;..:..
 

CL.ASS  ·e·CONCRETE
 
:,..:.	•4 RE·BARS
BOTli WAYS

 

0 :DIAMETER OF RISER PIPE
- a a s = BELL. 8 SPIGOT	3"
T a G :z   TONGUE  a GROOVE
 
,,..     '\:'ill"       \


SOUARE  ASE\
 






?!PE SIZE
DIAMETER		


BAR SIZE	
MINIMUM CONCRETE STRENGTH
	

··w··	

N9 OF BRS.		
1a·  9 as	!	4'-0"	(.5)   Ea. Woy	I	#   4	3000	P.S.L
24"    T8G	I	4'-0"	(5)  Ea. Woy	
•6	
3000	P.S.L
30•   TSG	l	5'-0"  .	!6J  Ea. Way	11  8	
3000	P.SJ.
36"   TSG	I	6'•0"	(7J   Ea. Way	•8	3000	P.SJ.
48"  TSG	I	a·-o·	
19)  Ea. Woy	
" e	
3000	P.SJ.
60" TSG	I	10·-o-	
UIJ  Ea. Wqy	•a	
3000	P.SJ.
n:   TSG	I	12'·0"	(13J   Ea. Way	# 8	
3000	P.SJ.
 84"    iSG	I 14'-0" 		(IS}  ca. Way 		
118 		
3000 P.SJ.










ANCHOR REQUIREMENTS FOR RISER PIPE 8'-0" TO 19'-0"



PLATE	D-1
 


'Z-0'"   TYi".    •      I OD.	• 1



 
i-:
0
J
 

COllTrfUOUS  WELD  SOTH SIDES



TWO 1'1ECE CONrlECTll'IG  eANO
 
















GENERAL  NOTES:

 
I.   CONNECTIONS  BETWEEN THE COLLARS
8 THE 3ARREL SH.llLL SE WATERTIGHT
8 SHALL NOT SE CLOSER THAN (2) TWO
FEET TO A  PIPE JOINt
 
5. EACH  COLLAR   SHALL  BE FURNISHED  WITH  (10)  TEN
3/8" DIA. STAINLESS STEEL 30LTS, STAINLESS
STEEL  LOCK  WASHERS  a. STAINLESS  STEEL  NUTS.
 

2.	COLLARS SHALL SE INSTALLED WITHIN THE SATURATED ZONE. 8 THE MAXIMUM SPACING BETWEEN COLLA S SHALL NOT EXCEED
3.	UNASSEM8LED  COLLARS  SHALL BE MARKED
8'1'  PAINT'iNG  OR  TAGGING  TO IDENTIFY
MATCHING  PAIRS.

4.	THE LAP 9ETWEEN TWO HALF SECTIONS SHALL
3E CAULKED WITH BITUMINOUS MASTIC AT THE
TIME OF U'fSTALLA TION.















ANTI - SEEP	COLLAR


PLATE	G
 



\	''
 
''.....	\
\.
\
 



iOP	0 	
 
'\.
'
 
...
'
 
''	\
''	\.
 
0 F	AM
 

<l:
_J
L	/
RETENTION

'. p 0 ND
'
''\
 

\
'	\
\ \
\ '\
 

'

  PLAN	VIEW 	






L::VEL CONTROL  SECTION

20" LENGTH (MN.)
 
'\ \
\ \
 





 
SECTJON	AT CONTROL SECTION

 	x 	

'ouRS£	100	- - -
Wl1'Hrt  Tl-£	s I  - - -.
OESIGHATEO	-
SiOAMMGNT.	-/
;./11£.A.	t    /
 


REQUIRED
ROCK  LINING  ON FILL
AREA


LEGEND
n =   Maming"s  Coefficient  ot  Roughness.

Hp=  Dif1erenc11 in Elevation b11tween Cr1tsl of Emer911ncy Spillway al the control  section  and  top  of  Dam. (Freeboard)
:i "  Bottom Width of SplDway at th• control ncllon. 0 ,.  Total Discharge In cfs.
'I =  Velocity in Feet Per Second that will  exist in chann•I below control secrion, at Design 0, if constructed to Slope that is shown.

S " flartes: Slop• in  . ::ilowabl• for chann•I below control nction. X= Minimum Length of channel below control section, in Feel.
 

TO SIZE MERGENCY SPILLWAY, USE TI-IS PLATE IN CONJUNCTION
WITH PLATE  I

 
EMERGENCY
 
SPILLWAY
 
DETAIL
 



PLATE	H
 

	-·-	I

·:J  -	
 	::2	.33	--	-	--	33	--	--	.:.:	--	::!	·-	-:"":	:;;	-	33	i
 	.c	I'	1.:.	'ii	=	20	2:::	2..:.	::o	37 	
 

·:.5
 
 	v 	3.0: 	3  o: 	:: c: 	3.0: 	
 
3.01
 
3. 'J
 
3. I
 
":  {I	3 5:
.3 i
 
:;.
 
-·'=- .
 
.,.
 
.... ;.
 

37	I
 

 	i6	iC	20	25 	
 
-	_,,	I
 
'I 	3 .2.
 
3.2:	3.3
 
3.3·
 
.3.3 I
 
!. .::. :	.3 '	.:..:·	3. :	; 3;	3 .3:	3. .3
 
C.7
 
s	. t	;• 5:	3.4
 
.:.:
 
3.4 I
 
3 .:.1
.:.1	41
 
;.:.;
 
3 . .::
 
- .:. I	3. -!I
.:. I	.:. I
 
3 . .:.
 





C.9	s
 	x 	
Q	2 o:	3 3	:: a	.:. 2    1       t.1	s ;     1           s ;;	;•	;::	;;a	,	;;	::	8 s	o:o
 
:.o
 
'I	.:.o:	.:01	.:..o!	.:.c:	.:..::1	401	.:.01	.:c:	t.c:	.: ·	40	o:	40!	.:.c!	.:.01	40
 
s	!I I
 
301	30:	::c1	3::1	301	:SOi	::c:	:JO•	301	30	301	3.01	:SCl	301	3·0
 
x	!
Q.,
 
;1 	i
 
5  •	!:2	!:2    I      5 2	:z	5 2    ·  :2	52	52	:2	5 2	5 2	5 2	5 2
54	5.:J	55	:-o	7.:.	7':?	s.:.	39	':?5	:co	105
 
! . !
 
..:,  2 I
 
.::.   2'
 
.:. 2'
 
.: 3 I
 
.:..  .":i
 
z. !	2.9	29!	2'=·	2.9:	2.5.	2.31	2.?!	2.21	2.91	2.:1	2.:!I
 
x	<  •
..,
2
 
;.:.	;!!I  ,,,
 

so	36	92    1       ;is= :o.:., 1:c	!I'>	. .,.,
 
5	- ; !
 	::

-:
,..;


: ...:.	S	z:::	"	27!	2.T:	2	2.7:	2.7i	2.50	2.SI	Z.6i	2.6;	2.51	2.'>i	2.Si	:?6•	2.Si	2.6
x	.:,.:	:..o	.;o	o	o	;.	;,·	;,	;1  I  -ii	S':'"	;a	;;a	;a	;a	;o 1     69'
o	.. .	:c	:a	oo	"!'!	!	3'2    ,   101	'oe	:1,;   1   ,z5  1      3.3   ,   ,.-i   .  :!o	1.;c	10  ,   1;5
 
.5






I. 7
 
v	.:.:.	"',,	4'?1	50:	5.C!	!C:	50:	50	5C·	5.C	5.Ci	501	5.C!	5.0I	51	511	5  I
s	2-·	2;.	2.s·	z;;	;:	2s1	2:;	2;:	251	2.s:	2;1	_::	2s:	2!'	2!1	2
X	-==	.;?	'7'J	70	;	71	I•	7f	71171	72	72	-:	72	7'217'2
v	5 ·'.;·	!.! :	51	51	!!'	!.2'	5.21	5  2!	5 2•	5.ZI	5.2	5.Z!	5.21	5 z;	5.2'	5 21	5   -
'----:s=----..,2::-_...;;;;:-.--2='"'".  "'.;'-, - ,_-';;,..-, --2 .-',;"':,.---'2"'".""'s,...·--2;:.;:'"---:2"".s::-1---=-2"".-='c."--::z:-.-:5:..,---,:z;;.::.51	z. 5	z.5i	2..s	z 51	2.51	2.s1	z.s
J..	7° (:	•  -	i	;" !i	7 <	7.;  ·	7 iS	i 6	1 $	75   I  7 6	;6	i;	7.:;	7;	i ; I  7 =j
z	;z	72	33	:1•  ·.  •v!.	15   112s  '135. ;.:.s; 156: 1s1	11s	187  11ss	zois 1217
---.  ,----:,_,z-,-  !:..          .,..--  s  z:-'-,   _;;_s .""'j,...,---: . ,....---:;;-,. --->5-_3...-:-1--.-s-.- .,---.5,..._""'.:.,....---,:,.... -.--;..,,.s_-.:.,...,-	....5..-_ .+--T:-.-.-.-5.-_ ::---..,s,....-.._,..._-"""......,s .""'"''"'1"""'"'-.	1
_-,..... .-----..,2,,,_,.;,...,--2, .,,.,._ .--,-s,...:--2'"'.'"'5,...,- ,z,....,::'"'i--·""'2'"'""':---:::2. s 1	2. 5i	2.:>	2.s1	2.51	2.5	2 .:1	2 .51	?'3:	z.s:	2. s
x	7;	;-:	!3	ao	:c	?c  ·    .30	eo	ao	:-J	so	80	.::c	;io	30	90   1          :o
 
.--.:i	"""":..-:.'--,-.---------"""".3'--1 ---='?_.3......_       ,-=o-•	•...-.=----' .-.2..,.7_,..,.'._1_ a
 
 r so 	: ;.: 	1 7 1 	1  a 2 	: '? 	z '.'.l • 	2  ' .:.     •   2 2  s   · 2 .3 3
 
v	5	.S.•·	5.41	5.5:	5.51	55.	S.SI	5..51	5.5i	S.51	S.5!	5·61	S.5i	5.6	5.ol	5.61	S.5
 
1.3


1.9


2
 
"---::s=----:----:!,.-,!-,-_,z'""':"':,.........,z"".'"'s'"':""-"'""'2 :,....-....,z:,.;-; ,..,-.....;2:-..;;..:.--"'2""". 4;--?..::	2.'"''	z ...1	z. .:.,	z...1	2. ...	z  .•	z ..:. •	2 ..:.1	<!   •
x	:c	;2	33	ac.	s•	:•. 94   •        3·.:.·	a.:..	ac.   1     8•   1      84  1       9.:.    1     a4	3.:.	::i.:	9.:.
o	.;.:.	.	:a	:02	1.:.	·	, .:.o	152	1.;.:.   · 1   •s  •   1sa   •   201   1    21J	22s	2'"  •   ;ac.a	250
v	::.!:	5    :	ss;	s.;:	a:	.;	5.7!	n	51;	!.11	!r;	5.71	.0	'	7•	s.;:	s.;
 	s	2.5:	2.5:	2..51	2. .:.:	2 !	!4•	241	2.41	z.c.:	241	2.41	2.41	2. .:.1	z..:..	2.c.1	2.4i 	2.4
x	d.:.	a ii   1       8 7	d a	a a   1	a a	a s	:a	:e   •	as	s s   1       e s	e a	s a	3 a   ;   a 3
'"---::v,.--.;.--.:;!·;..;;,,_: _..,s;:..;... 7.,.:__,s;.:·.;,.1..;.1_-:s.:... 7:,..'--:5;.:·..;::a.;..1 _.....:::.s =:..:'--:5;.:·;;.a.;..1--=s. !I	5    :	5.31	s.s 1	s 91	5. ?!	s  gi	s. !!	5.91	s.=
 
.O  I	S	2  C:	Z . .:.1	z ..:.;	2. c.:	2  .:.,	l ..:.-	2.41	2  c.!	2.J1	2.JI	Z.J!	2..31	2.!I	2 .31	2 • .3	2  31	Z  .::!
X	S	o/.J	\	9 I	91	; 1	9 2    I        '::! Z    ';  !! 2	;2  I        9 2    I	-Z	oz	? 2	9 2	!!2	!?  2
0	77	I   07   I 122	I "	,.:.9: :;2	17'7	192  •  2':'1'   1220  1z:;.:.  I    2 •257  1276  :2!! I	30
2_	6.0i	S.Ci	;.01	6.c:	6.01	0.01	O.ct	0.0!	'!t.V	.; .U
2.31	2.3;	2.Jf	2.31	2.31	2.31	Z.?J	!.3!	2	2.3

v	a	:QC	115   1131   1j.:..;	.;J,.	1  119.:.   1210  !ZZ.:.  !",9 · 53	2s::   iZ a  13 i	3iO:	3 :}
!.Z	V	! 1	5:0'	"601	SOI	6.C	;1.	S.11	6.11	611	611	6.11	6.11	ii.ii	62!	6.21	5.Z:	6.2

i.J	:01;c,s	:2 11 ..0	i!2	::	19:;12oa12z.;	2'	? a	zts1,a?:30 13z:3  1   ;..:.i1:?!:.:
2.3	S	:a. .:.1	Z . .:..	2.3;	2.3•	2.J;	2.::;	2.31	'Z.!I	!.2!	2.'!I	2.2!	2.2!	2. 21	Z.2!	2.2;	21!	2 .2
J..	ICC   I ;c;a	:02	103	103  I  .a;'' J.:.   I    1.:i.o    I 10-.  I l " I     105  ':os	I""	:c 'iC5  !  10 I 105
 
.-, -.
 

'I	6!=	'5.1!	6.2	;. :	S.31	; :	041	4f	;_.:of	.;.;1	;_.;1	.;.:.!	;.:.o	;..:a	;..:.1	.;..;.1	.;"'
s	2  !:	2!1	23i	2.31	2.!1	2.2..	2.21	2.21	2.2!	2.2!	2.2'	2.21	221	z.21	2.2!	2.2'	2.Z
 
:o	! 0 7
 
f    f  0 7   '	:oa   1      10s   'ro.3  '!C 1     :09	:09	10	iJ	:	··cc:?-	• .., 03
 

DESIGN DATA
 
r,....o R\
 
,... /\ o ........  ,
C.i-'li\
 

SP!LLvVAYS
 

SIDE:  SLO?S  2:1 VEGETATED	n=.0.040   ..
 
PLATt.	I
 
10"  MAXIMUM	SPACING	!0"    AXJMUW    SPACL'lG








r'
\. 2" • 2" GALVA.'GZED
CH.U'I UNI( FENCE \,
r	TFN- """-:,- '""· v-.,•.,._...,.'At'>,'<'i"f.YY'r">('\. •'Y'
6"

LINC..../
 

TYf'.	..:..--:or:::::
 

SCl£Dl.A.E 40	··
G.:U. 'IANZ.EO	TYf'.
2. 7/8" o.o.-	..
POST.	•	!j .. . ;L 12  i::rA.
 
.:·	SCtiEDUI..£ 40
...._...., I....(:;	Wl

(COf!IE:R POST & E."IO PO T)
 
TYP.6,--
I	.
 



BRACE  TO oE INSTALLED·· ON ENO SECTIONS 8
 
PLAN	VIEW
 
CORNER  SECTIONS
 




1------------- 10· OP'::NING  REo·o.

_,,o.9 .A.  1cs "'"ox. 12"c..c.





SRACE


r'
""I.  2"•Z"
GALVAICZEO
f CHAii'! Uie< FENC.E i".l.8itC\






 
GSAoL-ECU.E.40
,. POST.
 

_..,..    ,.
 

  VEHICULAR	ACCESS	GATE	:..I







RETENTION	POND	PERIMETER	FENCING


PLATE	J
 

-RISER  PIP-"'

/"

//	;]	11r
 
r
r CY I
 


'--
.
 


-r	"
 



1  ] "T'
 
......
.
 
TRUCTURE
 
y,
..
I  I
' I	I
 
n	-;;
)
 
'-	I	I	J
\.. '	I  I
II	T.O P	OF	DAM INLET PIPE				-- --
TYPICAL	POND	PLAN	 
 

.)


-··.
 


 
ROCX CHANNEL LINING TO 6E WIDTH  OF INLET PIPE DIAMETER
(MINIMUM)
 


INTERIOR  SLOPES
TO 6E GRASS LINED
 









ROCl< TO 6E SIZED ACCOROING
·TO CFS DISCHARGE OF INLET
PIPE.

SECTION	A - A
















ROCK LINING AT  BOTTOM OF	RETENTION  POND   DETAIL




PLATE	K
 



INLET CAPACITY REDUCTION	FACTORS

ASSUMING PARTIAL CLOGG!NG







 
Condition





Sumt: Sum;,:i
Continuous Grade
 
!nl.et Type



Side Otieninz Grate Ccmbina.":ion Sice Openinz
 
Reduction Factc0


a.so

0.50

0.65

C.30
 
Cont:!.!'luous Grade
 
Side O enin; with Derlecto
 

 
Cor.tinuous Grade Continuous Grace Continudus Grade
 
Lon itudinal 3a s Transverse Ba.::-s Ccmbina-cion
 
c.60

0.50

a.so
 





*  Percenta;e of	heoretical ca. a.city










TABLE 1
 




' n" VALUES   FOR  MANNING  FORMU!...A






                                                                   "n" Value'*
Asbestos Cement	0.013
Concrete Culvert Pi e	0.0.!.3
Concrete Sewer Pipe	0.013
Cast Iron	0.013
Corru ated Meta	(plain)	0. 021!.
Corrugated Meta	(coated)	0.02:
?lastic (smooth inside)	0.01.1.
Verified Clay	0.01.3






* Adjustments for specific conditions shall be based on en.:ineerini: experi.er.ce · and juctr.nent and subm1.<;-:ed to the Township En ineer fo ap rovai.













TABLE   2
 





SPACING OF INSPECTION AND CLEANOUT STRUCTURES -FOR STORM S WERS





Size of Pi e (inches)	Maximum Allowable S acin (feet)


-1::i	aoo

18	36	soc
LL 2	60	700
6 6  c:-  Lar•e:-	Un l.:!.m.:!. t'ed






























 
 
P RM!SSI3LE VELOCITIES FOR CHANNELS



?ERMISSI3LE CHANNSL
 

 

 
Crownvet.ch
Kentucky Elue rass
Ken ucky 31 Tall Fescue Reed Ca.nary
R;ye rass
small. Gr.a.ins

 

Sandy Loa.>n
Sil Loam or Alluvial Silts, Loose
Fi:::-m   Loam

3er-e  Earth. Erosion R 0 sistant
 

3
lJ.
3
3
2.5
2.5
 

5
6
7
5
3 . .5
3




1.75
2
2.25
 

 
Fine G?:'avel
S !ff Clay or Alluvial Sil s. Firm
Loam to Cobbles ( raded)
Silt to Cobbles ( radec} or Coarse
Gravel
Cobbles & Stones or Shales & Hardpans
Durable Bedrock

Othe!'

Plastic
o" Rip Rap
AstihaJ.t
9" RiD Rap
12" Rip Rap or Wood
Concrete	r Steel
 
2 . .5
3
3,75


5
8





6
7
8
9
15
 

Slope, soil conditions, climate and mana ement must be considered in channel desisn. If different channel linin s exist in a channel and size and slope do not chan e. desi n the channel for the iin1ni:. with the lower velocity listing.

Where velocity ran es are listed the lower velocitY is for desizn with easil:; er-oded soi.ls and sloi;>es a;.reate!" 'than 10 percent.    The hizher  velocity•is  for design  with erosion
!"esistant soils and slopes less than 5 percent.

Fil'tration and/or sedimentation of  sediment in the channel is encouraged. However, thia must  be  considered  or velocity determination in the deeisn of the channel croee­ sect'ion.



·rA3L2    4
 



















































APPENDIX  E


Property Owner Operations and Maintenance Agreement
 
APPENDIX E

PROPERTY OWNER OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT


 
THIS AGREEMENT,  made and entered into this   	
 
day  of
 
----, 20_, by and
 
between----------------' (hereinafter the "Landowner"), and the Township of North Huntingdon, Westmoreland County; Pennsylvania, (hereinafter "Township");



WITNESS ETH




WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in the land records of Westmoreland  County, Pennsylvania,  Deed Book                        at Page
 	, (hereinafter "Property").
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and WHEREAS, the Subdivision/Land  Management Plan (hereinafter "Plan") for the
property identified herein, which is expressly made a part hereof, as approved or to be approved by the Township, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property through the use of Best Management Practices (BMP's); and

WHEREAS, the Township and the Landowner, his successors and assigns agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township require that on-site stormwater Best Management Practices be constructed and maintained on the Property: and

WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the following definitions shall apply:


•	BMP - Best Management Practice.

•	Infiltration Trench - A BMP surface structure designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer,

•	Seepage Pit - An underground BMP structure designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer,
 
•	Rain Garden - A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable vegetation designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or underground aquifer, and

•	Stormwater Structures and Facilities shall include, but not be limited to, detention and retention basins, and BMP"S.

WHEREAS, the Township requires, through the  implementation  of  Ordinance  No. _, The Township of North Huntingdon Stormwater Management Ordinance, that stormwater management BMP's as required by said Municipal Ordinance be constructed and adequately maintained by the Landowner, his successors and assigns. The Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the BMP site location, plan view and cross sectional drawings as appropriate, design calculations, material specifications, and any maintenance  requirements  imposed  by  the Township or its Designated Representatives, and

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:

1.	The onsite BMP facility shall be constructed by the Landowner in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the Plan.

2.	The Landowner shall maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good working order acceptable to the Township and in accordance with the specific maintenance requirements noted on the Plan which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof.

3.	The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Township, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems necessary. Whenever possible, the Township shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.

4.	In the event the Landowner fails to maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good working order acceptable to the Township, the Township may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s). This provision shall not be construed to allow the Township to erect any permanent structure on the land of the Landowner. It is expressly understood and agreed that the Township is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Township.

5.	In the event the Township, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Township for all  expenses incurred within 10 days of receipt of invoice from the Township.

6.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to insure the proper maintenance of the onsite BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or effect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by nonpoint source pollution runoff.
 
7.	The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and  other  successors  in  interests, shall indemnify the Township's employees and designated  representatives  against  all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be  asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Township.

8.	In the event that a claim is asserted against the Township, its designated representatives or employees, the Township shall promptly notify the Landowner and the Landowner shall defend, at his own expense, any suit based on the claim. If any judgement or claims against the Township's employees or designated representatives shall be allowed, the Landowner shall pay all costs and expenses regarding said judgement or claim.

9.	The Township shall inspect the BMP(s) at a minimum of once every three years to ensure their continued functioning.

This Agreement shall be recorded among the land records of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania and shall constitute a covenant running with  the  Property  and/or  equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner,  his administrators, executors, assigns,  heirs and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity.
 



ATTEST:


WITNESS the following signatures and seals:


(SEAL)	For the Township:








(SEAL)	For the Landowner:





ATTEST:


Township of North Huntingdon


County of Westmoreland, Pennsylvania


l,	, a Notary Public in and for the County and

State aforesaid, whose commission expires on the	day of		,  20_, do hereby certify that		whose name(s) is/are
signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the _ day of	, 20_,

has acknowledged the same before me in my said County and State.


GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS----- day of	, 20	.




NOTARY PUBLIC


(SEAL)
 
OFFICIAL

TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. --1L OF 2010
ORDINANCE NO. 2152


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON, COUNTY	OF \VESTMORELAND AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA PROVIDING FOR AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE NO. 765 PROVIDE FOR TEXT CHANGES TO THE LANGUAGE OF SAID ORDINANCE



WHEREAS, the Township Planning Commission has recommended to the Township of North Huntingdon to make the herein below text changes to its Zoning Ordinance on the 30th day of August, 201O; and
WHEREAS,  the Township  Commissioners  have held a public hearing pursuant to the

Municipalities Planning Code on the 14th day of October, 2010; and

WHEREAS, the Township Commissioners deem it in the health, safety and general welfare to adopt text changes to Ordinance No. 765, and said text changes are set forth and described herein below.
NOW  THEREFORE   BE  IT  ORDAINED  AND  ENACTED,  by  the  Board  of

Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. After a Public Hearing held on the 14th day of October, 2010 at 6:45 P.M., the Board of Commissioners of North Huntingdon Township hereby amends Ordinance No. 765 to provide for the following text changes to said Ordinance:
A.	Section 823.4 is amended as follows:

Section 823.4 Signs Permitted in Commercial and Planned Economic Development Districts:




- 1 -
 
1.	In all Commercial and PEDD Districts, business signs, excluding advertising signs and billboards, shall be a permitted use subject to the following:
(1)	A permit ......

2.	Advertising signs or billboards may be permitted in any Commercial or PEDD district by special exception. A billboard shall be a principle use on any lot and shall be subject to the same restrictions set forth in Section 823.4.l.
B.	Section 823.5 Permitted Signs in an Industrial District is amended as follows:

1.	Signs on awnings ...

2.	Advertising signs or billboards may be permitted in any Industrial I District by special exception. A billboard shall be a principle use on any lot and shall be subject to the same restrictions set forth in Section 823.5.l.
C.	Table 5 shall be modified to read as follows:

1.	Commercial/Industrial Districts permitted uses to divide the use category for signs into two (2) categories: "Signs-Business" and "Signs­ Advertising and Billboards". "Signs-Business" would be permitted uses in all Commercial, PEDD and Industrial Districts. However, "Signs-Advertising and Billboards" shall be considered special exceptions in all Districts.
SECTION 2. The requisite Township officials are hereby directed to amend the official Zoning Ordinance to reflect the text changes as set forth hereinabove.
SECTION 3. Any Ordinance or portions of Ordinances in which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Commissioners that this


-2-
 
Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional,  illegal or

invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present, this Wednesday, the  17thday of November, 2010.


TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
_J
, President Board of Commissioners


ATTEST:








/

 


- /.
 
EAL

--.....;'	--
&'OLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire
 






















- 3 -
 

OFFICIAL

TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2 of 2017
ORDINANCE NO.  2226

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1029 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO OUTDOOR BURNING AND FIRES.

WHEREAS,  the  Township  desires  to  amend  the  outdoor  burning  and  fire regulations.
NOW,	THEREFORE,	be	it	ordained	and	enacted,	by	the	Board	of

Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, at a meeting assembled, by and with the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1.	Section 66-3(c) of Ordinance No. 1029 shall be repealed in its entirely and replaced with the following:
No person or persons shall set or maintain any outdoor burning or fires within seventy-five (75) feet of any structure and the size of the burning or fire, except as provided for in Subsection  B above, shall not exceed an area consisting of ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet. Open burning requires a permit issued by the Police Department and may be conducted Wednesdays, Thursdays,  Fridays , and Saturdays from 9:00
A.M . to 5 :00 P.M., prevailing time, as tolerated . The permit issued is a onetime permit only for the day(s) requested, and a new permit must be obtained for each and every open burning.
SECTION 2. The remainder of Ordinance No. 1029 shall remain in full force and effect.


- 1 -
 
SECTION  3.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4.	If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township Commissioner that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,  section or part thereof not been included herein.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania,  a full quorum  being present, this Wednesday,  the
 	day of	, 2017 .


TOWNSHIP  OF NORTH HUNTINGDON BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS

By:
Tony	sident



ATIEST:


 


SEAL



SOLICITOR:  Bruce E. Dice, Esquire







- 2 -
 
OFFICIAL

TOWNSIDP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO.  _l!L_ of 2010
ORDINANCE NO.	2151


AN ORDINANCE OF  THE TOWNSHIP OF  NORTH HUNTINGDON AMENDING ORDINANCE 765 (ZONING ORDINANCE) PROVIDING FOR TEXT REVISIONS TO TABLES IN SAID ORDINANCE.



WHEREAS , the Township Planning Commission has recommended to the Township of North Huntingdon to revise certain text provisions of its Zoning Ordinance related to the C- 1A Zoning District; and
WHEREAS , the Township Commissioners have held public hearings on the proposed revisions pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code on July 21 and September 15, 2010; and
WHEREAS , the Township Commissioners deem it in the best interests of the public 's

health, safety  and welfare  to  enact  an Ordinance  amending  the present  Zoning  Ordinance ,

Ordinance No. 765, to reflect the changes as follows.

NOW, THEREFORE , be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, at a meeting assembled , by and with the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1.	Article V, Table 2 - Rear Yard Setback Requirements is replaced with  a revised Table 2, attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and made part of this Ordinance.






- 1 -
 
SECTION2.      Article V, Table 5 - Commercial/Industrial Districts-Permitted Uses is replaced with a revised Table 5, attached hereto as Exhibit "B" and made part of this Ordinance.
SECTION3.   All  ordinances  or parts  of  ordinances  which  are  inconsistent herewith are  hereby repealed.


SECTION 4. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional , illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality , illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township Commissioner that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional , illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.


ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland , Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , a full quorum being present , this Wednesday , the 20th day of October, 2010.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON BOARD OF COMMISSI   NERS







ATTEST :
://f7/L (-----
M_.,,.Shepli-e:ra  :rownship Secretary
'





SOLICITOR: Bruce E. Dice, Esquire





- 2 -
 
EXHIBIT "A"



TABLE2

      Rear Yard Setback Requirements	 

District Where Site is Located	Abutting Zoning Districts
(Distance in Feet)
	R-1	R-lA	R-2	R-3	R-4	PRD	c	C-1	C-lA	C-2	I
											
R-1	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30
R-lA	30*	30	30*	30*	30*	30	30	30	30	30	30
R-2	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30
R-3	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30	30
R-4	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60
c	30*	30*	30*	30*	30*	30	30	30	30	30	30
C-1	30*	30*	40*	40*	40*	40*	30	20	20	20	20
C-lA	30*+	30*+	30*+	30*+	30*+	30*+	30	20	20	20	20
C-2	30*	30*	30*	30*	30*	30*	30	20	20	20	20
I	50*	50*	50*	50*	50*	50*	30*	30	30	30	30

* Buffer Zone required - 10 foot planting (see definition).
+ Additional rear yard setback required in the C-1A zoning district for buildings in excess of
three stories; 10 feet additional setback for every story over three stories.






























Exhibit A
 
EXHIBIT "B"


North Huntingdon Township							
Zoning Ordinance #765			C = Conditional Use			
Table 5:  Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses	P = Use by Right			
			S = Special Exception			
							
							
Use	District	District	District	District	District	District	District
	c	C-1	C-1A	C-2	PEDD-1	PEDD-2	I
							
1. Sinole Dwellino Unit							
2. Duolex Dwellino Units							
3. Multiple Dwellinq Units (Low rise)	p	p		p			
4a. Hiqh Rise Multiple Dwellinq Units (up to 3 stories)		c	p		c		
4b. Hioh Rise Multiole Dwellinq Units (4 to 8 stories)		c	c		c		
Sa. Hiah Rise Office Units Cuo to 3 stories)		c	p		c	c	c
Sb. High Rise Office Units (4 to 8 stories)		c	c		c	c	c
6. Aqenc ies: Real Estate, Insurance & Travel		p	p	p	p	p	
7. Amuseme nt Enterorises: Non-retail		s			p	p	
8. Amusement Enterorises: Permanent		c			p	p	
9. Animal or Waste Reduction, Incineration or
Processino (includino oumos and fill\							
p
10. Art & Antique Shops		p	p		p		
11. Assemb ly of Appliances & Prepared Parts		p	c		p	p	p
12. Automobile Sales Area		s					
13. Automobile Reconditionina & Reoair		p					p
14. Automob ile, Truck , Airplane Assemb ling and
Remodelinq							
p
1S. Bakery: Commercia l or wholesa le		p			p	p	p
16. Bakery: Retail		p	p	p	p		
17. Banks & Other Financial Institutions		p	p	p	p		
18. Barber and Beautv Shoo	p	p	p	p	p		
19. Book or Stationery Store		p	p		p		
20. Bottlinq Works		s			p	p	s
21. Brewery & Distillery							p
22. Buildinq Materials: Non-retail					p	p	
23. Buildino Materials: Sales vard & Storaae		p			s		p
24. Bus and Taxi Service		p					p
25. Canvas Products: Fabrication & Sales		p			p	p	p
26. Carpenter or WoodworkinQ Shop		p			p	p	p
27. Caroet Cleanina Establishments		p			p	p	
28. Casting: Liaht, non-ferrous metals		s			s	s	p
29. Cemeteries & Mausoleums	p	p		p			
30. Chemical ManufacturinQ & Storaqe		s				p	p
31. Dav Care Centers & Group Day Care		p	p	p	p		
32. Churches & Reliaious Institutions	p	p		s			
33. Clubs and Lodges (Non-orofit)		p		s			
34. Clubs and Lodqes (Profit)		p		s			
3S. Colleoes & Dormitories	p	p	c	p			
36. Commercial Boardina Home		s		s			
37. Community Center Buildings	p	p		p			
38. Community Garaqes (No trucks >3/4 ton)	p	p					
39. Cosmetic or Pharmaceutical Manufacturinq			c				
40. Crematory (Except in cemetervl							p
41. Custom Tailor, Dressmaker, Milliner		p	p	p	p		
42a. Department , Shoe & Clothing Stores (<1S,OOO SF
footor intl		
p	
p		
p		
42b. Department , Shoe & Clothing Stores (1S,000 SF or
Igreater footprint)		
p			
p		
43 . Druostore, Dry Goods or Notion Store	p	p	p	p	p		
44. Enamel, Japanning, Lacquering , Galvanizing &
Platinq of Metals & Plastics					s	s	
p
4S. Entertainment: Trans ient		p			s		
46 . Essential Structures	p	p	p	p			
47. Farm: Livestock/Poultry (Section 8.18)	p	p		p			
48. Farm: Aqriculture	p	p		p			
49. Fat Renderinq							p
SO. Feed Store, Seed Store, Lawn and Garden Shoo		p		p	p		
S1. Felt Manufacture							p



Page 1
Exhibit B
 

North Huntingdon Township							
Zoning Ordinance #765			C = Conditional Use			
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses	P = Use by Right			
			S = Special Exception			
							
							
Use	District	District	District	District	District	District	District
	c	C-1	C-1A	C-2	PEDD-1	PEDD-2	I
52. Fertilizer Manufacture							p
53. Fire Station	p	p	s	p			
54. Flea Market		s					
55. Florist	p	p		p	p		p
56. Food Stores	p	p		p	p		
57. Food Processing: Retail (on premises)		p	p		p		p
58. Food Processing: Who lesale (Excluding meat, fish,
vineaar, veast & fat)					s	s	
p
59. Freight Classification Ya rd		p					p
60. Funeral Parlor		p		p			
61. Furniture, Interior &  Uoholsterv  Shoos		p			p		
62. Gas Manufacturina or Storaae. Coke Ovens		s					p
63. Gasoline Stations	c	c		c	c	c	c
64. Glass Fabrication and Installation		p			p		p
65. Glass Manufacturina							p
66. Glue and Size Manufacturina							p
67. Golf Courses	p	p		p			
68. Gymnasium or Health Spa		p	p	s	p		
69a.  Hardware ,  Electrical Appliances  &  Music  Store
1 {<15,000  SF  footprint)		
p	
p		
p		
69b.  Hardware ,  Electrical Appliances  &  Music  Store
1115,000 SF or areater footorintl		
p			
p		
70. Hotel or Motel		p	p		s		
71. Ice Manufacturinci & Storacie		p			s	p	p
72. Intermediate Care Facilitv		s		s			
73. Jewelrv Store & Repairing		p	p		p		
74 . laboratories: Research		p	p		s	s	p
75. laundrv. Cleanina & Dveina Aaencv - Retail	p	p	p	p	p		p
76. laundry , Cleaning & Dyeing Plant		p			p	p	p
77. library	p	p	p	p			
78. Machine Shop: Stamping Press, Plumbing and
Blacksmith Shop		s					
p
79. Machine Shoo: Non-forae , non-foundrv					p	p	

80. Manufacturinci & Assemb ly from prepared materials		s	c		
p	
p	
p
8 1. Manufactur ing: Brick, Tile, Terra Cotta, Cement
Block, Cast Stone		s				
p	
p
82. Manufactur inq: China. Potterv & Porcelain						p	p
83. Manufacturina: Fire Arms							p
84. Mass Transit Stations & Right of Ways	p	p	s	p			s
85. Massacie Parlor (Ordinance 48 1)		s					
86. Meat Processing (Excluding slaughtering, curing &
smoking)						
p	
p
87. Metal Fabrication. liaht		p			p	p	p
88. Metal Fabrication, Heaw							p
89. Microbreweries/Brew Pubs			p				
90. Mineral Removal	c	c		c	c	c	c
91. Mobile Home Park		p					
92. Mobile Home Sales lot		s					
93. Municioal Buildinas	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
94. Offices: Business & Professional		p	p	p	p	p	
95. Optica l, Scientific & Jewelry Manufacturing		s	s		p	p	p
96. Paint Stores, Sian Paintinq Shoos		p			p		
97. Pawnshop, Second Hand Store, Auction Store		p					
98. Personal Care Boarding Home for Adults		s		s			
99. Petroleum products & fuel manufacturing and
storaae						
p	s
100. Photographic Services, Supplies & Equipment		p	p	p	p		
101. Printinci. Industrial: Wallpaper. etc.	'	p			p	p	p

102. Printinci, Publishinci & Reproduction Establishments			
p		
p		
p	
p	
p


Page 2
 

North Huntingdon Township							
Zoning Ordinance #765			C = Conditional  Use			
Table 5: Commercial/Industrial Districts Permitted Uses	P = Use by Right			
			S = Special	Exception			
							
							
Use	District	District	District	District	District	District	District
	c	C-1	C-1A	C-2	PEDD-1	PEDD-2	I
103. Public Charitable Institutions	p	p	p	p			
104. Public clinic, medical clinic		c	c		c	c	
105. Public Garages. Parking Lot		p	c				p
106. Public Utilities: Maintenance garage and service
area		
p			s	
s	
107. Public Parks. Plavarounds & Other Recreation	p	p	c	p			
108. Pulp, Paper , Cardboard and Building Board
Manufacturina							
p
109. Quarry , rock crusher (See Mining Ord.)							p
11O. Radio & Television Stations and Masts		s	s		p	p	s
111. Restaurant , Tavern, Cafe (Includes entertainment
and liauorl		
p	
p	
p	
p		
112. Sand and Gravel Pit (No crushing or clay extraction
See Mining Ord.)							
p
113. Saw Mill, Planina Mill							p
114. Schools: Public &  Private	p	p	c	p			
115. Shoe Reoair Shoo		p	p	p	p		p
116a. Sians - Business!Art icle 8)	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
116b. Sians - Advert ising and Billboards (Art icle 8)	p	p	s	p	p	p	p
117. Shopping Center (3 Ac res+)		c		c	c		
118. Skilled Nursina Facilitv		s		s			
119. Slauahter House, Abattoirs, Stock Yards							p
120. Stone and Monument Works							p
121. Storage, Sorting, Baling and Processing Uunk,
wood, glass & paper)							
p
122. Swimmina Pool (Commercial Use)		p					
123. Svnthetics and Plastics Manufacturina							p
124. Tannina, Curina or Storino Hides							p
125. Telecomm unications Facilites		c			c	c	p
126. Tourist Courts and Homes		p					
127. Truck Term inals, Storaae & Parkina		p				p	p
128. Veterinary Hospitals, Kennels, Bird Store &
Taxidermist		
p			
p		
129. Wearina Aooare l: Fabrication & orocess ina		s			p	p	p
130. Wholesale Distribution Plants		p			s	s	p
131. Wholesale Business, Storage Building,
Wareho uses & Mini Warehouse		
p			
p	
p	
p

132. Wool Pulling or Scouring ; manufacturing of shoddy	
-						
p
133. Wool or Bone Distillation							p
134. Yards for Storage and Reoair							p
							
							
•	Any commercial or industrial activity or enterprise not listed shall fall under Paragraph 6.2 and is subject to consideration
under a Specia l Exception.				















Page3
 
. .

'



. .
. .
: :


 

'. .
 
OFFICIAL
 
:  '
1
 
'. .
'.'.
. '
' '
. .
';
 





.',
 
I .	PROPOSED	ORDINANCE NO. l	OF 2001	•
)
'	.',
 
.;
j    ·:
! .
' :
:. '
; I
i  ;
'.: i.
: :
 

',
ORDINANCE NO.	1029	'
';
'
 
i  '	'
 
' ¥-
 
.'.
 
: j.
;'. '.
1
i '
'•
' '

·..   :
>'· :.
'. '.
I '
' 'I
':
.' .
'I
 
'.
AN	ORDINANCE	OF	THE	TOWNSHIP	OF	NORTH	HUNTINGDON
'
ESTABLISI-IING	REGULATIONS	PERTAINING	TO	OUTDOOR	\
BURNING	AND	FIRES;	PROVIDING	PENALTIES	FOR	VIOLA1 IONS;	:
AND	SPECIFICALLY	WITH	REFERENCE	TO	CHAPTER	66	OF	TI-IE	'
CODE	OF	THE	TOWNSHIP	OF	NORTH	HlTNTINGDON	FOR	THE	1
 
t ''
:
.
.	SAFETY.   HEALTH   AND   WELFARE	OF THE RESIDENTS.	'·
;:	',
4
:·	'
i. _.	'
'.	!
' .	WHEREAS,	the	burning	of	garbage,	refuse,	rubbisl1	and	debris,	and	tl1e	;
'l .:	'
f  j	'
' .	'
l;	maintai11i11g	of  open f'ires witl1in the corporate	limits	ot' the  Township	of	North Huntingdo11	'
l' ;	':
i.
'·:	'
'.;	aff'ects the hec1ltl1,	s'1tery a11d ge11ere:1l	vvel1 are	of  the  residents  thereof	1:1ncl	!
. '	'
i
:	'
·: ;
1	vVHERE t\S.	tl1e	Bc)ard	ot' Commissioners	o·f	the	Township	ot· North	Hu11tingdor1	'
:
;''1	1
' '
<
·'.
:	desire to est<:1b lisl1 rules and regulations	t'or burning	and open f'ires tl1rougl1out	the Tovvnship	'
. .	'•
; '.
i  i	(
ii	ot' N ortl1 I !L111tingdc)11: a11c1	'
\   :	·-
:
i  ?'
l ;
 

j
j  l
(  l
'>'
j
;
 
WI-IEREAS,	the ·Tow11sl1ip of North Hunti11gdo11 is gra11ted	al1thority	to  regulate	the	'i
;'
'
 
f   [
'i	sc1n1e by	the First Class Tow11ship	Code of' the Commo11wealth	of' Peru1sylvania.	·;
i	"'
' :	f
' '	'
 
'·; ''
: \
·:
"· l
i
t  .
1 ·:
 
(
NOW,	THEREFORE,	BE	IT	ORDAINED	AND	ENACTED	AND	IT	IS	l


.
 
i;	fIEREBY	ORDAINED	t\ND	ENACTED
,{. :
'. '.
 
by	tl1e	Bo,1rd	of·	Comn1issioners	of	tl1e	''
;
•
 
'. ;	Tovvnsl1ip
<   :
; ;
-t:   '··.
. '
 
o·f	NorLl1	Hu11tingdon,	Cot1nty	of	Westmorel:1nd.	';
•;
•

'
 
'j	Pe1111sy lva11ia,	as t'ollows:	'
' :.
;	•.
i ?
'. '	SEC1"ION 66-1.			'
 
. .
'
', :'
'. -.
'. ..
. .
' :
'.'-.
 
;
,
'
As	Llsed	i11	tl1is	Ordi11a11ce.	the	f'ollowing	terms	sl1;;1ll	11ave	the	111eani112:s	i11dic,1tecl
 
•	.   ,,	4-'
' '
'
Ltnless c:t  clit't'erent 111e 111i11g  cle:1rly appe(1rs t1·0111 tl1e context:





1
 
...





.'l;    :
. '•
' :
 

.
'
'


A.	BOARD	OF	COMMISSIONERS	-	The	Board	of	Co1nmissione1·s	of	the
,..[ O\VDS11ip .
 
.
;
. :
. '	B.	BUILDING	MATERIALS	-	All	inaterials	i11cidental	to	construction	or
. .	.
.	re111odeling	o·f	buildings,	inclttding,	but	not	li1nited
 
stv.ro·foam,	wire,	insulation,	and	treated	wood..
 
bttt	!
 

i l
r
. '
. '
i :,
;.;
.

•
•'  ;
. •I
 
<
wood.	';
'
I

C.	.	CONTAINERS/BARRELS	- No	l;1rger	than	fifty-t'ive	(55) gallons	and	vvith	a	i
ininimum height of three	(3) feet.	The top ot' the contai11er	or bc1rrel	should be	!
 
l	'
: .	j'
.  .	covered	with	a	grate	to	prevent	particles	t'rom	t1ying	out	of	the	co11tainer	or
.' .
 
.;
·,  t
•  •.
 
barrel.	!
)
 

'. .
 
•    •
'. :..

'·,:.
t  i
. '
 
I

•
•
D.	DEMOLI1"ION PROJECT - Tl1e destrt1ction	of a dwelli11g or building on site.	.
'.
 
'.•    •	'i
 
. .
. .;
:
! !
•'
' t
•

'
.
 
;
E.	FURNACE	-	A11y	ei1closed	device	specif1cal1y	desig11ed	t'or	bl1rning	any	..
'
n1::1teric1l	t'or  the production  of  heat .
'{
;
.
F.	GARBAGE	-	All	pt1trescible	anin1al	a11d	vegetable	inatter	resulti11g	t'rom	tl1e	'
 
.•   '	<
. :	11andling, preparation,	cooking a11d consl1n1ptio11 of t'ood.	.
 
:
'5    '
.
.  .
.
l.

!
r }!
 



G.	INCINERATOR	-	Any	device	specit.ically	desig11ed	f'o1·	tl1e	destruction	by burning  ot· refl1se,		sewage  sludge,   or  any  other  combustible  n1aterial.
 

'(
'
i
'
"·,
 
i  ,
' .
 
::   >
:. .
•	1
. :
' -
- :

S'     ;
.: :
. .
' .
.. .;
'
..  .
i. :

; :
·t   •
. ..
' '.
. .
:
l:
'. '.
;'.
.
?   :
;.:   .
'. '.
'; '

., .

'. .
•
 

H.	I AND	DEVELOPMENT	- 1"11e	improvernent	ot· 011e	(1)	or	mc)re	lots,	tracts
or pe:1rcels of ground for any of tl1e f'ollowi11g:	1
'
.i
(1)	A	group	of	two	(2)	or	more	residential	or	r1011residential	buildings,	'[
whether	proposed	initiC:1lly	or	cuml1latively,	or	a	single	no11reside11tie:1l	'.
i
bl1ilding	c)n  a  lot  or  lots;  regardless	of' tl1e nu1nber	ot· occl1pa11ts	or   tenure;	r
,.
or	'
'
•
5
(2)	The	division	or	allocc1tio11	ot·	lc.1nd	or	spc.1ce,	wl1ether	i11iti<:1lly	or	';
cumulC:1tively,	between	or	an1ong	t\vo	(2)	or  more	existing	or   prospective	'
i
;
occupa11ts	by	ineans	of·,	or	f'or	the	pl1rpose	of	streets,	comn1on	areas,	i
leaseholds	C()ndominiums,	bl1ildi11g groups or otl1er features .	/
'

.
 
: ·.	(3)	A st1bdivisi<)Il ot' lc1nd.
 
'
' .
: ;
;. .	I.	OPEN	FIRE	-	A	tire	i11 whicl1	c111y	m::1terial	is	burned	in	the	()pen	but
. .
 




I1()t
 
includi11g bt1r11ing	in a furnace or inci11erC:1tor.

.
. .
J.	PERSON	-	A11y	individl1al,	pe:1rt11ership,	associc.1tion,	cc)rpor::1tio11,
 

.
.


depart1ne11r.
 
lJL1re<:1u.	agency or otl1er legal entity.	. .



1(.	RECEPTACLE	FIRE	- A	fire	in	whicl1	1ny	ina.teri;;1l	is	lJ L1r11ed	i11 a. C<)nt;1i11er
 
<)r barrel. lJLlt i1ot inclt1di11rr·
 
a tur11::1ce	or i11ci11er;.1tor.
-.,
 
.
i.	.
•


. .'
'






L.	RECYCLABLE S	-	A11y	items	designated	by	the	Township	of	N ortl1
Huntingd on which are to be recycled.



 
l	M.
.
 
REFUSE - Garbage, ntbbish and trade vvaste.
 
'

',	N.
•'
•
•
,. .
•	'
' ,.
.
 


..
RUBBISH	-	Solids	not	considered	to	be	highly	inflammable	or	explosive
'
including,	but	not limited to, rags,	old clothes,	leatl1er , ntbber,	carpets,	wood,	'.
'
excelsior,	paper,	ashes ,	large	tree	branches ,	yard	trimmings	i11cludi11g	grass,
furnitl1re,	crockery	clnd	inaso11fy,	and	witl1 the	specif'ic	understanding	thclt	all
 
' •	recyclable	items	are	as	mandated	u11der	the	recyc1i11g	resolL1tion(s)	of	the	.
I
J   .	Township.	•
;
I
•	}
•	'	i
0.	SALVAGE	OPERATIONS	-	Any	busines s,	trade	or	industry	engaged	in	'
 
I .
' •
I•.


•
i ;
l '

•
 
I
whole or in part salvaging or reclaiming	any product or material , including but	'• not limited to, metals , chemicals , shipping containers or drums .		'I i
•
'
P.	TRADE	WASTE	-	All	solid	or	liquid	materi <:ll	o r	n1bbi sh	resulting	t'ron1	'i
 
'	constrL1ction ,	buildin g operations,	or the	prosecution	of any	business, tr,1de	or	'.
' .	industry	including,	but	not	limited	to,	plastic	prodtict s, cartons,	paint,	grease,
.	oil	and other	petr oleum	prodticts,	chemicals,	cinders c111d other	forms	of	solid
J   ;
' !	or	liqt1id	waste	n1ateria ls;	provided ,	that	"trade	waste"	shal l	11ot	inclt1de	a11y	.
coal refL1se clssociated with tl1e mining or preparation of coal.
I I	;
 
:

)
SECTION 66-2.	GENERAL REGULATIONS;	PERIVIITS;	FEES.
 
i
',.
 

 
'•, •.
'
 


-A- .	A.ll	outdoor	bur11in.Q._:	and
 
.
                                                                                                                                                                m.l ' \JI	h"-"
 
(...l.
'
 
V \...-
 


authorized under tl1e	terms here of .	'
'•
l
•
t  •
'l
 


:, I
'.
 
B.	i\ny	burning	permi tted by	the	terms	of' this	Ordinan ce she1:
 
ll only	be	those	items	'•
.,
•
 
. ·.
'J    ',
 
or	n11:1teri;:1l	O\vned	lJy	the	pr operty	ovvner	1nd	generated	011 tl1e	pr operty	by	said	property	,
'j
•
 
' I.	j
;	owner	or	resident.	No	per son	sl1all	burn	any	items	or	1naterial	on	behalf	ot· a11y	other	'

'
' '
'	indi vidu1:1l	for eitl1er	a	fee or	gratuitot1sly ,	nor	sl1all	any	person	brin g ttpon	the property	of
' •.	'
. .

.	c111otl1er ,	;1ny	inaterials	or	ite1ns	allowed	to	be	burned	purst1::111t	to	the	terms	of	t11is	'.
' .
'
Ord inance .	t'or	the	pt1rp<)Se	ot· l1t1rni11g	said	items	on	anotl1er	persons	property,	or	<)n	a



p roperry	\) (her	tl1a n tl1e properry	Llpon which the items were generated .	•












3
 
'  .











C.	A permit	issued by	the Police Department	of the Township of No rt h I-Iuntingd on



sl1all  be reqL1ir ed for all outdoor  burning a11d fires tor all categories ot' this section except  <1:  s



set t·orth in this Ordinance.


 
' '



j' .
' !
 

'.
D.	The Board of Commissio11ers	of  the Township	of North	HL1ntingdon	shall,	from	..
'
•.
'.
 
: ,	tirne	to	ti1ne,	by	Resolutio11,	adopt	a11d aL1tho1·ize	a  permit	form	a11d schecit1le	of	fees	to	be	•
!  .	•'
'. .
i	•.
 
'


I '.
I I
i i


•

l I
I
I.
•
•.
•    •
I .

.
I. •'
 
imposed t'or the issuance of permit s hereunder.



E.	No	pers on  or  persons  shall  set  or  maintain  any	0L1td oor  bltrning or  t1res  upon  the



p<:1ved portion ot·any  street , alley or publi c ground  in the Township ot· North  Huntingd on.



F.	No	person	or	persons	sl1all	knowi11gly	n1aintain	a	fire	hazard	on	a11y	property
 

;'.
'.•.
•.
!•
'


'




.
;
'.
 
'; '·	withi11 tl1e Tow11ship	ot   North   Huntingdon.
 
.!!..
j

'.
. '
1
,.' '.
 

.
G.	No  person	or  persons  sl1all  deliberately,	knowingly , c<:1relessly or 11eglige11tly set	'


.
 
. .	fire	to	or	CctL1se the	bl1rning	ot· any	materi<:1l	in	st1ch n1<:tnner	to	e11de:111ger	the	satety	of	any	'
I l
'.
).
. :	perso11 or property.

 






t'

•  •
i  :
•, .
 


SECTION 66-3.	SINGLE- AND DOTJBT ,E-FAlVIILY	RESIDENTIAL	A.REAS .


.
[11 all	residentiall y	zoned	areas  witl1  reference	to and onl y	w i th	ret'e rence	to	single-
 

•
l






'
'••
•
 
: :	family  a11d dolrble-famil y  (duplex)  buildings ,  the f"ollowi11g	regula(i 011s shall appl y :	.
I I	•
 
.' •.
•  '•
 
,•.
•
 
l' .	A.	All	outcioor	bl1r11ing	or	t'ires	i11 areas	of	residential	dwelli11gs	sh 1ll	be
 
. .
'' ;
1
 
'-	.._	•
'
 
:	lirnited	to	tl1e	bur 11i11g	ot' {Jctper	prodt1cts ,	newsp::1per	<:111d yard	w aste ,	exclLtding	le;:1ves,	els



ciefi11ed	11erei11,	during	the	11our s	ot·	9:00	A.M.	t1ntil	5 :00	P.rvl .,	pr ev,1iling	tin1e,	011	'•



:	Wednesda)'S,	Tl1ursday,	Fridays,	and	S<:1turdays ,	as	tolerated.	Al l	0L1tdoor	fires,	wl1ether



ope11	or	contai11e d,	sl1all	be	<:lttended	1nd	ha\1e	<:tn	adequate	water	st1pply	or	ec1t11l


 
•
exti11-gu ishing.._
 


agent tl1rou ghoL1t the duratio11 of the burning.
 
. .
.


. .
'




'.   .

'...
:;
 











B.	Outdoor	burning	01·  fires	confined	to	a11 approveci	co11tainer	or	burni11g
 
· '.	bclrrel	will	not	reqt1i1·e	cl	permit,	but	shall	comply	with	all	pertine11t	prov1s1ons	of	tl1is
·,
;
. .
l .
1 .	l
 
,. .
 
Ordi11ance.	'j
;
 
•. i.
 
•. •.
; .
1. :
''•   •
.
 


C.	No perso11 or persons	shall set or mai11tain	any outdoor bL1rning	or  fires
 
'.,
•
i.
';
'.
•
 
' '
 
: ,	within	seventy-five	(75)	feet	of' any	stn1ctl1re	and	tl1e	size o·f	the	burning	or	t'ire,	except	as
I' •.
•'. •.'.
,i (	provided	t-or	i·n	Subsection	B  above,	shall not  exceed  an  area  consisti11g	of' ten	( l 0)	feet	by
. .
.•. ..
' .
 
.\
·'',
•
';

'•
'
'.;
•
 
; '	ten	( 10) feet.	Open burning	requires a permit	issued by	the	Police	Department	and n1ay	be	I
. .
z   j
·.	'
.:  '	condL1cted	on Sc1tl1rdays	fro1n	9:00  A.ivl.	to	5 :00  P.M.,	prevailing	tirne , as	tolerated.	The	•.
 
: '

.:  (
; \	permit	issued  is  a  one tin1e  permit  only  for  the  011e	day  requested	and  a new	permit	n1ust	be
.'' ..
'; l:
f   ;
'.	obtained  for  each  and  every   open  burning	Sc1t11rday.
:' :..
!' .·
: ..	D.	No	perso11	or	perso11s	shall	bt1r11	or	cause	to	be	bur11eci	any	g<:1rbc1ge,	rttbber,

; :
·.
;, -	tires.	pai11t ,	ani1111:1l	w21ste ,	plastics,	diapers ,	toxic	mclterials ,	buildi11g	m21teri11ls,	demoli  tio11
: '
i
 
'.
'
!
:
1.

;

•
I

'
..·
'.
'·.
'•
'
!
:
'(
 
;
; ;
; ·	materi<:1ls	or	any	other	rnatter	consisti11g	of	rt1bbish,	trade	waste,	refuse,	garbage	or	'
. I	.
f. .	'
; {	'
'•  '!
: :	recyclc1bles	(curre11tly	per	R.esolt1tion	No.	120 of	1991	which	recycles	cle£.:i.r	gla.ss,	coloreci	·:
.•  .	I.
 
' :

•.
; 1	glass, alL1mint1n1,	steel a11d bi1netc1llic	cans)  21s  det'i11ed by  this  Ordinance.
•. .
i
'.:.
 


'
'
•
''.
.'
 
:.
:
'

. '
l ::
 
E.	Ot1tdoor	fireplaces,	grills	a11d	camptl.res	used	solely	for	t'ood	prepar 1tion	..
!
'•
 
' '.
; i pt1rposes	sh£.1ll	r1ot	require	a	permit,	bt1t	mt1st	adhere	to	all	pertinent	provisions	of	this	,
i	'
.'
: .
•>     •	<
:	Ordi11a11ce	witl1  the  exception   of  time   limitations.	Witl1   respect	to C:111y	f'ire regt1lc1ted l)y	tl1is	.
' .
' l	i
'..  .	'
; ;	p21ragr<:1pl1.	tl1e	fire  sl1all  be   extinguishable	by	1:00 A. NI. and sl1<:1ll	not	be	stclrted u11til	9:00	·
;i
' '
 
..;.
· .·,
.·.
' .
•
'


. .
i j
;
 

A.M .
 






F.	Bonfires	for <:1museme11t	pt1rpc)ses	shc1ll l)e per111ittecl	vvitl1 tl1e co11dition tl1at clll	of
 
the  regt1lc1tio11s	c)f. tl1is  section ot· this  01·cii11a11ce	<:1re complied vvitl1 a11cl 21	pe1·n1it	is   isst1ed   by


.'.
 
\
I'
:
•




' .
•     •



 
•	t
. .

•
•
I.
.
•
.
I .,


l
'•  •
j.
t
,
'
;j;'
y   l
! !
 


the Police Department.	With respect to any fire regulated by this paragraph , the fire shall be



extinguished by	l :00 A.M. and shall not be started until 9:00 A.NI.



G.	That	ail	fires,	except	as	provicled	for	herein,	shall	be	totally	extinguished	as provided	t·or in Subsection A	above so as to assure there	is no smoke or smoldering	of said
 







•
.
,




.'.
.
(
.
•
.
!
!
,
 
J. (	•.
 
' '.
1
;'   I
.';.•
"' .

j' .
I l


'• '.
'<, .
I.
'
.'
I ;

,
.
,. .
I l
•
. ,
:  I
I.
i l
I.	.
•, '
1 r.
) I
I I
i \
I :
. .
 
fires.	'.
•.
!
•
H.	The	police	or	local	Fire	Chief	may	order	the	extinguishment	of	any	fire
'\
i
•
t
considered offensive or hazard ous .	f
.
.
SECTION  66-4.	OTHER RESIDENTIAL  AREAS.	•
!


Other tl1an in single- ru.1d	double-family	(duplex)  residential  areas	as  provided	for i11



Section	66-2	and	66-3	of	the	Code	of	the	Township	of	North	Hunti11gdon,	all	outdoor
•
!
'•
bt1r11ing	or	t'ires	whether	co11tained	or	not	is/are	prohibited	in	tl1e	t'ollowing	'-lre 1s :	;
 
\
•I I
I',
(  l
' .


; f
 


residential,
 


co1nn1ercial,
 


neig._hborhood/busi11ess,
 


indtistrial	a11d	pla1med
 

.
economic	i
 
•	develop ment	21reas.	Any	person	or	entity	who	shall	violate	this	section	shall,	t1pon
•'
I :
.•   •'
 
' .

• •
'I
'
'I .
0    I
I .

l '
I. '..
. .
(
•
; j
I ;
. I
, I
j  •
; I
: >
!   1
:
:
I i
•. .
' :
\
 

con\i iction , be subject	to the penalt ies set forth by Section 66-7 of the Code ot' the To\1,1ns!1ip



ot· North  Htintingdon .
'-



SECTION 66-5.	WORK SITES.



A.	With	reference	to	land	developn1ent	011ly ,	the	same	shall	be	governed	by	tl1e



applic<1ble	Department	ot·	Env ironn1e11tal	Protectio11	rt.1les	a11d	regt1latio11s	pe1-ra1111ng	t()
 




•

(
•
!
'.
•
j

l
•
':
!
'
•
'
.
•
•
.'.
.
 
I'
I. ;
t  :
.:
l !
•	I
t  l


' .
. :



•.
 
I
l.
bt1r11ing,		whether	said bu1·ni11g is contained	or  not  contained.	Tl1e aforest:1id bt1rning	shall  be controlled	strictly		througl1	tl1e	appropr1<:lte	rules	and	regulati o11s	of	the	Dep<:1rtn1e11t	<)f	• Envirorunen tal	Protection	in eff'ect	at	the	time	(currently		contained  at  25	Pa .	Code	129.14, e11[itled	''Opening		Bt1r11i11g Operatio11s".		In  additio11 to	tl1e  above-stated	reg..,.,ulc1tions ot· the
 









6
 
Department	of Environn1e11tal	Protection	that shall be adhered to , tl1e	t'ollowing	regulations



shall also apply to land developments.



 


•
.' .
i J
 
1.	Any	bt1rni11g	related	to	a	land	development	shall	adhere	to	the	regt1lati ons
 
•    .•
 

.'. .
 
specit!ed in Section 66-3(C) of tl1is Ordinance.
 
'. '
 
,I  .

•
l .
I ':
, !
<  .
.
l•  '•

.
;
.•
,
 

B.	Witl1	respect	to	work	sites	that	are	not	defined	as	la11d	develop111ents ,	the	•


!
following regulations	shall be adhered to .	:'
.
l
!
1.	Open	burning	as	defined	in  Section	66-3(C)	of	t11is	Ordi11ance	sl1all	be
'.
 
I .	permitted in accordance with all of the regul ations pertaining	to	same as
'• l
 
;
.•.
;
I.
'•
 

1 I
."l.
•   •

.
', '.
'•
;' '.
 
specit.ied  in	this	Ordinance.	However ,	st1ch open burni11g	shall  only	be	i
'
i
•
'
permitted	to	clear	<:lll	or	part	of	a	building	lot .	No	other	open	bt1rning	i
I
i
 
.' '	•
 
!  .
'
j  .
'I
f
. .
i  !
'

•   •
j  '
I ;


'
i
'
,•. .

I •
 
shall be permitted.	'



2.	Bt1rni11g	shall	be	pern1itted	in an	approved	container	in accordance	with



all ot· the regulatio11s pertaining	to san1e as specified in this Ordina11ce .

!

SECTION 66-6:	EXEl\tlPTIONS.	;
•
(
 
:\. .	.
 

'I .: I I ' .

.•   <.
i .
. '
:
:' '.'
l .
I ;
I. :.
I.	'
' '.

.
•  •
•' ;
t    •

'  .
.
:
; '
: .








' .•
 
A.	Open fires may be set in the performance	of an official duty of any public officer	',
l


it. the fire is necessary t'or:	,'
'.
'i
1.	The	prever1tion	of	a	t'ire	hazard	\.Vhich	cannot	be	a.bated	by	a11y	otl1er	•
•.
l
.
n1e::1ns;	or	;
'
.
,
2.	Tl1e protectio11 of public healtl1.	•



B.	Thclt	L1pon obt;1inin g a permit at no cost	isst1ed by	tl1e	Police	Department	ot· tl1e

.
Township ot· North	Ht1ntin gdon . and which	said	permit	shall	be	countersig11ed	by	the	Fire	'



Marsl1al.	any	voluntee r	fire	department	may	burn	a	strucn1re	t'or	rhe	purpose	ot· pr tc(ice,












7
 
, '

'; .
. .








provided	that	said burning	activity	is	a	controlled	burning	activity	and	supervised	by	the
'.
•
'
volunteer fire depart1nent so permitted.


 






,. .
I. .
i :
 

SECTION 66-7.	PENALTIES.



Any  person  who  shall  violate  any  provisions	of this Ordinance shall, t1po11 co11victio11
 
.



.
.'.
\.
;

I,
 
'·	thereof,	be	sentenced	to	pay	a	fine	of· not	more	than	011e	Thot1sa11d	($1,000 .00)	Doll<:1rs,	'.
' .	\
l ;	'i
I	i
and/ or  imprisonment	t·or	a term not to exceed thirty	(30) days.	'•
. '	!
:I '	i
"l
! •	SECTION 66-8.	SEVERANCE CLAUSE.	:
'
•
•.
Should	any	section,	paragraph,	clause	or	phra se	of·	this	Ordinance	be	i
•
!
•	!
'	!.
.	declared	unconstitutional	or invalid	by	a Court	of competent juri sdicti on , the	remc1inder	of	'
j  I	!
' .1
!
 
:
•. •,
. .
'.
"
;
!'.:'.
•
; .
..  :.
 
said Ordinance shall not be affected thereby, and shall remain in full force and effect.	'
i

I
i
SECTION 66-9.	REPEALER.	.'
'.
i
'
Tl1e adoptio11 of this	Ordinance	will automatically	repe<:1l	Ordina11ce No.	818 adopted	i
t
 
., !
'. I	'
l
011 the	l7r11   day  of  March,	1993	Ordine:1nce  No.	831 adopted  011 tl1e	L 8l11  clay ot· Augt1st,	1993	•

•    •
'l	'•;
 
:	<1:


•

'
 
nd Ordinance  No.	947 adopted on the	16[11 day ot· September	1998.	.•
'
!
I
!
 
.•	ORDAINED	AND  ENACTED  at  a  regt1la1·  meeting
' I
I !
. •
 
ot· the Board	of  Commissio ner s
•l
l

l
 
; :	ot·	tl1e Townsl1ip	of	North  Huntingdo11,	County	of	Westn1orela11d	and   Cornrnonwealtl1  ot·
I )	'
'. '.'	'
·1:	Pennsylv lnia,	a	full	qt1orum	being	present,	this	Wednesdc1y ,	the	21st	day	ot·	l
I	'•
I. '	'!
.	February	, 2001.
,
 
'. '.

. ;
. .
 

'.
TOWNSHIP  OF NORrfH  HUNTINGDON
';
•
'
·'	I
 
''	I'    /	.
 
1.'.	'	'	/
 
I•. '
 
BY""
 
•...·./·f.
 
.	. •	.	.
 
I	....  ,.	/
I	--'	,,  .	/	•  I
 





ATTEST:	/
 
.-....,.	.__.!  ·' / !.. !(.. <.L-	.,,.,  .	• "" ...•  )_ : _..._	'--	'.
Thomas L. Kerber , President
Board of Comm i ss ioners
 

.	,	/
 

..,·
 

../
 
...... .... /.---- /
 

.../
 
•· ......-,	,/ •	,.-'?.-.	/''	./
 
.	£-
 
4 ;?	/'(_;.. ·/	{	.
 
...-··  -·10!111	v1.   Sl1epherd,   TovmhiP Secretc1ry
..	s·Ei.\L
SOLICITO.R:	Tl1omas	P. Cole ,	I



8	'·
' .
 

OFFICIAL


TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 14	OF2019 ORDINANCE NO.	2252
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON, COUNTY OF- WESTMORELAND, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, REGULATING THE HOURS DURING WHICH CONSUMER FIREWORKS MAY BE SET OFF IN THE TOWNSHIP AND PROHIBITION OF SETTING OFF FIREWORKS OWNED BY THE TOWNSHIP.



WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania State Legislature recently enacted ACT 43 of 2017, entitled "Fireworks Law" which, among other things, legalized the use of consumer fireworks by individuals in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;  and


WHEREAS, while the law provides certain regulation regarding the use of these fireworks, it does not define the hours during which they may be set off; and


WHEREAS, the Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon has deemed it to be in the best interests and general welfare of the residents of the Township to permit the use of consumer fireworks or other fireworks available to the general public to certain times; and


WHEREAS, property owners in the Township are entitled to the quiet use and enjoyment  of their property;  a n d


WHEREAS, as property owners of numerous parcels within jurisdictional limits of North Huntingdon Township, and in an effort to protect the health, safety and welfare of individuals using said property, the Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon declare that all persons are prohibited from setting off fireworks on any and all property owned by the Township of North Huntingdon.


NOW THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the Township of North Huntingdon as follows:
 

SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.


"Consumer Fireworks" - Shall mean the terms "Consumer-grade Fireworks" as defined in 35 P.S.
§1271 et seq., as may be amended; "Class C" or "consumer grade" fireworks that include firecrackers, Roman Candles, bottle rocks, and similar fireworks that contain a maximum of 50 milligrams of explosive material.


SECTION 2. PERMITTED HOURS OF USE.


1.	The Township  of North  Huntingdon  hereby  permits  the use of consumer  fireworks  as defined in Act 43 of2017 available to the general public during the following hours:
•	Sunday through Thursday from 4 p.m. through 9 p.m.
•	Friday and Saturday from 4p.m. through 10 p.m.


2.	In addition to the aforementioned times permitted above, the use of consumer fireworks as defined in Act 43 of 2017 may also occur on the following specific dates and times:
a.	July 3rd from 4 pm to 11pm;
b.	July 4th from 4 pm to 1lpm;
c.	July 5th from 4 pm to 11pm;
d.	December 31st from 4 pm to 11:59 pm; and
e.	January pt from 12 am to 12:30 and 4 pm to llpm.






SECTION 3. PROHIBITION OF USE OF CONSUMER OR OTHER FIREWORKS.


The Township of North Huntingdon hereby prohibits the use of consumer fireworks as defined in Act 43 of 2017 or any other fireworks available to the general public on any and all property owned by the Township of North Huntingdon. The purpose of this prohibition is to ensure the safety of North Huntingdon's residents and visitors using public property for their use and enjoyment.



SECTION 4.  VIOLATIONS    AND  PENALTIES.


Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding brought before a District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary  offense,  and  shall  be subject  to  the payment   of a fine of not  less  than  $300  and  not more  than  $1,000, plus  the
 
costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. Each section of this Ordinance violated shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is found to exist shall constitute a separate offense, each of which violations shall be punishable by a separate fine imposed by the District  Justice  of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000, plus the costs  of prosecution,  or  upon default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county prison for a term of not more than 30 days. All fines and penalties collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.


SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY.


If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found  to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the  remaining  provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts hereof. It is hereby declared as the intent of North Huntingdon that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.


SECTION6. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed  insofar as the same affects this Ordinance.


SECTION 7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall become effective in five (5) days from the date of adoption.


ORDAINED AND ENACTED at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of North Huntingdon, County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a full quorum being present on the	20th day of November	, 2019.


TOWNSHIP OF NORTH HUNTINGDON BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS


ATTEST:
 
§ 84-21	GRADING, EXCAVATIONS & FILLING	§ 84-22

§ 84-21.  Conflict with other provisions.

This chapter shall be construed as being in addition to the prov1s10ns of any other regulatory ordinances. If any regulations herein are in conflict with any other regulatory ordinances, the provisions establishing the more restrictive requirements shall apply.



§ 84-22.  Environmental impact statement.

An environmental impact statement is required before beginning of any applicable work under the provisions of this chapter.


