PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2838]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 36018.15 of the Third Class City Code, the codification
of a complete body of legislation for the City of Oil City, County of Venango,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters
1 through 310, together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the City of Oil City, which
shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the City of Oil City,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the City Council of the City of Oil City, and it is the intention of said
City Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from
the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Legislation saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the City of Oil City which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 24, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the City or other instruments or evidence of the
City's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the City.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 OIL CITY CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the City or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the City.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the City for adoption and revision as part of the Code,
certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the
City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the City Council, and it is the
intent of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy or copies shall be
certified to by the City Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy or
copies shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 7-9-2015 by Ord. No.
2838." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-7 OIL CITY CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed
by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by
the City Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
the City Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The City Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The enactment and application
of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction,
the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public
and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as
required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a violation
of this section of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that this ordinance
and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after July 9, 2015.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-15 OIL CITY CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE I
Short Title; Definitions
§ 4-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the City of Oil City."
§ 4-2. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, mean or include as follows:
CITY — The City of Oil City, Pennsylvania.
CHARTER LAW — The "Optional Third Class City Charter Law" (councilmanager
form) Act of 1957, July 15, P.L. 901, as amended (53 P.S. § 41501
et seq.).
COUNCIL — The Council of the City of Oil City, Pennsylvania.
MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Oil City, Pennsylvania.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council
§ 4-3. Legislative power.
§ 4-4. Mayor.
Power and duties of the Mayor shall be such as are expressly conferred on
him by Article V, Section 508, of the Charter Law.2
§ 4-5. Meetings of Council.
A. All powers of the City and the determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by the
Charter Law or by general law.
B. The Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the Manager and shall not give orders to any
subordinates of the Manager, either publicly or privately.
A. The Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, designate the time of
holding regular meetings, which shall be at least monthly.
B. All meetings of Council shall be open to the public, and public notice of
such meetings shall be required by the Pennsylvania Sunshine Act
which legislates the methods by which public meetings are conducted.3
C. Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent
with ordinances or statute.
D. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by
roll call and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes.
E. Executive sessions may be attended by the Mayor and Council, as well
as the City Solicitor, Manager and staff or other individuals if necessary
and permitted by law.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41508.
3. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:11

ARTICLE III
Manager
§ 4-6. Duties.
The Manager shall:
A. Be the chief administrative official of the City.
B. Execute all laws and ordinances of the City.
C. Appoint and have power to remove the Deputy Manager if one be
authorized by the Council, all department heads and all other officers,
subordinates and assistants for whose selection or removal no other
method is provided for in the Charter Law, except that he may authorize
the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such
department, supervise and control his appointees, and report all
appointments or removals at the next meeting thereafter of the Council.
D. Negotiate contracts for the City, subject to the approval of the Council,
make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
municipal improvements, and execute municipal improvements as
determined by the Council.
E. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation, call
the same to the attention of the Council.
F. Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote.
G. Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised of the financial
condition of the City, make reports to the Council as requested by it or
as otherwise herein provided, and at least once a year to make an
annual report of his work for the benefit of the Council and the public. A
calendar shall be set outlining a timeline for reports prior to evaluation.
H. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
City which is under his jurisdiction.
I. Perform such other duties as may be required of the Manager by
resolution or ordinance of the Council.
J. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for carrying out all
policies established by it and for the proper administration of all affairs
of the City within the jurisdiction of the Council.
K. Serve (or appoint a City employee to serve) as an ex officio member of
the various boards, commissions and authorities created by the City. A
list of employees and board members who serve on each respective
board shall be furnished annually to Council.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:13
L. The City budget shall be prepared by the Manager. Not later than the
month of October of each year, the Manager shall require all
department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing
budget year.
M. At the last stated meeting in November, the Manager shall submit to
Council his recommended budget in the form of an ordinance, together
with such explanatory comments or statement as he may deem
desirable.
N. Prepare and present to the Council a monthly financial report of City
revenues and expenditures for each department or office. The report
shall include amounts budgeted, current monthly expenditures, year-todate
and encumbered, and the remaining balances. The City shall strive
to continue to make these reports as transparent and clear as possible
as time evolves.
O. The Manager shall be responsible for human resources and related
matters.
P. Develop and maintain a policy and procedures manual for the staff and
operation for the City government.
Q. Any disagreements between departments and/or bureaus will be settled
by the Manager on an as-needed basis.
§ 4-6 OIL CITY CODE § 4-6
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Departments, Organization and Duties
§ 4-7. General.
§ 4-8. Department and bureau heads' qualifications.
Department and bureau heads shall be chosen by the Manager solely on
the basis of executive and administrative qualifications appropriate to the
duties of their respective departments. They shall be subject to removal
at the discretion of the Manager as provided in Article III, § 4-6, of this
Administrative Code.
§ 4-9. Department and bureau heads' duties.
A. The City shall have the following four departments under the
supervision of the Manager: Administration, Public Safety, Public
Works, Community Planning and Development.
B. The Manager shall prepare and maintain an administrative manual to
include a schedule of organization indicating a specific description of
activities to be performed by each department, bureau, office or agency
and the number and kind of employees necessary for the performance
of the department's duties. The schedule of organization shall be
approved by resolution of Council. Additional positions may not be
created until approved by Council.
C. The Council shall continue to create, and determine and define, the
powers and duties of such executive and administrative departments,
boards and offices, in addition to those provided for by the Charter Law,
as it may deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the
affairs of the City, including the office of Deputy Manager. Any
department, board or office so continued or created may, at any time, be
abolished by the Council.
A. General duties. Each department head and bureau head shall perform
all duties required by his office by charter, by ordinance, by resolution,
or other laws, and each shall perform such duties not in conflict with
the Charter Law, Article V, "Council-Manager Plan," Section 511,
therewith as may be assigned by the Manager.4 (See § 4-7B and C of this
chapter.)
B. Provide their best and honest advice to the Manager on all issues
relating to their departments and City operations without fear of
retribution or retaliation. However, they are to implement the
Manager's directives and the City's established policies to the best of
their ability in a professional manner.
C. Specific duties. The heads of the departments and bureaus shall:
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41511.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:15
§ 4-10. Department of Administration.
(1) Be responsible to the Manager. Be immediately responsible to the
Manager for the effective administration of their department and/
or bureau and all activities assigned thereto.
(2) Cooperate with other departments and bureaus. Furnish to any
other department or bureau such service, labor, equipment or
materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such other office
and as its own facilities permit.
(3) Authority over employees. Have authority to appoint and remove
all subordinates under them subject to the authority of the
Manager and the personnel (including labor contracts) and civil
service regulations of the City.
(4) Maintain records. Establish and maintain a system of records and
reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for
proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the
reports required by the Manager.
(5) Inaugurate sound practices. Keep informed as to the latest
practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the
approval of the Manager, such new practices as appear to be of
benefit to the City and to the public.
(6) Delegation of duties. Have power to delegate to members of the
departments or bureaus coming under their direction such duties
and responsibilities as deemed advisable, together with
proportionate authority for their fulfillment, but in no case may
they delegate their overall responsibility or any of their
accountability.
(7) Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the proper custody and
maintenance of all City property and equipment used in their
departments.
(8) Intradepartmental organization. Prescribe the internal
organization of the department and the duties of subordinate
officers and employees of the department with the approval of the
Manager.
A. General responsibilities. The Department of Administration, under the
Manager, or under the Deputy Manager if one should be appointed
pursuant to § 4-7C, shall perform the fiscal and administrative service
functions for the City and its departments, including general
supervision over all officers in the administrative service regarding the
proper management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices. If
appointed, a Deputy Manager shall function as the Manager in the
event of the Manager's absence.
B. Areas of responsibility.
§ 4-9 OIL CITY CODE § 4-10
1:16
§ 4-11. City Clerk.
§ 4-12. Bureau of Law.
(1) Personnel policies. Establish and maintain standard personnel
policies and practices.
(2) Assessment and taxation. Maintain the real property assessment
records; prepare proper assessments; prepare annually a list of all
inhabitants over 21 years of age; prepare all tax billings as may be
assigned to this office.
(3) Budget. Prepare the budgets for all funds.
(4) Accounting and utility billing. Maintain an accurate accounting of
all funds, monies received and disbursed, and prepare and record
all utility billing.
(5) Purchasing. Administer a centralized purchasing system for all the
departments of City government to be under the day-to-day
guidance of the Bureau of Accounting and Finance.
(6) Training. Develop and establish training and educational programs
for persons in the municipal service, including staff interaction with
the public.
(7) Staff services. Assist in the responsibility for providing the staff
services of research, planning, development and coordination of all
the departments and official boards, commissions and agencies of
the City.
(8) Other. Assume and fulfill other functions as may be required by law,
ordinance, resolution or by direction of the Manager.
A. The Manager shall also serve as City Clerk and shall carry out the
duties assigned to him by the laws of the commonwealth and the City
Charter.
B. The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer to
perform his duties during his temporary absence (including, but not
limited to, vacation, sickness, training, etc.) or disability. In the event of
his failure to make such designation, or if the absence or disability
continues more than 30 days, the Council may, by resolution, appoint an
officer of the City to perform the duties of the Manager during such
absence or until he shall return or his disability shall cease.
A. Director. The Head of the Bureau of Law shall be the City Solicitor who
shall be appointed and/or removed by the Manager with the advice and
consent of Council. The appointment of the Solicitor shall be effected
every two years on or prior to the last regular Council meeting in
January following the previous municipal election. If a vacancy occurs
in the office of the Solicitor, the appointment of a new Solicitor shall be
§ 4-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:17
§ 4-13. Bureau of Code and Zoning.
for the unexpired portion of the previous appointment. If an Assistant
City Solicitor is deemed necessary and approved by Council pursuant to
§ 4-7B, he shall be appointed in the same manner as the City Solicitor,
and his duties shall be assigned and designated by the City Solicitor.
B. Duties.
(1) Advise the Manager and Council, (or any elected City officer), when
they request, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of City
business.
(2) Prepare or revise ordinances and resolutions so requested by the
Manager, the Council or a committee thereof.
(3) Give his opinion on any legal matter or question submitted to him
by the Manager, the Council or any of its committees or by any
elected City officer.
(4) Attend Council meetings at the request of the Manager or Council.
(5) Prepare or approve for execution all contracts and instruments to
which the City is a party. Approve as to form all bonds required to
be submitted to the City.
(6) Represent the City in all legal actions brought by or against the
City.
(7) Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise or submit to
arbitration any action or causes of action, accounts, etc., in which
the City is concerned, as directed by the Manager or Council.
(8) Make an annual report to the Manager and Council of all pending
litigation in which the City has an interest and the conditions
thereof.
(9) Upon his termination as Solicitor, deliver all records and
documents and property of every description in his possession
belonging to the City to his successor in office, who shall give
duplicate receipts therefor, one of which he shall file with the
Manager.
A. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Code and Zoning shall be
qualified in the administration of code and zoning activities and shall
possess the necessary executive and administrative qualifications to
oversee both code and zoning. He shall be appointed by the Manager.
B. Duties.
(1) The Director of the Bureau of Code and Zoning shall be charged
with the direction and control of code and zoning matters of the
City as they are prescribed in the laws of the commonwealth and
§ 4-12 OIL CITY CODE § 4-13
1:18
§ 4-14. Bureau of Accounting and Finance.
§ 4-15. Bureau of Utilities.
§ 4-16. Bureau of Library Science.
ordinances of the City, and he shall perform such duties not in
conflict herewith as may be assigned by the Manager. Furthermore,
the Director of the Bureau of Code and Zoning shall review and
manage the adequacy of the code and zoning enforcement
program, including, but not limited to, building code, plumbing,
electrical, minimum housing standards, zoning and health. The
Director will have a working relationship with the Zoning Hearing
Board, Code Appeals Board and the Blighted Property Review
Committee and the City and County Planning Commissions.
(2) The Director of the Bureau of Code and Zoning shall be charged
with the direction and control of the zoning matters of the City as
they are prescribed in the laws of the commonwealth and
ordinances of the City, and he shall perform such duties not in
conflict herewith as may be assigned by the Manager. Furthermore,
the Director of the Bureau of Code and Zoning shall review and
manage the adequacy of the zoning enforcement program and
make any and all requests for changes to the Manager.
(3) This office shall carry out zoning and code enforcement by
proactive measures rather than by a solely complaint-driven
manner. They shall also utilize fire, police and public works
resources to aid and assist in code and zoning issues.
A. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Accounting and Finance shall be
qualified in the administration of finance activities and shall possess the
necessary executive and administrative qualifications for the position
and shall be appointed by the Manager.
B. Duties. The Director of the Bureau of Finance shall be charged with the
direction and control of finance matters of the City as they are
prescribed in the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the City,
and he shall perform such duties not in conflict herewith as may be
assigned by the Manager.
A. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Utilities shall be qualified in the
administration of utility activities and shall possess the necessary
executive and administrative qualifications for the position and shall be
appointed by the Manager.
B. Duties. The Director of the Bureau of Utilities shall be charged with the
direction and control of utility matters of the City as they are prescribed
in the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the City, and he
shall perform such duties not in conflict herewith as may be assigned by
the Manager.
§ 4-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:19
§ 4-17. Department of Public Safety.
§ 4-18. Bureau of Police.
§ 4-19. Bureau of Fire.
A. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Library Science shall be
qualified in the administration of library activities and shall possess the
necessary executive and administrative qualifications for the position
and shall be appointed by the Manager. The Manager, after consultation
with the Library Commission, shall appoint, supervise and have the
authority to remove the Library Director.
B. Duties. The Director shall be responsible for the Public Library and all
of the functions associated with the Bureau of Library Science. The
Library Director shall have the authority to appoint, supervise and
remove all employees engaged either in the library science and building
and facilities maintenance areas of the library operations, subject to the
authority of the Manager and the personnel (including labor contracts)
and civil service regulations of the City.
A. General responsibilities. The Department of Public Safety shall be
responsible for the City's concern in the maintenance, safety and health
of persons and property and shall include the functions of police, fire,
health and safety.
B. Director. The Director of the Department of Public Health and Safety
shall be the Manager, or when, under the provision of § 4-7B of this
chapter, Council shall approve the position, the Director shall be a
qualified administrator trained or experienced in matters of public
health and safety.
C. Areas of responsibility. The responsibility of this department shall be
the functions of a bureau of police and a bureau of fire.
A. General responsibilities. The Bureau of Police shall be responsible for
all police services required in the protection of persons and property
within the City.
B. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Police shall be the Chief of
Police, who shall possess the necessary executive and administrative
qualifications for the position. The Director shall be capable of
administering all facets of Police Department administration, have
knowledge of accepted law enforcement practices and procedures, and
possess suitable leadership qualities and acceptable personality traits.
C. Areas of responsibility. The areas of responsibility of this Bureau shall
be the following; law enforcement, traffic, parking violations,
community policing and criminal investigations of adult and juvenile
crimes.
§ 4-16 OIL CITY CODE § 4-19
1:20
§ 4-20. Department of Public Services.
§ 4-21. Bureau of Public Works.
A. General responsibilities. The Bureau of Fire shall be responsible for
providing fire protection, emergency medical services and related
services to residents of the City and their property.
B. Director. The Director shall be the Fire Chief, who shall be capable of
administering all facets of Fire Department administration, and he shall
have knowledge of accepted firefighting practices and procedures and
shall have suitable leadership qualities and acceptable personality
traits. The Fire Chief shall also serve and act as Fire Marshal with all of
the powers given by law to that position.
C. Areas of responsibility. The Bureau of Fire shall be organized in
accordance with recognized sound principles of administration of fire
departments generally and shall include firefighting, emergency
medical services, fire prevention and related community education,
code inspection and enforcement, or duties that may arise to minimize
injury or loss of life and property when other emergencies occur.
A. General responsibilities. The Department of Public Services shall be
responsible for the construction, engineering, operating and
maintenance of City streets and highways, City buildings and
equipment including the municipal building, as well as City streets,
sewers and waterlines. Furthermore, the Department of Public Services
shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of all City parks
and forestlands and the municipal enterprises, including, but not
limited to, ball fields, deck hockey, swimming pool and the industrial
park.
B. Director. The Director of the Department of Public Services shall be the
City Manager, or when, under the provision of § 4-7B of this chapter,
Council shall approve the position, the Director shall be a qualified
administrator trained or experienced in matters of public works.
C. Areas of responsibility. The responsibility of this Department shall be
the functions of a bureau of public works and a bureau of engineering.
A. General responsibilities. The Bureau of Public Works shall be
responsible for the construction and maintenance of City streets and
highways, the maintenance and repair of related City buildings and
equipment including the municipal building, as well as the maintenance
of City streets, sewers and waterlines. Furthermore, the Bureau of
Public Works shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
all City parks and forestlands and the municipal enterprises, including,
but not limited to, ball fields, deck hockey, swimming pool and the
industrial park.
§ 4-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-21
1:21
§ 4-22. Bureau of Engineering.
B. Director. The Director of the Bureau of Public Works shall be the Public
Works Director, qualified in the administration of public works
activities, and shall possess the necessary executive and administrative
qualifications for the position.
C. Areas of responsibility. The areas of responsibility of the Department
shall include construction, maintenance and operation of the following:
(1) Streets, to include maintenance of surface, grade and curbing,
street cleaning and snow removal.
(2) Water distribution system.
(3) Storm sewers and inlets.
(4) Sanitary sewers.
(5) Public buildings and grounds, including all equipment and fixtures.
(6) Maintenance of all City vehicles and self-propelled equipment.
(7) Assist in the development of comprehensive recreation
programming.
(8) Maintenance of City-owned recreation areas, planting areas and
forestlands (according to Shade Tree Ordinance).
(9) Other responsibilities and duties as may be required by law or
ordinance, by the direction of the Manager.
A. Director. The Head of the Bureau of Engineering shall be the City
Engineer, who shall be a registered engineer in civil engineering,
licensed in Pennsylvania, and shall be appointed by the Manager.
B. Duties.
(1) The City Engineer shall be charged with the direction and control
of the engineering matters of the City as they are prescribed in the
laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the City, and he shall
perform such duties not in conflict herewith as may be assigned by
the Manager. Furthermore, the City Engineer shall manage the
construction, operation and maintenance of City sewers,
wastewater treatment plant and water supply system and its
employees, and other items the Manager may assign.
(2) The City Engineer shall have a close working relationship with the
Director of Public Works. The City Engineer shall also be
responsible for assisting with any and all environmental studies
and reports needed for any department of the City.
(3) The City Engineer shall perform such duties as directed by the
Manager with reference to the construction, reconstruction,
§ 4-21 OIL CITY CODE § 4-22
1:22
§ 4-23. Department of Community Planning and Development.
maintenance and repair of all streets, pavements, sewers, bridges,
culverts and other engineering work.
(4) The City Engineer shall develop and follow a policy for conducting
RFPs regarding contracting with other engineers.
A. General responsibilities. The Department of Community Planning and
Development shall perform those functions required for the desirable
growth and development of the City, including but not limited to:
administration of the Community Development Block Grant Program,
planning, economic development, urban renewal, downtown
revitalization, neighborhood and housing revitalization, grant writing
and reviewing of other department/bureau grants, Oil City Arts
Commission, Main Street and overall redevelopment of the City.
B. Director. The head of this Department shall be a qualified administrator
and appointed by the Manager on the basis of his experience or actual
training in areas of work as described below.
C. Duties. The Department of Planning and Development shall be
responsible for:
(1) The planning operation of the City with the advice of the City
Planning Commission.
(2) Preparation of a biannual capital improvements program and
budget for the City. Said document shall be prepared on or before
July 1 of each odd-numbered year and shall consist of a proposed
five-year capital improvements program, which shall be presented
to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to
Council. The program submitted may be modified by the affirmative
vote of three members of Council. Passage of the five-year capital
improvements program shall be subject to biannual revision.
(3) Cooperating and working with the various authorities, commissions
and City-related agencies, viz.:
(a) Housing Authority.
(b) Redevelopment Authority.
(c) Zoning Hearing Board.
(d) Code Appeals Board.
(e) Planning Commission.
(f) Shade Tree Commission.
(g) Oil City Arts Commission.
(h) Oil City Civic Center.
§ 4-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-23
1:23
(i) Oil Region Alliance.
(j) Northwest Planning Commission.
(k) Oil City South Side and North Side Business Associations.
(l) South Side, North Side and Siverly Neighborhood
Associations.
(m) Other City-created and/or -related agencies, commissions,
committees and/or authorities.
(4) Establish a positive working liaison with other private, public or
semipublic agencies, as well as county, regional and state
governmental entities and organizations and individuals involved in
such areas as economic development, arts, culture, regional
planning, marketing, advertising, transportation, industrial and
commercial development, recreation and leisure time, tourism and
general community appearances.
(5) Coordinate economic development activities for the City.
(6) Assume other functions or other responsibilities as may be
designated from time to time by the Manager.
§ 4-23 OIL CITY CODE § 4-23
1:24
ARTICLE V
Boards, Commissions and Authorities
§ 4-24. Appointment of members.
Where the appointment of members to boards, commissions or authorities
is vested in the City by statute or ordinance, such member or members shall
be appointed or removed by the Manager with the advice and consent of
Council.
A. Authorities.
(1) Redevelopment Authority.
(2) Housing Authority.
(3) Parking Authority.
B. Commissions.
(1) Shade Tree and Forests.
(2) Planning.
(3) Library.
(4) Arts.
C. Boards.
(1) Civil Service.
(2) Board of Health.
(3) Board of Zoning Appeals.
(4) Board of Code Appeals.
(5) Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust
Fund
D. Committees.
(1) Blighted Property Review.
(2) Main Street.
(3) Arts Revitalization.
(4) Weed and Seed.
§ 4-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-24
1:25

ARTICLE VI
City Treasurer
§ 4-25. Position.
The City Treasurer, elected as provided by law, shall carry out such duties
and exercise such powers and functions with respect to the collection,
receipt, safekeeping, accounting for and disbursement of public monies as
are provided by general law, including county, City, institution district and
school district taxes and, in addition thereto, shall receive for deposit from
the departments of the City government all City monies collected by such
departments.
§ 4-26. Powers and duties.
The City Treasurer shall disburse all funds by check, countersigned by the
City Controller in accordance with warrants issued to the City Treasurer
and duly signed by the City Controller and the head of the City department
or office listing such disbursements. The City Treasurer shall have all
the powers, duties and functions relating to the collection, receiving,
safekeeping, accounting for and payment over of public monies, including
county, City, institution district and school district tax, as provided by
general law, and shall perform such other functions and duties as may be
required of him by the Council.
§ 4-27. Bond.
The City Treasurer shall furnish such fidelity bond and other insurance as
required by general law and in such amounts as Council, by ordinance, may
direct.
§ 4-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-27
1:27

ARTICLE VII
City Controller
§ 4-28. Position.
The City Controller, elected as provided by law, shall be responsible for
the control of an encumbrance system of the City budget operation and
in the supervision of the finances of the City. He shall receive from the
Manager and department and bureau heads such information regarding
City properties and obligations and City income and expenditures as he
deems necessary to carry out these duties. He shall furnish the Manager
and Council the report concerning these matters for preparation and
presentation by the Manager to Council at least monthly and at such other
times as may be deemed necessary. Such reports presented by the Manager
to Council shall be countersigned and certified by the City Controller as to
the accuracy and correctness thereof.
§ 4-29. Responsibilities and duties.
The City Controller shall review all warrants for the expenditure of City
monies and, if satisfied that such expenditure is within the budget allotment
pertaining thereto, shall sign said warrant before it is presented to the City
Treasurer for payment. In so doing, he shall also preaudit all claims and
demands against the City prior to payment and shall approve warrants for
payment thereof only if satisfied that such payments are in accordance with
the law.
§ 4-30. Bond.
The City Controller shall furnish a fidelity bond to the City as required by
general law. The fidelity bond for the position of City Controller shall be
in the minimum amount of $50,000. The fidelity bond shall be issued by a
surety company authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and shall be financially rated by the A.M. Best Company at an
A level or above.
§ 4-31. Designee in absence of Controller.
The City Controller may designate, with the approval of the Manager,
a person in the administrative service to perform his duties during his
absence from the City.
§ 4-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-31
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Personnel Regulations
§ 4-32. Personnel.
§ 4-33. Residency.
A. The Department of Administration, specifically the Manager, shall be
responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a merit system
personnel program, which is to include a position classification system
and pay plan covering all City employees as provided by the Charter
Law.5
B. The basic personnel policy of the City shall be:
(1) Employment in the City government shall be based upon merit and
fitness, free from personal, racial, religious and political
considerations.
(2) Recruitment shall be conducted on a broad basis in order to secure
an adequate field of selection.
(3) Just and equitable conditions of employment shall be established
and maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the City government.
(4) Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be
classified and compensated on a uniform basis.
A. Subject to any contrary term, condition or practice that would currently
apply to any employee that is subject to a collective bargaining or labor
agreement with the City, any full-time employee and part-time Fire
Department employee currently or hereafter employed by the City shall
be required, as a condition of his or her employment, to be or become
within 12 months from the commencement of such employment and
remain, during the term of his or her employment, a resident of the
geographical area delineated by a ten-mile radius, which epicenter
shall be 21 Seneca Street, Oil City, Pennsylvania (City Hall).
B. The term "resident" means and shall be construed to include only a
person who maintains his or her primary domicile and place of
residence within the geographical area stated in Subsection A.
C. If any person in the employ of the City shall fail, neglect or refuse to
become a resident of the geographical area stated in Subsection A
within the limitation of time provided in that same subsection, or cease
to remain a resident of that area, as defined in Subsection B, then the
absence of the aforesaid residency shall be grounds for the termination
of said employment of such person.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41501 et seq.
§ 4-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-33
1:31
§ 4-34. Blanket bond.
Any officer or employee of the City who is or shall be required to give bond
to the City conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, except
such officers and employees who are required by law to give individual
bonds, may be covered by a public employees' blanket bond, the amount
and coverage thereof to be determined by the Manager and approved by
Council.
D. The Manager, at his sole discretion, shall have the authority to waive
the requirements set forth herein in those cases where enforcement of
the requirement would be adverse or detrimental to the safe, efficient
and economical conduct of City business or in those cases where, after
diligent effort, no person is available for employment who is both a
resident of the geographical area delineated in Subsection A and
otherwise qualified.
E. There shall be no residency restrictions placed on any part-time
employees of the City except for those outlined in Subsection A above.
§ 4-33 OIL CITY CODE § 4-34
1:32
ARTICLE IX
Finance
§ 4-35. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January.
§ 4-36. Budget.
Pursuant to Section 517 and Section 518 of the Charter Law,6 the City
budget shall consist of the following:
§ 4-37. Budget preparation and adoption.
At the last stated meeting in November, the Manager shall submit to Council
his recommended budget in the form of an ordinance, together with such
explanatory comment or statement as he may deem desirable. Public
hearings shall be held on the recommended budget before action thereon
is taken. Council shall, upon passing the proposed budget ordinance on the
first reading, fix a date for adoption thereof, which shall be no later than the
31st day of December immediately following.
§ 4-38. Budgetary operation.
A. General fund operating budget.
B. Liquid fuels tax budget.
C. Capital improvement reserve budget.
D. Such other budgets as may be required by law or agreement.
A. The Department of Administration shall supervise the administration of
the budget.
B. Upon adoption of the budget, the appropriations included shall
constitute the maximum authorizations to spend and shall not be
exceeded except as hereinafter provided.
(1) Transfers by Manager. The Manager shall have the power to
authorize transfer of any unexpended balance of any appropriation
item or any portion thereof within any department or
interdepartment, provided:
(a) Transfers shall not be made from any appropriation item
involving personal services, i.e., salaries or wages.
(b) The amounts transferred to any one appropriation item shall
not exceed a sum of $3,000.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 41517 and 41518.
§ 4-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-38
1:33
§ 4-39. Purchasing.
(c) All such transfers shall be reported in writing to Council within
30 calendar days following the transfer.
(2) Transfers by Council. All transfers in excess of $3,000 involving all
expenditure items shall be effected only after formal approval of a
majority of Council.
C. The accounting system of the City shall be determined by the Manager
and shall include an encumbrance system of accounts for control of
expenditures within the limits of budget appropriations and shall be
maintained on a modified accrual basis as applicable to governmental
accounting.
A. The Manager or his designee shall be responsible for the establishment
of a centralized purchasing system to be maintained within the
Department of Administration and for the designation of a purchasing
agent.
B. Formal bidding. Whenever the probable cost of materials, equipment
and/or services is expected to exceed $10,000, the purchasing agent
shall cause to be prepared specifications for the articles or services
required and shall advertise the requirements of the City in accordance
with the Third Class City Code.
(1) When formal bidding is employed, the bids shall be opened and
tabulated publicly by the purchasing agent at the time and place
specified in the advertisement of bids.
(2) Investigation of the responsibility of the bidders shall be made as
the purchasing agent may deem necessary, and he shall award the
contract to the lowest and best responsible bidder, after Council
approval, unless Council determines that the interest of the City
would be better served by rejecting all bids and ordering a new
advertisement, in which case the Council may so order.
C. Three written and/or telephonic quotes should be obtained for any
purchases from $4,000 to $9,999 to determine the best price. The
purchasing agent may award the purchase to the supplier offering the
lowest and best bid of any of the three written quotes.
D. Informal bids shall be solicited whenever possible for all items of less
than $4,000 and more than $1,000. If the cost is less than $4,000, the
purchasing agent may award the purchase to the supplier offering the
lowest and best bid of any of the informal bidders.
E. Emergency purchases. In case of emergency, any or all using agencies
may purchase directly any supplies, materials, services or repairs not to
exceed $200 in the aggregate whose immediate procurement is
essential to the continuance of the work of the using agency. The head
of such using agency shall send written notification of such emergency
§ 4-38 OIL CITY CODE § 4-39
1:34
§ 4-40. Disposal of City property.
No City personal property with an estimated value of $500 shall be disposed
of by sale except upon approval by Council and on such conditions as
Council may designate in accordance with applicable law.
§ 4-41. Depositories of City funds.
purchase to the purchasing agent and the Finance Director with a
full explanation of the circumstances of the emergency, which shall be
filed by the purchasing agent as permanent and public record of the
purchase.
F. The contracts or purchases made by Council involving an expenditure
of over $10,000 which shall not require advertising or bidding, as
hereinbefore provided, are as follows:
(1) Those for maintenance, repairs or replacements for water, electric
light, or other public works of the City, provided they do not
constitute new additions, extensions or enlargements of existing
facilities and equipment, but a bond may be required by Council as
in other cases of work done.
(2) Those made for improvements, repairs and maintenance of any
kind made or provided by any City through its own employees;
provided, however, that this shall not apply to construction
materials used in a street improvement.
(3) Those where particular types, models or pieces of new equipment,
articles, apparatus, appliances, vehicles or parts thereof are
desired by Council, which are patented and manufactured or
copyrighted products.
(4) Those involving any policies of insurance or surety company bonds;
those made for public utility service under tariffs on file with the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission; those made with another
political subdivision or a county, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the federal government, any agency of the
commonwealth or the federal government, or any municipal
authority, including the sale, leasing or loan of any supplies or
materials by the commonwealth or the federal government, or their
agencies, but the price thereof shall not be in excess of that fixed by
the commonwealth, the federal government or their agencies.
(5) Those involving personal or professional services.
A. The City Treasurer shall deposit in the name of the City all City funds
collected by him/her in such banks or other financial institutions
conducting business with the City which have been designated by
Council as City depositories.
§ 4-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-41
1:35
§ 4-42. Temporary investment of City funds.
§ 4-43. Annual audit.
Pursuant to Section 520 of the Charter Law,7 all accounts of the City shall be
audited following the close of each fiscal year by an independent certified
public accountant, selected by resolution of Council, to be provided to
Council no later than September 1 of each year for the prior year. The firm
chosen to conduct the audit for the City should be let out for bid via request
for proposals at least every three years.
B. The Manager will require acceptable securities to be pledged by any
depository equal to 100% of deposits computed on a daily basis at all
times.
A. The Manager shall have the power to authorize temporary investments
of City funds and for the disposal of such investments when the monies
may be needed.
B. Such temporary investments shall be in United States Treasury
obligations or in savings or share accounts of institutions to the extent
that the accounts would be insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or to the extent covered by the security requirements of
the City as referred to in § 4-41.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41520.
§ 4-41 OIL CITY CODE § 4-43
1:36
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 4-44. Rules and regulations.
§ 4-45. Sundays and holidays.
Whenever any time established by this chapter for the taking of any action
expires on a Sunday or any legal holiday, such time shall not expire on said
day, but shall expire on the next work day.
§ 4-46. Constitutional constructions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. It is
hereby expressly declared as the intent of Council that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional or illegal provision or
provisions not been included herein.
§ 4-47. Municipal claims.
The City Solicitor shall be furnished by the heads of the various
departments with statements of claims of the City which remain due and
unpaid and payable, and the City Solicitor shall enter such claim in the City
Lien Docket. Upon payment of any claim so entered, the person receiving
said payment shall forward to the City Solicitor a satisfaction piece, and it
shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to cause satisfaction to be entered
upon the proper record.
A. No rule or regulation made by any department, office, agency or
authority of the City, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the City, shall take effect until it has been
approved as to form and legality by the City Solicitor and approved by
the Manager. Council shall receive all such rules and regulations which
shall be filed with the Manager.
B. All such rules and regulations shall be published by posting in the office
of the City Clerk and other appropriate places for 30 days.
C. The City Clerk shall keep a current record of all rules and regulations
filed with him.
§ 4-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-47
1:37

ARTICLE XI
Transition Provisions
§ 4-48. References and prior ordinances.
A. Whenever in any statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
resolution or ordinance of the City there is a reference to the
Department of Accounts and Finance or to the Director of the
Department of Accounts and Finance, the reference shall be construed
to mean the Department of Administration or the Director of the
Department of Administration. Where there is a reference to the
Department of Streets and Public Improvements or to the Director of
the Department of Streets and Public Improvements or to the
Department of Parks, the reference shall be construed to mean the
Department of Public Works or the Director of the Department of Public
Works.
B. All references in any other statute, ordinance or resolution to Council or
any other board, body or office shall be construed to mean such body,
officer or office to which the respective functions, powers or duties are
assigned by this Code.
§ 4-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-48
1:39
Chapter 7
ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4.
§ 7-1. Creation of the Commission.
A. The Commission shall hereafter consist of 21 to 23 members, composed
as follows:
(1) Two members of the Council of the City of Oil City elected annually
by the membership of the City Council, each to serve for a term of
one year.
(2) One member of the staff of the City of Oil City, being the City
Manager or his designee.
(3) Four members, to be appointed by the Council of the City of Oil
City, should be from citizens that may reside outside the City limits
of the City of Oil City, upon the recommendation by the Arts and
Culture Commission.
(4) All other members shall be appointed by the City Council of the City
of Oil City from the citizens at large of the City of Oil City upon the
recommendation of the Arts and Culture Commission. If possible,
one member should be from the Oil City School District and one
from the Venango Campus of Clarion University of Pennsylvania.
B. In order to effect the reorganization of the Commission in accordance
with the provisions of this section but not to interfere with the present
membership and the operations of the present Oil City Arts Council, all
members and officers of the present Oil City Arts Council shall be
considered newly elected members of the Arts and Culture Commission
and newly elected officers. All future appointments to the Commission
and future officer elections shall be in accordance as hereinabove
provided.
C. Forthwith upon enactment of this section, the Council of the City of Oil
City shall appoint the members from its body to act as members of the
Arts and Culture Commission and shall appoint all present members of
the Oil City Arts Council to the Arts and Culture Commission. The
current members will serve for three-, four- and five-year terms. At the
first meeting of the Commission, terms will be established, with seven
members serving three years, seven members serving four years, and
seven members serving five years. Appointments after the initial
establishment of the Commission will be for five years. The remaining
two members will be council members that are appointed for one-year
§ 4-48 OIL CITY CODE § 7-1
1:40
§ 7-2. Administration of Commission.
terms. On appointment of the newly constituted membership of the
Arts and Culture Commission, the reorganization shall be into one
Chairman, one Vice Chairman, one Secretary and one Treasurer, and
thereafter at its December meeting, the Commission shall elect said
officers. The Commission shall keep a full and complete record of all of
its proceedings and make an annual report to the Council in a meeting
in April of each year. It shall also make such reports to the Council of
the City of Oil City as may be requested by the Council.
A. Personnel.
(1) All employees engaged in the operation, coordination, production,
revitalization and relocation of arts, culture and artists located in
the City of Oil City shall be employees of the City of Oil City and
shall be subject to all administrative rules, regulations and
practices of the City.
(2) In accordance with the Administrative Code of the City of Oil City,8
the Manager, after consultation with the Arts and Culture
Commission, shall appoint and have the authority to remove any
arts and culture employee or employees.
B. Appropriation and disbursement of funds.
(1) The City shall appropriate annually from its revenues such sums as
it deems appropriate for the necessary operation and promotion of
the Arts and Culture Commission programs. The Arts and Culture
Commission shall submit its budget to the City Manager at his
request each year. Disbursements from the Arts and Culture
Commission operations budget shall be made by the City to cover
expenses incurred and purchases made in the operation of the arts
and culture operations.
(2) The Arts and Culture Commission shall maintain line items for
expenses and revenues in the City's budget and deposit therein all
funds donated, fees paid, grants funded and revenues derived from
the operation and the production of programming. Disbursements
from the fund shall be made in accordance with the fiscal policy of
the City. Receipts and expenditures of the Commission will be
included in the City's monthly financial reports.
(3) All expenditures shall be made only in accordance with the
purchasing provisions of the Administrative Code of the City of Oil
City.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:41
§ 7-3. Development of programming.
The Arts and Culture Commission shall determine the operations and
programming and shall establish rules and regulations for the operations
and development of programming.
Chapter 11
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4.
§ 7-3 OIL CITY CODE § 7-3
1:42
ARTICLE I
Redevelopment Authority
[Adopted 2-13-1956 by Ord. No. 1936 (Ch. 46 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 11-1. Legislative finding.
The Council of the City of Oil City does find and declare that there is need
for a redevelopment authority to function within the territorial limits of the
City of Oil City.
§ 11-2. Filing of copies.
The Clerk of City Council is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
article with the Department of State of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and a duplicate thereof with the State Planning Board of the said
commonwealth.
§ 11-3. Authority of officers of City.
The appropriate officers of the City of Oil City are hereby authorized and
directed to do all other acts and things necessary or desirable in connection
with the incorporation of the Redevelopment Authority of the City of Oil
City.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:43

ARTICLE II
Oil City General Authority
[Adopted 3-16-1956 by Ord. No. 1941 (Ch. 35, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 11-4. Legislative declaration.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.9
§ 11-5. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of the City of Oil City, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority, in substantially the following form:10
§ 11-6. Publication of notice.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause a notice of
the substance of this article, including the substance of the Articles of
Incorporation and of the proposed filing of said Articles, to be published one
time in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of
Venango, as directed by the Act of May 23, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
§ 11-7. Authority of Mayor and City Clerk.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are directed to file said Articles of
Incorporation, together with the necessary proof of publication, with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Oil City General
Authority.
§ 11-8. Initial project of Authority.
The initial project, which shall be undertaken by said Authority, is to
acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either in
the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and
sewage treatment works, including works for treatment and disposing of
industrial waste, for the City of Oil City and for such other territory as it
may be authorized to serve.
9. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: A copy of the Articles of Incorporation is on file in the office of the City
Manager. The Articles were amended on August 27, 1973, by Ord. No. 2291 to provide for
the term of existence of the Authority and the project or projects to be undertaken.
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:45
§ 11-9. Designation of members.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1, 1957.11
11.Editor's Note: There followed the names and addresses of the original members, which list
is on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 11-9 OIL CITY CODE § 11-9
1:46
ARTICLE III
Oil City Parking Authority
[Adopted 7-22-1957 by Ord. No. 1969 (Ch. 35, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 11-10. Legislative declaration.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Parking Authority Law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as follows: the Act of June 5, 1947, P.L. 458,
as amended.12
§ 11-11. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of the City of Oil City, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority in substantially the following form:13
§ 11-12. Publication of notice.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause a notice of
the substance of this article and of the proposed filing of said Articles of
Incorporation to be published one time in a newspaper published and of
general circulation in the County of Venango as directed by the Act of June
5, 1947, P.L. 458, as amended.
§ 11-13. Authority of Mayor and City Clerk.
The Mayor and City Clerk are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation,
together with said proof of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation.
§ 11-14. Designation of members.
The following named persons, who have been appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Oil City in the manner provided by law, shall be the first members of
the Board of the Authority, and their terms of office shall commence on the
date of the appointment and shall be computed from July 15, 1957.14
12.Editor's Note: The Act was repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22).
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq., for provisions related to parking authorities.
13.Editor's Note: A copy of the Articles of Incorporation is on file in the office of the City
Manager.
14.Editor's Note: There followed the names and addresses of the original members, which list
is on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 11-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-14
1:47

ARTICLE IV
Joint Solid Waste Authority
[Adopted 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 2272 (Ch. 35, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 11-15. Legislative declaration.
It is the desire of the City of Oil City, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in
cooperation with the City of Titusville and the City of Franklin and the
County of Venango, acting through their City Councils and Commissioners
of said County, and the City Council of the City of Oil City hereby signifies
its intention, jointly with the City of Titusville and the City of Franklin and
the County of Venango, to organize an authority under the Municipality
Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.15
§ 11-16. Function of Authority. [Amended 8-27-1973 by Ord. No.
2292]
It is the intention to exercise the powers granted hereunder for facilities
and equipment for the disposal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse
materials by incineration, landfill or other methods.
§ 11-17. Health and safety considerations.
It is desirable for the health and safety of the people of the City of Oil City
that the City use the facilities of this Authority.
§ 11-18. Termination of prior contracts.
Any contracts between the City of Oil City and any other person, firm or
corporation for collection, removal or disposal of ashes, garbage, rubbish
and other refuse material are terminable at the option of the City within six
months from the date this article becomes effective.
§ 11-19. Articles of Incorporation.
Pursuant to said desire and intention of the City of Oil City in cooperation
with the City of Titusville and the City of Franklin and the County of
Venango, through the Commissioners of said County, and in conformance
with the terms and provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945
and its amendments, the proposed Articles of Incorporation are set forth in
full in form attached hereto and made a part hereof.16
15.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq. A copy of the Articles of Incorporation is
on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 11-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-19
1:49
Chapter 15
BLIGHTED PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4.
Redevelopment Authority — See Ch. 11, Art. I.
Abandoned or vacant property — See Ch. 80.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 238,
Art. I.
§ 15-1. Purpose. [Amended 1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Blighted Property Review
Committee which shall work with the City of Oil City Code Enforcement
Office (Code Office), to officially designate City properties as blighted and
to implement the provisions of Section 1712.1 of the Urban Redevelopment
Law of 1945, as amended. The Blighted Property Review Committee shall
be known and hereinafter referred to as the "Committee."
§ 15-2. Composition; terms. [Amended 1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
A. The Committee shall consist of seven members, holding four-year
terms, consisting of the following:
(1) One member of City Council, appointed by Council.
(2) One member of the Oil City Redevelopment Authority, appointed by
the Authority.
(3) One member of the Planning Commission, appointed by the
Commission.
(4) One representative of the executive branch of the City, appointed
by the City Manager.
(5) The Oil City Fire Chief or a representative of the Department as
recommended.
(6) Two residents of the City to serve at large, appointed by City
Council.
B. The Committee shall initially be constituted of two members serving a
four-year term, two members serving a three-year term, two members
serving a two-year term and one member serving a one-year term. Any
vacancy on the Committee shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
respective appointing agency or individual as noted above. Committee
members that miss more than three consecutive meetings may be
subject to removal from the Committee by a majority vote of the
remaining members.
§ 11-19 OIL CITY CODE § 15-3
1:50
§ 15-3. Meetings. [Amended 1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
The Committee shall meet every other month in Council Chambers, City
Hall, 21 Seneca Street, Oil City, Pennsylvania. The Committee shall
establish its meeting day and time at its initial meeting and cause the same
to be advertised in accordance with any laws or regulations members of the
Committee to be present to transact official business.
§ 15-4. Procedure; notice of determination; appeal. [Amended
1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
A. Procedure; notice of determination.
(1) At its regular meeting, the Committee shall consider such
properties identified and submitted by the City's Code Office as
appearing to be in a blighted condition. Prior to its regular
meeting, the Committee shall request from the City's Code Office a
list of properties that appear to be in a blighted condition. The
Committee shall review and consider pertinent information about
the property, including, but not limited to, matters related to
general structural conditions, foundation, roofing, drainage,
exterior walls, windows, doors, chimneys and porches. In addition
to this information, the Committee shall also review and consider
the blighting conditions designated in § 15-5 that appear to apply to
each potentially blighted property. The Committee shall then
inspect each property individually to ascertain whether or not the
property meets one or more of the blighting conditions designated
in § 15-5.
(2) The Committee shall then designate each property that meets any
of the criteria as "blighted" and shall prepare a written notice of
determination of blight.
The written notice shall:
(a) Detail the reasons for such determination;
(b) Notify and direct the owner to either eliminate the blight or
develop and submit to the Committee and the Code Office a
written plan to eliminate the blight, within 30 days of being
served with the notice;
(c) Inform the owner that failure to eliminate or abate the
blighting conditions may render the property subject to
condemnation; and
(d) Notify the owner of the right to appeal a determination of
blight and the time, place and manner of perfecting an appeal.
(3) Nothing in the above language shall restrict the Code Office,
subject to the prior written approval of the City Manager, from
granting any additional time that might be necessary to eliminate
§ 15-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:51
§ 15-5. Blighted property.
The Committee, with the assistance of the Code Office, may only designate
a property as blighted if one or more of the following conditions exist:
the blight or to develop a plan for its elimination, if the owner or
his agent has made an order.
(4) The notice of determination of blight by the Committee shall be
served by the following methods:
(a) Service by certified mall and first class mail at the last known
address of the said owner; and
(b) Posting the notice upon the premises that have been
determined blighted, record of said posting being made by
photograph.
B. Appeal.
(1) Any owner or person who is aggrieved by determination of the
Committee that his or her property has been determined to be
blighted for the reasons set forth in § 15-5 above, may appeal the
decision as hereinafter stated. The appeal shall be in the form
prescribed by the City and shall state the specific reasons for
appeal.
(2) The appeal shall be addressed to the City's ICC Appeals Board in
writing within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the
determination of the Committee by said owner or his agent and
shall be filed at the Oil City Code Office, 21 Seneca Street, Oil City,
Pennsylvania. A copy of the appeal shall also be forwarded by the
Code Office to the Blighted Properties Review Committee for its
records.
(3) The required fee for each appeal shall be $500 which shall be
payable to the City of Oil City and must accompany the appeal.
A. Any premises which, because of physical condition or use, is regarded
as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public
nuisance in accordance with the local housing, building, plumbing, fire
and related codes.
B. Any premises which, because of physical condition, use or occupancy, is
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited
to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences
or structures.
C. Any dwelling which, because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by
the City's Property Maintenance Code, has been designated by a City
Code Official of the City as unfit for human habitation. [Amended
1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
§ 15-4 OIL CITY CODE § 15-5
1:52
D. Any structure which is a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to the
safety of persons or property.
E. Any structure from which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewage or
other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or
rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use.
F. Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly
built-up neighborhood which, by reason of neglect or lack of
maintenance, has become a place for accumulation of trash and debris
or a haven for rodents and other vermin.
G. Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for a period of
two years according to the latest records of the Venango County Tax
Claims Bureau.
H. Any property which is vacant, but not tax delinquent, which has not
been rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of a notice of violation
by the Code Official.
I. Any abandoned property. A property shall be considered abandoned if:
(1) It is a vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground on which a
municipal lien for the cost of demolition of any structure previously
located on the property remains unpaid for a period of six months;
or
(2) It is a vacant property or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of
ground on which the total of municipal liens on the property for tax
or any other type of claims of the municipality are in excess of
150% of the fair market value of the property, as established by the
Venango County Assessment Office or other body with legal
authority to determine the taxable value of the property; or
(3) The property has been declared abandoned by the owner, including
an estate that is in possession of the property.
J. Any property which has defective or unusual conditions of title or no
known owners rendering the title unmarketable.
K. Any property which has environmentally hazardous conditions, solid
waste pollution or contamination in a building or on the land which
poses a direct and immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the community.
L. Any property that has three or more of the following characteristics:
(1) Has unsafe or hazardous conditions that do not meet current use,
occupancy or fire codes;
(2) Has unsafe external and internal accessways;
(3) Is being served by an unsafe public street or right-of-way;
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5
1:53
§ 15-6. Certification to and action by Oil City Redevelopment
Authority.
(4) Violates the applicable property maintenance code adopted by the
municipality and is an immediate threat to public health and safety;
(5) Is vacant; or
(6) Is located in a redevelopment area with a density of a least 1,000
people per square mile or a redevelopment area where more than
90% of the units of property are nonresidential, or in a municipality
with a density of at least 2,500 people per square mile.
A. Certification. The Committee, with the concurrence of the Oil City
Planning Commission, upon making a determination that any property
is blighted within the terms of this chapter and the Urban
Redevelopment Law, as amended, may certify said blighted property to
the Oil City Redevelopment Authority. Such certification may be made,
except that: [Amended 1-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2836]
(1) No property shall be certified to the Authority unless it is vacant. A
property shall be considered vacant if:
(a) The property is unoccupied or its occupancy has not been
authorized by the owner of the property;
(b) In the case of an unimproved lot or parcel of ground, a lien for
the cost of demolition of any structure previously located on
the property remains unpaid for a period of six months; or
(c) In the case of an unimproved lot or parcel of ground, the
property has remained in violation of any provision of local
building, property maintenance or related codes applicable to
such lots or parcels, including licensing requirements, for a
period of six months.
(2) No property shall be certified to the Authority unless the owner of
the property or an agent designated by him for receipt of service of
notices within the municipality has been served with notice of the
determination that the property is blighted, together with an
appropriate order to eliminate the conditions causing the blight
and notification that failure to do so may render the property
subject to condemnation under the Urban Redevelopment Law, as
amended. The notice shall be served upon the owner or his agent in
accord with this subsection pertaining to service of notice of
determination of blight. The owner or his agent shall have the right
of appeal from the determination as per the requirements
established in this subsection.
(3) No blighted property shall be certified to the Authority until the
time period for appeal of all orders from the Code Office has
expired and no appeal has been taken, or if taken, the appeal(s) has
§ 15-5 OIL CITY CODE § 15-6
1:54
been disposed of, and the owner or his agent has failed to comply
with the order(s) from the Code Office.
B. Blighted property removal.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the Authority shall
have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, bequest, eminent
domain or otherwise any blighted property as defined herein,
either within or outside of a certified redevelopment area and,
further, shall have the power to hold, clear, manage and/or dispose
of said property for residential or related uses and commercial,
industrial or institutional reuse, as provided by law. This power
shall be exercised in accordance with the procedure set forth
hereinafter.
(2) Residential and related use shall include residential property for
sale or rent and related uses, including but not limited to park and
recreation areas, neighborhood community service and
neighborhood parking lots.
C. Notice of determination. The service of the Notice of Determination of
Blight by the Authority shall be accomplished, at a minimum, through
one of the methods listed below. The notice shall detail the reasons for
such determination, shall order that the blighting conditions be
eliminated within a certain time frame, and shall notify the owner that
failure to eliminate or abate the blighting conditions may render the
property subject to condemnation. Service of the notice shall be by one
of the following methods:
(1) Service by certified mail and first class mail at the last known
address of the said owner; or
(2) Posting of said notice upon the premises that have been determined
blighted, record of said posting being made by photograph.
D. Appeal of determination of blight.
(1) Any owner or person who is aggrieved by a ruling of the Authority
that his property has been determined to be blighted for the
reasons set forth in § 15-5 above may appeal the decision as
hereinafter stated. The appeal shall be in the form prescribed by
the City and shall state the specific reasons for appeal.
(2) The appeal must be filed with the City's ICC Appeals Board in
writing within 30 days of the date of the receipt of the
determination of blight by said owner or his agent. Appeals shall be
filed at the Oil City Code Office, 21 Seneca Street, Oil City,
Pennsylvania. A copy of the appeal shall also be forwarded by the
Code Office to the Blighted Properties Review Committee for its
records.
§ 15-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-6
1:55
§ 15-7. Other functions of Committee.
The Blighted Property Review Committee may, at its own discretion,
conduct the following other functions:
(3) The required fee for each appeal shall be $150, which shall be
payable to the City of Oil City and must accompany the appeal.
E. Reuse of acquired property.
(1) Acquisition and disposition of blighted property under this chapter
shall not require preparation, adoption or approval of a
redevelopment area plan or redevelopment proposal but, at least
30 days prior to acquisition of any property, the Authority shall
transmit identification of the property to the City Planning
Commission and shall request a recommendation as to the
appropriate reuse of the property. The Authority shall not acquire
the property when the Planning Commission certifies that
disposition for residential or related uses or commercial, industrial
or institutional reuse would not be in accordance with the City's
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Property disposed of within a redevelopment area shall be disposed
of under a redevelopment contract in accordance with the
provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Act, as amended.17
(3) Property disposed of outside of an urban renewal project area shall
be disposed of by deed in accordance with the provisions set forth
in applicable law.
A. The Committee may advise the Authority in matters relating to the
establishment and modification of policies, priorities and procedures
affecting the disposition of properties acquired through the certification
process of the Committee.
B. The Committee may advise the City's Community Development
Department in matters relating to the provision of financial, advisory
and technical rehabilitation assistance affecting reinvestment in
properties acquired through the certification process of the Committee.
C. The Committee may advise other municipal agencies in matters relating
to the functions of said agencies affecting the acquisition, disposition
and reinvestment in properties which have been or may be acquired
through the certification process of the Committee.
D. The Committee may advise other appropriate agencies in matters
relating to the disposition of publicly owned properties in the City of Oil
City.
17.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 15-6 OIL CITY CODE § 15-7
1:56
Chapter 19
CITY FUNDS, DEPOSIT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4.
§ 19-1. Designation of depository bank.
From and after the first day of January 1940, and until otherwise provided
by Council, all City taxes and all other funds coming into the possession
or hands of the City Treasurer of the City of Oil City for and on behalf of
said City, or entrusted to his care, shall be deposited daily by said Treasurer
in the First Seneca Bank and Trust Company, 248 Seneca Street, Oil City,
Pennsylvania.
§ 19-2. Security bond and escrow deposit.
Said First Seneca Bank and Trust Company shall forthwith deliver to the
City of Oil City its own bond in the sum of $100,000 in a form satisfactory
to Council and the City Solicitor, conditioned for the faithful keeping and
paying over, on demand, of all funds and property of the City that may
come into its hands; and as security for said bond, said First Seneca Bank
and Trust Company shall deposit, in escrow bonds of the United States of
America, the par value of which shall be not less than $50,000.
§ 19-3. Authority of City; withdrawal of designation.
The Mayor of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and directed to
enter into an agreement with the First Seneca Bank and Trust Company
providing for the deposit of the bonds by the First Seneca Bank and Trust
Company as above provided and for the control thereof. The City reserves
the right, whenever deemed advisable by Council, to demand additional
bond or additional security from said First Seneca Bank and Trust Company
and, upon failure of said First Seneca Bank and Trust Company to furnish
the same, its right to hold said City funds or property, or to receive any
further deposits thereof, shall forthwith cease and determine and it shall
E. The Committee may advise appropriate agencies in the design,
development and implementation of homesteading and other property
reinvestment programs which may, from time to time, be effectuated in
the City of Oil City by such agencies.
F. The Committee may also perform such other acts, including, but not
limited to, the promulgation and implementation of rules and
regulations, as may be necessary to fulfill the duties, obligations and
administration of the provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law, as
amended, and this chapter.
§ 15-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:57
forthwith, upon demand, return to the City all funds that may then be in its
hands or possession.
Chapter 23
CIVIL SERVICE BOARD
§ 23-1. Board established; membership.
There is hereby established, appointed and constituted a civil service board,
which shall consist of three citizens of the City of Oil City, one of whom shall
be an educator in said City and one a practicing physician in said City.
§ 23-2. Appointment of Board; term. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord.
No. 2456]
Said Board shall be appointed by the City Manager with the advice and
consent of Council and shall serve for four years or until their successors
are duly elected and qualified.
§ 23-3. First members of Board; subsequent appointments.
At the first election, the Council shall elect one person to serve on said
Board for two years, one person to serve for three years and one person
to serve for four years. Upon the expiration of the term of any member of
said Board, one person shall be elected by the City Council to serve on said
Board for the term of four years.
§ 23-4. Filling of vacancies.
If any vacancies occur in said Board, they shall be filled by the City Council
for the unexpired term.
§ 23-5. Function of Board.
The Civil Service Board hereby created shall constitute the Civil Service
Board of the City of Oil City for the purpose of providing for and regulating
examinations, the matter of appointment and the manner and power of
removal of employees of the Fire Department, Police Department and
Engineering Department of the City of Oil City.
§ 23-6. Duties.
The duties of said Board shall be such as are prescribed by the Acts of
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorizing and requiring
the establishment of civil service boards in cities of the third class of the
Commonwealth.18
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 39401 et seq.
§ 19-3 OIL CITY CODE § 23-6
1:58
Chapter 28
COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4.
§ 23-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-6
1:59

ARTICLE I
Procedure Guide
§ 28-1. Scope.
A Council procedure guide prescribing meetings, submission and
enactment of ordinances and resolutions, minutes of meetings, agenda and
order of business and duties of Council and committees is hereby adopted
as follows.
§ 28-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1
1:61

ARTICLE II
Meetings
§ 28-2. Regular meetings. [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2751;
4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2762; 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2840]
Council shall hold regular meetings beginning at 4:30 p.m. on dates that are
publicly advertised in advance in accordance with other state or local laws.
This time change shall commence with the first meeting of January 2016.
§ 28-3. Executive meetings.
Executive meetings of Council with members of the administration shall be
scheduled each month at times mutually agreed upon and acceptable to
both.
§ 28-4. Special meetings.
The Mayor may and, upon request of two Councilmen, must call special
meetings of Council upon 24 hours' notice to each member, which notice
shall state whether such meeting is to be convened for special or general
business. If called for special business, only such business shall be
considered as stated in the notice. Such notice may be waived by unanimous
consent of Council.
§ 28-5. Place of meeting.
All regular meetings of Council, except in the case of emergencies or as may
be otherwise provided by Council, shall be held in the Council Chambers of
City Hall.
§ 28-6. Meetings open to public.
All regular and special meetings of Council shall be open to the public.
§ 28-7. Presiding officer.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall have
the same rights as Councilmen in the conduct of Council business.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-7
1:63

ARTICLE III
Quorum; Vacancies in Office
§ 28-8. Attendance at meetings.
Three members of Council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number
may compel the attendance of absent members under penalty of mandamus.
§ 28-9. Filling of vacancies.
If a vacancy exists in the City Council, whether as to the office of Mayor or
one or more of the other members of Council, the City Council shall, by a
majority of its remaining members, fill such vacancy in the manner provided
by general law.19
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41506(a).
§ 28-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9
1:65

ARTICLE IV
Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 28-10. Introduction.
Each ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in printed form as
provided in the order of business and shall be read and considered as
provided by general law. All ordinances and resolutions shall be properly
introduced by a member of Council and seconded by a member of Council.
§ 28-11. Form.
§ 28-12. Voting.
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by
roll call, and the ayes and nays shall be entered upon the minutes. Each
member of Council shall vote on every matter presented to Council, unless
specifically excused by Council or prevented therefrom by provisions of
general law. Unless a member of Council is excused or prevented from
voting, his failure to vote may shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
§ 28-13. Disclosure of interest by Councilman.
A member of Council who has a personal or private interest in any question,
measure or bill proposed or pending before the Council shall disclose the
fact to Council and shall not vote thereon nor take any part in the discussion
of the same. If such interested person shall vote without disclosing his
interest in such question, measure or bill, he shall be subject to penalties as
provided by general law.
§ 28-14. Signing by Mayor and City Clerk.
Every legislative act of the Council shall be by resolution or ordinance, and
every ordinance and resolution which shall have passed said Council shall
be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
A. Proposed ordinances shall be introduced to Council as Council bills.
Each Council bill and ordinance shall be numbered consecutively. All
resolutions presented to Council shall be numbered serially for the
calendar year.
B. The Council may pass ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations not
in conflict with the Constitution of the United States of America, the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Charter of
the City of Oil City.
§ 28-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-14
1:67

ARTICLE V
Minutes; Agenda; Order of Business
§ 28-15. Journal of proceedings.
A. The Council shall keep a journal of its proceedings, which shall be in the
possession of the City Clerk and which shall at all times be open to
public inspection. Upon every vote, the ayes and nays shall be called
and recorded by the recording secretary. Every motion, resolution or
ordinance shall be reduced to writing before the vote is taken thereon.
No member in attendance shall withhold his vote on any measure, bill
or question, unless the Council excuses him and enters the reason upon
the journal.
B. The minutes shall be prepared immediately following the Council
meeting and offered in writing at the next regular meeting of Council.
Approved minutes shall be maintained on serially numbered pages, and
the record of proceedings should contain the following:
(1) The name of the City of Oil City.
(2) The date and place of meeting.
(3) The kind of meeting (i.e., whether regular or special).
(4) The purpose of the meeting, if the meeting was specially called.
(5) The hour of calling the meeting to order.
(6) The name of the presiding officer.
(7) The name of the recording secretary.
(8) The names of members present and of those absent.
(9) A statement that the minutes of the past previous meeting were
read and approved or approved without reading.
(10) All main motions that were made and not withdrawn and whether
they were carried or lost, referred to committee, postponed or laid
on the table. The motion should be in the exact words of those who
made them. Each motion made and the outcome of the vote on it
should be put in a separate paragraph.
(11) All subsidiary motions adhering to the main motion, if the motion is
passed.
(12) All written reports in full. If a report is long, it should be filed, and
the minutes should contain a reference to that effect along with a
very brief statement of its nature or substance.
(13) The number of affirmative and the number of negative votes, when
voting by ayes and nays has been ordered. The vote of each
member should be recorded after his name on a membership roll.
§ 28-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-15
1:69
§ 28-16. Agenda.
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents,
petitions or other matters to be submitted to Council shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk not later than Thursday at 4:00 p.m., preceding the
weekly meeting of the Council, whereupon the City Clerk shall immediately
arrange an agenda of such matters according to the order of business. The
City Clerk shall furnish each member of Council, the Mayor and Solicitor
with a copy of the same delivered or mailed at such time as will permit each
member of Council to receive the same not less than 24 hours prior to the
time of such meeting. Also, the City Clerk shall release a copy of the agenda
no later than 9:00 a.m. on the Monday of the regular meeting of Council to
newspapers, television and radio stations.
§ 28-17. Order of business.
The order of business of Council and the consideration and disposition of
matters coming before it shall be as follows:
(14) If no formal action of any kind is taken at a meeting, the minutes
should state the fact and merely mention that there was discussion
of certain matters.
(15) The manner and exact time of adjournment.
(16) The presiding officer's signature and attested by the City Clerk.
A. Call to order.
B. Roll call.
C. Approval of minutes.
D. Revision of agenda. Council may, upon a majority vote of the members
present, amend the agenda to include any items that may be properly
brought before Council and to permit any person in attendance to
present an oral communication to Council on any matter over which
Council has control. Council shall then close the order of business with
the adoption of the agenda as is or as revised.
E. Written communications. All written communications filed with the City
Manager or City Clerk shall be introduced to the City Council by
naming the addressor, addressee and a brief statement of the subject
matter. Copies of written communications shall be made available to
Council with the presentation of the proposed agenda. Written
communications shall not be read at length unless approved by Council.
F. Current business. Under this item, Council shall consider and take
action on all matters, such as appointments to boards, commissions,
etc., and any other business not falling under any of the following
categories.
§ 28-15 OIL CITY CODE § 28-17
1:70
G. City Manager reports. The City Manager shall recommend to the City
Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or
expedient, keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the
City, make reports to the Council as requested by it, and bring before
Council any other items that he believes necessary and proper.
H. Ordinances and resolutions. Council shall consider and take action
upon all ordinances and resolutions in the manner provided by this
chapter.
I. Fiscal and contractual.
(1) Presentation of list of claim vouchers as presented to Council 24
hours in advance with agenda listing claimant, amount and
description.
(2) Request authorization to bid.
(3) Review of bids and awarding of same.
J. Persons in attendance. In order to encourage public participation and
provide for the conduct and maintenance of order during public
meetings of City Council, the following rules and regulations shall be in
effect: [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2751; 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 2754]
(1) Audience decorum. Members of the audience shall not engage in
disorderly or boisterous conduct, including the utterance of loud,
threatening or abusive language; clapping; whistling; stamping; or
other acts that disturb, disrupt, impede or otherwise render the
orderly conduct of the City Council meeting unfeasible. A member
of the audience engaging in such conduct shall, at the discretion of
the Mayor or a majority of the Council members, be subject to
removal from that meeting.
(2) Request to speak form. Residents or taxpayers of the City may
address the City Council during public comments and/or prior to
action on any agenda item; however, no person shall address the
Council without first being recognized by the Mayor. Any
nonresident or nontaxpayer of the City wishing to speak during
public comments or on a particular agenda item shall first properly
secure the permission of Council before the Mayor calls for public
comments or calls the particular agenda item.
(3) Purpose. The purpose of addressing the City Council is to
communicate formally with the Council by commenting on matters
of concern, official actions or deliberations which are or may be
before City Council prior to Council taking official action. Persons
addressing the City Council on an agenda item shall confine their
remarks to the matter under consideration by the Council.
§ 28-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-17
1:71
(4) Speaker decorum. Each person addressing the City Council shall
do so in an orderly manner and shall not engage in conduct that
disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of the
Council meeting. Any person who so disrupts the meeting shall, at
the discretion of the Mayor or a majority of the Council members,
be subject to removal from that meeting as is necessary to assure
the peaceful conduct of the Council meeting and the maintenance
of order during said meetings.
(5) Time limit. In the interest of fairness to other persons wishing to
speak and to other individuals or groups having business before the
City Council, each speaker shall limit his comments to five minutes.
If a large number of people wish to speak, this time may be
shortened by the Mayor so that the number of persons wishing to
speak may be accommodated within a reasonable time.
(6) Public comment, placement on agenda and overall time limit.
Public comment will be heard at the end of the meeting. However,
should a majority of the Council members determine that there is
not sufficient time at a Council meeting for residents or taxpayers
of the City to comment, Council may defer the comment period to
the next regular meeting or to a special meeting occurring in
advance of the next regular meeting.
(7) Speak only once. Second opportunities for the public to speak on
the same issue will not be permitted unless mandated by state or
local law.
(8) Addressing the Council. All comments are to be directed to the
Council as a body. Dialogue between and inquiries from citizens at
the lectern and individual Council members, the Mayor, members
of staff, or the seated audience is not permitted. Council members
seeking to gain additional information should direct their questions
through the Mayor.
(9) Yielding of time. It is understood that a person making a request to
speak does so on his own behalf. For this reason and to guarantee
all persons ample opportunity to be heard, all speakers will be
recognized for the same amount of time. No speaker will be
allowed to yield part or all of their time to another, and no speaker
will be credited with time requested but not used by another.
(10) Public comments.
(a) Nonagenda items. The agenda shall allow for public comment
on matters of concern which are not specifically listed on the
agenda. A member of the public, who wishes to speak under
public comments about a nonagenda item, must first secure
the permission of Council before the Mayor calls for public
comments. If permission is granted, persons may speak under
the public comments section of the agenda for a maximum of
five minutes and shall not be allowed to defer any portion of
§ 28-17 OIL CITY CODE § 28-17
1:72
their time to any other person. Since the City Code prohibits
City Council from taking action on any item not listed on
the agenda unless the Council agrees to revise the agenda in
accordance with the City Code, any item arising subsequent to
the final posting of the agenda must be appropriately added
to the revision of agenda section. Council members or staff
members may provide brief response to public comments when
recognized by the Mayor for the purpose of doing so.
(b) Agenda items. Subject to other applicable requirements, public
comment will be accepted on agenda items. Persons may speak
about an agenda item for a maximum of five minutes and will
not be allowed to defer any portion of their time to any other
person.
(11) Violation of the rules of decorum. Upon violation of the rules of
decorum established in Subsection J(1) or (4) above, the procedure
to enforce the rules shall be as follows:
(a) Warning. The Mayor shall first request that a person who is
violating the rules cease such conduct. If after receiving a
request from the Mayor the person persists in violating the
rules, the Mayor shall order a recess. Any representative of law
enforcement who is present at the meeting when the violation
occurs shall be authorized to warn the person that his or her
conduct is violating the rules and that he or she is requested to
cease such conduct. If upon resumption of the meeting the
violation persists, the Mayor shall order another recess,
whereupon the Mayor shall have the authority to ask the law
enforcement personnel to remove the person from the meeting
and/or to cite the person as being in violation of Section 5508
of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.20
(b) Motion to enforce. If the Mayor fails to enforce the rules of
decorum set forth herein, any Council member may move to
require the Mayor to do so, and an affirmative vote of a
majority of the Council shall require the Mayor to do so. If the
Mayor fails to carry out the will of the majority of the Council in
this matter, the majority may designate another Council
member to act as Mayor for the limited purpose of enforcing
the rules of decorum established herein.
(c) Clearing the room. In the event that any meeting is willfully
interrupted by a person or groups of persons so as to render
the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and order
cannot be restored by the removal of the individuals who are
willfully interrupting the meeting, City Council, by a majority
vote, may order the meeting room cleared, and the meeting
shall continue in session. Only matters appearing on the
20.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5508.
§ 28-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-17
1:73
agenda may be considered in such a session. Representatives
of the press or other news media, except those participating
in the disturbance, shall be allowed to continue to attend any
session.
(d) Violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code. Any person or
persons who intentionally violate(s) these rules of decorum or
who by their actions intend(s) to prevent or disturb a City
Council meeting may be prosecuted under Section 5508 of the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code for disrupting a lawful meeting.
Every person who violated Section 5508 of the Crimes Code is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.21
K. Adjournment.
21.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5508.
§ 28-17 OIL CITY CODE § 28-17
1:74
ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§ 28-18. Continuing nature of Council.
The Council shall be a continuous body, and it shall be lawful for any Council
to complete any unfinished business or legislation begun by the preceding
Council.
§ 28-19. Committees.
Council may, as provided in the Charter Law,22 appoint committees or
commissions of its own members or of citizens to conduct investigations
into the conduct of any officer or department or any matter relating to the
welfare of the City, and delegating to such committees or commissions such
powers of inquiry as the City Council may deem necessary.
§ 28-20. Supplementary rules.
Robert's Rules of Order shall apply in any situation not otherwise covered
by these rules of procedure.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 41501 et seq.
§ 28-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-20
1:75
Chapter 36
HEALTH BOARD
§ 36-1. Board created; statutory authority.
A Board of Health is hereby created and established in and for the City of Oil
City, Pennsylvania, to be constituted and organized under and in accordance
with the provisions of an Act of Assembly of Pennsylvania entitled "An
Act Providing for the Incorporation and Government of Cities of the Third
Class," approved the 23rd day of May, A.D., 1889, with the powers and
duties in said Act enumerated.23
Chapter 45
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
23.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 37301 et seq.
§ 28-20 OIL CITY CODE § 36-1
1:76
ARTICLE I
Oil Region Council of Governments
[Adopted 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 2461 (Ch. 15 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 45-1. Membership established.
The City of Oil City elects to become a member of the Oil Region Council of
Governments.
§ 45-2. Conditions of agreement.
The conditions of the agreement, the manner and extent of financing the
agreement, the duration of the term of the agreement and the
organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement are as
specified within the Articles of Agreement and Bylaws, which were
presented before the City of Oil City at the public meeting of April 6, 1987,
and which are set forth in Appendix A to this chapter and incorporated
herein.24
§ 45-3. Appointed representative.
The appointed representative is hereby authorized and directed to take
whatever steps are necessary, sign whatever documents are necessary and
do all things necessary to become a member of the Oil Region Council of
Governments.
§ 45-4. Annual dues.
There is hereby appropriated from the municipal treasury an amount
sufficient to pay the 1987 annual dues as determined for this municipality
under the terms of the above-mentioned agreement.
24.Editor's Note: The Articles of Agreement and the Bylaws are on file in the office of the City
Manager.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-4
1:77

ARTICLE II
Penn Prime Trust Agreement
[Adopted 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 2493 (Ch. 6 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 45-5. Membership acknowledged; conditions.
The City of Oil City hereby acknowledges membership in the Penn Prime
Trust by entering into the member participation agreement, hereinafter
"participation agreement." In accordance with the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Law, 53 P.S. § 481 et seq., this chapter sets forth the
components of the Penn Prime Trust cooperative arrangement as follows:25
A. The conditions of the participation agreement. The participation
agreement, agreement of trust, coverage provisions and bylaws of the
Penn Prime Trust, as amended from time to time, are hereby attached
and fully incorporated by reference herein as though they were part
hereof.
B. Duration of the agreement. The duration of the participation agreement
is a continuous period commencing on the effective date of this chapter
and ending on termination/cancellation.
C. Purpose and objective of the agreement. The purpose of the
participation agreement shall be to minimize the financial impact upon
the City of Oil City resulting from an occurrence covered by the trust.
This will be accomplished by means of:
(1) Loss prevention and safety programs to minimize or eliminate risks
of such accidents;
(2) Risk pooling to share with other local agencies the financial impact
of such losses; and
(3) The establishment of a mechanism through the trust to provide risk
coverage for catastrophic losses through means deemed
appropriate by the Board of Trustees of the Penn Prime Trust.
D. Manner and extent of financing the agreement. The expenses of
participating in this cooperative program will be financed through
contributions by the City of Oil City to the Penn Prime Trust and by
investment of the trust governed by the Board of Trustees.
E. Organizational structure to implement the agreement. The
participation agreement will be implemented by the use of the Penn
Prime Trust. The trust is to be administered by the Board of Trustees,
which may designate a day-to-day administrator, as established through
the provisions of the agreement of trust and the bylaws.
F. Property acquisition. The Penn Prime Trust, as administered by the
Board of Trustees, has the power, through the bylaws, to acquire, hold
25.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 45-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:79
or dispose of real or personal property. Such measures by the trust will
be carried out in accordance with the Penn Prime Trust and its bylaws.
G. Powers to contract for group insurance and employee benefits. The
Penn Prime Agreement sets forth that the Board of Trustees has the
power to enter into contracts, incur debts, liabilities and obligations in
the ordinary course of business. These powers allow the Penn Prime
Trust to enter into such contracts as allowed under 53 P.S. § 487(7) of
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law.26
26.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 45-5 OIL CITY CODE § 45-5
1:80
Chapter 49
LIBRARY
§ 45-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:81

ARTICLE I
Establishment; Library Commission
[Adopted 7-17-1901 by part of Ord. No. 50327 (Ch. 29, Art. I, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 49-1. Acceptance of site.
§ 49-2. Library Commission membership and organization.
[Amended 12-23-1927 by Ord. No. 1164; 5-28-1928 by Ord. No.
1184; 12-12-1955 by Ord. No. 1935; 8-8-1960 by Ord. No. 2048;
5-27-1963 by Ord. No. 2098; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2792]
A. The generous offer of Mr. Andrew Carnegie is hereby accepted, and the
following described lot of land is hereby accepted as a site for the free
library building to be erected thereon by money donated by Mr. Andrew
Carnegie: All that certain piece or parcel of land situate in the Fourth
Ward of the City of Oil City, in the County of Venango and State of
Pennsylvania, being Lot Nos. 2 and 3 in the plan of lots of the Latonia
Town and Oil Company, and bounded and described as follows:
beginning at the southwest corner of Central Avenue and Front Street;
thence along the south line of Front Street westward 75 feet to the
northwest corner of Lot No. 4; then south along the east line of said Lot
No. 4 132 feet to the north line of an alley; thence east along the north
line of said alley 75 feet to the west side of Central Avenue; thence
north along the west line of Central Avenue 132 feet to the place of
beginning.
B. Said lot of land is to be conveyed to the City of Oil City, free of
encumbrance by the trustees who now hold the title for that purpose, by
deed of even date with the approval of this article, to be used as the site
for said free library building.
A. A commission to be known as the "Oil City Library Commission" is
hereby created, which shall hereafter consist of no less than seven and
no more than 15 voting members, comprised as follows:
(1) One or two members of the Council of the City of Oil City, as
determined by the City Council, shall be elected annually by the
membership of the Council, to serve for a term of two years.
(2) Two members of the Belles Lettres Club in accordance with the
bylaws of said club. One member shall be appointed biannually, and
each member shall serve for a term of four years.
(3) Three members to be appointed by the City Manager of the City of
Oil City from the citizens at large of the City of Oil City, with City
Council approval. One member per year shall be appointed to serve
a three-year term. Upon the resignation of any member appointed
27.Editor's Note: Some sections of this ordinance have been excluded as having served their
purpose or having been superseded. The excluded sections are Sections 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:83
from the citizens at large of the City of Oil City, the City Manager
shall appoint their successors for the duration of the remaining
term.
(4) One member to be appointed by each municipality paying an
annual residential fee based on the census and determined by the
Library Commission on a yearly basis, if one is desired by the
governmental entity. The appointed member must be from the
citizens at large within the municipality's taxing area and will serve
for a term of two years or until no longer a resident of that
governmental taxing area.
(5) In the event that the County of Venango or the Oil City Area School
District participates in funding of library services in an amount at
least equal to the total of participating municipalities other than
the City of Oil City, it shall be entitled to appoint a member to the
Commission to a two-year term.
(6) One at-large Library Commissioner may be appointed from any of
the contributing municipalities to a two-year term on the Library
Commission upon a 2/3 vote of the Library Commissioners and the
approval of the City Manager.
(7) Up to two nonvoting members to serve in an advisory, fully
participatory and supporting role may be appointed to represent
library supporters in adjoining nonparticipating municipalities for a
two-year term upon a 2/3 vote of the Library Commission and the
approval of the City Manager. Such nonvoting members must be an
Oil City Library circulation card holder (member).
B. In order to effect the reorganization of the Commission in accordance
with the provisions of this section, the appointments of the present
acting members (two from City Council, two from the Belles Lettres
Club and three Oil City residents) shall continue to serve as members of
the Library Commission until such time as their current terms expire.
C. Forthwith, upon enactment of this section, any new members to the
Library Commission, as hereinabove provided, appointed from a
governmental entity paying an annual residential fee and any special
project library commission shall be accepted and voted on at the first
quarterly meeting of each year.
D. The Library Commission shall keep a full and complete record of all of
its proceedings and expenditures and make an annual report, in written
form, to the governmental entities represented on the Commission by
the first meeting of April of each year. It shall also make such reports to
the Council of the City of Oil City as may be required by the City
Manager or by resolution of the Council of the City of Oil City.
§ 49-2 OIL CITY CODE § 49-2
1:84
ARTICLE II
Administration
[Adopted 3-17-1986 by Ord. No. 2444 (Ch. 29, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 49-3. Personnel.
§ 49-4. Appropriation and disbursement of funds.
A. All employees engaged in the operation of the Oil City Library, both in
the library science and in the building and facilities maintenance areas
of said operation, shall be employees of the City of Oil City and shall be
subject to all administrative rules, regulations and practices of the City.
B. In accordance with the Administrative Code of the City of Oil City,28 the
City Manager, after consultation with the Library Commission, shall
appoint, supervise and have the authority to remove the Library
Director.
C. The Library Director shall have the authority to appoint, supervise and
remove all employees engaged either in the library science and building
and facilities maintenance areas of the Library operation, subject to the
authority of the City Manager and the personnel and civil service
regulations of the City.
A. The City shall appropriate annually from its general revenues such
sums as it deems appropriate for the necessary operation of the Library.
The Library Commission shall submit its budget proposal to the City
Manager on or before October 1 of each year.
B. Disbursements from the Library operation budget shall be made by the
City to cover expenses incurred and purchases made in the operation of
the Library, as follows:
(1) Wages and salaries of employees.
(2) Materials and supplies necessary for the business operation of the
Library.
(3) Materials, supplies and utilities necessary for the maintenance of
the building.
C. The Library Commission shall establish a library books, materials and
maintenance fund and deposit therein all funds, donations and
revenues derived from the operation of the Library. Disbursements
from the fund shall be made in such manner as the Library Commission
may determine in accordance with its bylaws, and the Library Director
shall furnish the City Manager a monthly report of the fund's receipts
and expenditures.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government, § 4-6.
§ 49-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-4
1:85
§ 49-5. Use of library facilities.
The Library Commission shall determine the use to be made of the Library
building and shall establish rules and regulations for the use of the facilities.
D. All expenditures of $4,000 or more shall be made only in accordance
with the purchasing provisions of the Administrative Code.29
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government, § 4-36.
§ 49-4 OIL CITY CODE § 49-5
1:86
Chapter 53
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS
CHANNEL ADVISORY BOARD
§ 53-1. Advisory Board.
A. Creation. There is hereby created a body known as the Oil City PEG
Channel Advisory Board ("the Board"), which shall act solely as an
advisory body to City Council and the City Manager with regard to the
optimal use of the PEG channel(s) on the cable system in the City. In its
advisory capacity, the Board shall endeavor to promote and develop the
best use by the City of its PEG channel(s).
B. Composition and terms. There shall be appointed no less than seven
and no more than nine members to the Board as follows:
(1) Members of the Board shall serve thereon without pay.
(2) Membership of the Board shall be composed of a resident
representative of the Venango College of Clarion University of
Pennsylvania, a resident representative of the Oil City Area School
District, a representative of City Council of the City of Oil City, a
resident representative of the industrial business sector, a resident
representative of the retail/commercial business sector, a resident
representative of the arts community and no less than one and no
more than three at-large resident representatives from the City of
Oil City.
(a) Each resident representative member shall be appointed by
the City Manager with the advice and consent of the City
Council of the City of Oil City.
(b) A member shall be deemed to have resigned from the Board
and shall no longer participate in any manner thereon when
the member's residence is no longer within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Oil City or upon missing more than
three consecutive meetings of the Board, absent good cause
for doing so.
(c) Following the creation of the Board, the duration of initial
appointments shall be as follows: three members shall serve
for two years, two members shall serve for three years, two
members shall serve for four years and two members shall
serve for five years. The duration of initial appointments shall
be decided by lot at the first scheduled meeting of the Board.
Each subsequent appointment to the Board shall be for a term
of five years.
§ 49-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-1
1:87
§ 53-2. Meetings and procedure.
§ 53-3. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board shall have the following specific functions.
(3) A chairperson and vice chairperson of the Board shall be elected by
a roll-call vote of a majority of the members appointed and voting at
the first scheduled meeting of the Board.
(a) The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson so elected shall serve
for a term of one year from the date of their election.
Thereafter, a new Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be
elected by the Board members on the anniversary of the initial
Board meeting.
(b) A vacancy in the position of Chairperson and/or Vice
Chairperson of the Board shall be filled by a roll-call vote of a
majority of the members appointed and voting at the meeting
called for that purpose.
(4) Vacancies on the Board, whether by reason of resignation or
otherwise, shall be filled by the City Manager with the advice and
consent of City Council of the City of Oil City. The member
appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the duration of the
vacated term.
(5) In addition to members of the Board appointed as herein before
outlined, the City Manager shall be a nonvoting member of the
Board.
(a) The City Manager shall not serve as the Chairperson of the
Board.
(6) Neither the current cable franchisee or the current operator of the
City's PEG channel(s), nor any of their agents, servants, employees
or their families, nor any of their subsidiaries, parent or affiliated
corporations and organizations or any of their agents, servants,
employees or members of their families, nor any person with any
financial interest in any agreement awarding a franchise or
operating contract in accordance herewith, shall be appointed as a
member of the Board by Council.
A. Any action to be taken by the Board shall require the concurrence of a
simple majority of the members of the Board present and voting. If
action is taken without a quorum being present, any member may, at
the next regularly scheduled meeting, request reconsideration of such
action.
B. Minutes of Board meetings or records of any Board actions shall be
prepared, preserved and made available for public inspection in the
office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.
§ 53-1 OIL CITY CODE § 53-3
1:88
A. Review and evaluate prospective proposals for PEG channel operator(s)
submitted in response to a request for proposals thereto and make
recommendations to Council and the City Manager regarding the
selection of the operator(s).
B. With regard to the renegotiation of the City's cable franchise
agreement, make recommendations to Council and the City Manager in
regard to any proposed changes which would prove beneficial to the
operation of the City's PEG channel(s).
C. Advise Council and the City Manager regarding general policies
relating to PEG channel programming, funding, equipment, use of
volunteer staffing, promotion, relationships with other organizations
and outreach to residents and organizations within the channel's local
viewing area.
D. Work with the PEG channel operator(s) and provide advice and
direction on the channel's day-to-day operations and impact and
acceptance by local viewers and sponsors.
E. Develop and implement, together with the City Manager and the
channel operator(s), a plan consisting of shorter-term goals and
objectives for the channel's return to the airwaves and monitor
progress on implementing this plan.
F. Develop and implement, together with the City Manager and the
channel operator(s), a long-range business plan for the channel's
continued viability which includes evaluations of multimedia
distribution platforms, website development and joint ventures and
strategic partnerships.
G. Advise Council and the City Manager as to how the PEG channel(s) can
be effectively utilized as an economic development and promotional tool
for residential, commercial, industrial, tourism and arts-related
development.
H. Advise Council and the City Manager on both the viability and
advisability of establishing a second PEG channel.
I. Make an annual report to Council which discusses the Board's activities
and accomplishments throughout the previous year and an operational
plan for the upcoming year.
J. Report to Council and the City Manager on matters which may
constitute violations of PEG channel operating agreements.
K. The Board may appear before Council in accordance with Council's
direction and in accordance with its rules and proceedings before
Council on matters pertaining to PEG channel services and
communications.
(1) The Board shall meet at least bimonthly but may meet more often
via special meetings should the need arise. Special meetings may
§ 53-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:89
§ 53-4. Board comment and review of City action.
Council shall not pass any proposed resolution or ordinance relating to
Board functions identified in § 53-3 above without referring same to the
Board for review. The office of the City Clerk shall provide reasonable
assistance to the Board in its review of such proposed resolutions or
ordinances. If the Board fails to act within 45 days of receipt of such
referral, the Board will be deemed to have approved the resolution or
ordinance. The review period may be shortened if Council declares that an
urgent reason exists requiring earlier Board action.
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
be called by the Chairperson in accordance with the Board's and
the City's requirements for special meetings.
(2) All meetings of the Board shall be posted and open to the public.
L. Adopt rules and regulations governing its meetings and other activities.
M. Request comments and suggestions regarding PEG channel services or
communications.
N. Perform other advisory functions as Council may direct.
§ 53-3 OIL CITY CODE § 53-4
1:90
ARTICLE I
Board of Trustees of Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund
[Adopted 9-28-1987 by Ord. No. 2466 (Ch. 41, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 55-1. Board of Trustees.
There is hereby established, pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act (Act No. 205 of 1984,
Public Law 1005, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., hereafter "Act"), a board of
trustees to be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive
Municipal Pension Trust Fund" to establish a trust fund to be known as the
"Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund" and to invest and otherwise
manage the assets of said fund in accordance with the requirements of the
Act.
§ 55-2. Membership of Board.
The Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund
shall consist of seven members to be determined according to the
requirements of the Act. The Mayor, City Manager, Councilperson and City
Controller shall be members of the Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive
Municipal Pension Trust Fund. Three members shall be appointed by the
City Manager, subject to the approval of City Council, from the managing
board of the City's various pension plans. The remaining three members
shall consist of one representative of the active membership of each pension
plan included in the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund, which
representative shall be elected by the active membership of each respective
pension plan.
§ 55-3. Terms of Board members; vacancies.
Each appointed member of the Board shall serve for a term of four years,
provided that the member continues to hold a position on the managing
board of one of the City's pension plans. Any vacancies created by the
resignation, death or removal of an appointed member shall be filled by
appointment of the City Manager, subject to the approval of Council, for the
unexpired portion of that appointed member's term. Each elected member
of the Board shall serve for a term of four years. Any vacancies created by
the resignation, death or removal of an elected member shall be filled by a
special election of the active membership of the applicable pension plan for
the unexpired portion of the elected member's term.
§ 55-4. Compensation of Board members.
Members of the Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive Municipal Pension
Trust Fund shall serve without compensation. This provision, however, shall
not be deemed to prevent reimbursement for proper expenses incurred in
the performance of a Trustee's duties and approved by the Board.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:91
§ 55-5. Quorum.
A majority of the seven members of the Board of Trustees of the
Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of any business or the decision of any matters within its
jurisdiction, and the majority of such quorum shall be sufficient to decide.
§ 55-6. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board of Trustees of the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund,
acting by a quorum of its members, shall have the following powers and
duties:
§ 55-7. Interpretation.
This article shall be construed in accordance with the Municipal Pension
Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.
A. To establish a trust fund to be known as the "Comprehensive Municipal
Pension Trust Fund" to receive and to act as a repository for the assets
amassed by the City's various pension plans and from which the
payment of pension benefits and pension administrative costs shall
henceforth be paid in accordance with the procedures established in
Subsection C below.
B. To invest and manage the assets of the Comprehensive Municipal
Pension Trust Fund and to account for the individual interests of the
various pension plans in said trust fund.
C. To establish procedures, in accordance with applicable law, to provide
access by various pension plans to their respective interests in the trust
fund for the payment of benefits and administrative expenses
associated with each plan and to facilitate the payment and/or deposit
of contributions to the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund.
D. To contract for investment and consulting services.
E. To assess reasonable administrative expenses of the Board of Trustees
of the Comprehensive Municipal Pension Trust Fund against the assets
of the fund.
F. To exercise and perform any and all other powers granted and duties
prescribed under the Act.
§ 55-5 OIL CITY CODE § 55-7
1:92
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 7-22-1968 by Ord. No. 2197 (Ch. 41, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 55-8. Fund established.
A Police Pension and Retirement Fund shall be and the same is hereby
established by the City of Oil City, which shall be known and designated as
the "Police Pension Fund" and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "fund."
§ 55-9. Creation of Police Pension Fund Board.
The direction of the fund shall be and is hereby committed, subject to the
regulations herein contained and such other regulations as Council may
by ordinance hereafter, from time to time, prescribe, to a board which
is hereby created and which shall be known as the "Police Pension Fund
Board" and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Board."
§ 55-10. Members of Board; terms of office.
A. The Board shall consist of seven members, viz.:
(1) The Mayor of the City of Oil City, who shall be ex officio Chairman
thereof and whose membership on said Board shall be concurrent
with his term of office as Mayor.
(2) The City Manager, whose membership on said Board shall be
concurrent with his term of office as City Manager. [Amended
3-26-1979 by Ord. No. 2368]
(3) A member of City Council appointed by the Mayor, who shall be ex
officio Treasurer thereof and whose membership on said Board
shall be concurrent with his term of office as Councilman.
[Amended 3-26-1979 by Ord. No. 2368]
(4) The City Controller, whose membership on said Board shall be
concurrent with his term of office as City Controller.
(5) Three duly appointed, confirmed and active members of the police
force of the City of Oil City elected in a manner approved by
Council by and from the members of the Police Pension Fund
Association, hereinafter created, who are entitled to participate in
the fund created hereby, one of whom shall serve for one year, one
for two years and one for three years, and whose successors shall
be elected for a term of three years. A vacancy occurring during a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the election of a
successor in the same manner as his predecessor.
B. The Council shall also, by resolution, appoint one or more of its
members, as the case may be, to serve upon the Pension Fund Board for
such periods of time as Council, by said resolution, shall so direct, not
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-10
1:93
§ 55-11. Compensation; reimbursement of expenses.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and shall be
reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures, and no member
shall suffer loss of salary or wages through serving on the Board.
§ 55-12. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board may from time to time, subject to the limitations of this article
and of law:
§ 55-13. Meetings, records and reports of Board.
The Board shall, subject to the limitations of this article and of law:
to exceed, however, said Councilman's term of office. [Added
6-12-1972 by Ord. No. 2263]
A. Adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the fund and the
transaction of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article or any supplement or amendment thereto duly enacted. All such
rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the approval of
Council, and Council may from time to time, by ordinance, alter, modify,
change or repeal such rules and regulations and establish new rules
and regulations for the administration of the fund by the Board and the
transaction of its business.
B. Appoint a Secretary and such medical, clerical and other employees as
may be necessary.
C. Determine and fix the compensation of all persons employed by the
Board.
D. Care for, manage, invest and dispose of (as part of the fund) all money
or property, real, personal or mixed, taken by the City of Oil City by gift,
grant, devise or bequest in trust for the benefit of such pension fund,
subject to the provisions of this article and future regulations by
Council, and subject to such directions not inconsistent herewith as the
donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
A. Hold a meeting at least once annually at a time and place selected by
the Board and prepare or cause to be prepared an annual report stating
the conditions of the investments of the fund and evidencing the
receipts, which report shall be made a part of the record of said
proceedings, and a copy of which shall be filed with the Council of the
City of Oil City. [Amended 3-26-1979 by Ord. No. 2368]
B. Hold such special meetings as the efficient discharge of its duties may
require, and the Chairman may, upon the request of three members of
the Board, in writing, call a special meeting of the Board on 24 hours'
notice to each member, which notice shall state whether such meeting
§ 55-10 OIL CITY CODE § 55-13
1:94
§ 55-14. Creation of Police Pension Fund Association.
§ 55-15. Powers and duties of Association.
The members of the Association shall, subject to the limitations of this
article and of law:
is to be convened for general or special business; such notice may be
waived by the unanimous consent of the members.
C. At the annual meeting, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, designate
a depository or depositories for the fund, which designation shall be
valid for the period of one year or until such time as another is
designated by similar action, and the Treasurer of the Board shall, upon
the designation of the depository, immediately deposit all moneys in the
fund therein in the name of the fund.
D. Keep all permanent records and accounts and perform all duties as
shall be necessary for the efficient execution of this article.
E. Furnish to Council such financial and other reports as it may, from time
to time, request.
A. An association is hereby constituted and created which shall be known
and designated as the "Police Pension Fund Association," herein
referred to as the "Association."
B. The membership of the Association shall consist of each regular fulltime
member of the police force now employed by the City and such
persons hereafter employed as regular full-time members of the police
force. [Amended 10-13-2011 by Ord. No. 280430,31]
C. Each member of the police force hereafter employed shall, at the time
of admission to membership in the Association, contribute to the fund in
accordance with this article from the date of his or her employment as a
member of the police force.
A. Adopt rules and regulations for the administration and transaction of its
business.
B. Elect officers in accordance with established rules and regulations to
represent the Association.
C. Certify to the Board annually a list of the members of the Association in
good standing and the amount of salaries and wages paid to each
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsection C, regarding the Police
Pension Plan, which immediately followed this Subsection.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provides that: Any active member of the police force
who had been precluded from membership in the Association as a result of the prior
Subsection B or C shall immediately become a member of the Association upon payment
of the contributions which would otherwise have been due and owing under the terms of
the Police Pension Plan if said member contributions had not otherwise previously been
made.
§ 55-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-15
1:95
§ 55-16. Expulsion from Association.
member as a member of the police force of the City, together with a list
of members of the Association who were, during said year, dismissed or
who resigned or terminated their service and the date thereof.
D. Furnish to the Board and Council, upon request, such information
relative to the subject of this article as the Board or Council shall
require.
A. Expulsion by members.
(1) A members of the Association may be expelled from membership
and deprived of his right of participation in the fund by a 2/3 vote of
the members of the Association for one or more of the following
causes:
(a) Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor under the laws of the
United States or any state or commonwealth.
(b) Becoming a habitual drunkard.
(c) Failing to comply with the provisions of this article or any
supplements or amendments thereto or any general
regulations adopted pursuant hereto relating to the
management of the fund or the transaction of the business of
the Association.
(2) No member of the Association shall be expelled pursuant to this
section nor deprived of his right to participate in the fund without
due notice and full hearing, at which he shall be afforded the
opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by counsel if
he so desires. In every such case, a written complaint shall be filed
with the Association by a member of the Association or some officer
of the City of Oil City and, promptly thereafter, a day for hearing
shall be fixed by the President of the Association, notice of which
hearing and of the filing of the complaint shall be given to each
member of the Board and each member of the Association,
including the person or persons complained of, by mail addressed
to each of their respective post office addresses at least five days
prior to the time fixed for hearing.
B. Expulsion by Board.
(1) A member of the Association may likewise be deprived of his right
of participation in the fund by a majority vote decision of the
members of the Board for one or more of the following causes:
(a) Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor under the laws of the
United States or commonwealth.
(b) Becoming a habitual drunkard.
§ 55-15 OIL CITY CODE § 55-16
1:96
§ 55-17. City contributions to fund.
The City of Oil City shall annually, on or before the first day of June of each
year, appropriate and pay into the fund a sum of money sufficient to meet
the requirements of and to maintain such police fund, which sum in no year
shall be less than 1/2 of 1% of all City taxes levied by the City, other than
taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of the City or any part
thereof.
§ 55-18. Association member contributions to fund.
(c) Failing to comply with the provisions of this article or any
supplements or amendments thereto or any general
regulations adopted pursuant hereto relating to the
management of the fund or the transaction of the business of
the Association.
(2) No member of the Association shall be expelled pursuant to this
section nor deprived of his right to participate in the fund without
due notice and full hearing, at which he shall be afforded the
opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by counsel if
he so desires. In every such case, a written complaint shall be filed
with the Board by a member of the Association or a taxpayer of the
City of Oil City and, promptly thereafter, a day for hearing shall be
fixed by the President of the Board, notice of which hearing and of
the filing of the complaint shall be given to each member of the
Board and each member of the Association, including the person or
persons complained of, by mail addressed to each of their
respective post office addresses at least five days prior to the time
fixed for hearing. All such hearings shall be open to the public.
A. Each member of the Association shall contribute to the fund monthly,
until retirement, a sum equal to 3% of his monthly wage or salary.
B. The payment of the monthly sum or contribution herein provided for by
members of the Association shall cease and determine at the time the
member receives the pension hereafter provided for.
C. Each member of the police force of the City of Oil City, by applying for
membership in the Association, shall authorize the City to deduct the
payments to be made under this section semimonthly from his or her
monthly wage or salary and to pay the amount so deducted for and on
behalf of such member to the Board herein created for said fund.
D. Should any member of the Association become partially or totally
disabled in the course of his employment as an active member of the
Police Department of the City of Oil City and receive workers'
compensation as a result of the injuries so sustained and no wages or
salary from the City of Oil City, no deduction from such payments of
compensation shall be made from said member during the period
during which he receives only workers' compensation payments, nor
§ 55-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-18
1:97
§ 55-19. Payments to be made from fund moneys.
Payments of pensions or allowances under this article shall be made solely
out of the moneys and property in the Police Pension Fund and shall not be
a charge on any other fund in the treasury of the City or under its control.
§ 55-20. Maintenance of fund moneys required.
§ 55-21. Benefits.
shall any contributions by such member to the fund be required during
such period.
A. There shall at all times be maintained in the fund property or moneys in
a sum sufficient to repay in full to all members of the Police Department
of the City of Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to
participate therein, or their estates, as herein provided, the amount of
their total contributions out of salary or wages into the fund, and no
person shall be entitled to payments of pension except out of property
or moneys in excess of said sum.
B. If at any time the excess over the amount required to repay to the then
members of the fund, or their estates, the amount of their contributions
into the fund be insufficient to pay in full all pensions which may then
be due and payable, such excess shall be apportioned among all of the
members then entitled to pension in accordance with the amount of
pension due them respectively, and during any such period or periods
the amount of pension payable to such persons shall be abated
proportionately.
A. Retirement.
(1) Each member of the Association at any time after he or she shall
have served for 20 years as an active member of the police force of
the City of Oil City shall, upon application, be retired from service;
and after said date, the Board shall, subject to the limitations and
restrictions herein contained, pay said member from the fund
during the remainder of his or her natural life, in monthly
installments, an annual pension in a sum equal to 50% of the annual
pay of such member, computed at the monthly rate of such member
at the date of his retirement or at the highest average annual salary
which the member received during any five years of service
preceding the date of retirement, whichever shall be the higher;
provided, however, that except as to service increments the
payments so made shall not in any case exceed in any one year 1/2
of the annual pay of such member computed at such monthly or
average annual rate, whichever is the higher. [Amended
3-26-1979 by Ord. No. 2368; 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2570;
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 2624]
§ 55-18 OIL CITY CODE § 55-21
1:98
(2) Each member retired herein shall be subject to service from time to
time as a police reserve until unfitted for such service, when he
may be finally retired by reason of age or disability.
(3) Each member of the Association who is a member of the
Association at the time he attains the age of 70 years and shall have
served for 20 years as an active member of the police force of the
City of Oil City shall, upon attaining the age of 70 years, be retired
from service and shall, subject to the limitations and restrictions
herein contained, receive from the fund during the remainder of his
or her natural life in monthly installments an annual pension in an
amount equal to 50% of the annual pay of such member, computed
at the monthly rate of such member at the date of his retirement or
at the highest average annual salary which the member received
during any five years of service preceding the date of retirement,
whichever shall be the higher; provided, however, that except as to
service increments the payments so made shall not in any case
exceed in any one year 1/2 the annual pay of such member
computed at such monthly or average annual rate, whichever is the
higher. [Amended 3-26-1979 by Ord. No. 2368; 3-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 2570]
(4) No person shall be entitled to the payments of pension under this
section at any time or during any period that the principal of the
fund, and the accumulated interest thereon, shall be insufficient to
repay in full to all the members of the Police Department of the City
of Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to
participate therein, or their estates, as herein provided, the amount
of their total contributions out of salary or wages into the fund.
(5) If at any time the excess of said fund over and above that required
to repay contributions to the members of the Police Department of
the City of Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled
to participate therein, or their estates, is insufficient to pay in full
all pensions which may then be due and payable, such excess shall
be apportioned among all of the persons then entitled to pensions
in proportion to the amount of pension due them respectively, and
all pensions then due and payable shall be abated proportionately.
B. Service increment. In addition to the retirement allowance hereinabove
provided for, and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon
such retirement allowances and upon contributions, every contributor
who shall become entitled to the retirement allowance shall also be
entitled to the payment of a service increment in accordance with and
subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth:
(1) Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the
number of whole years after having served the minimum required
by this article during which a contributor has been employed by the
City and paid out of the City treasury and multiplying said number
of years so computed by an amount equal to 1/40 of the retirement
§ 55-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-21
1:99
allowance which has become payable to such contributor in
accordance with the provisions of this article. In computing the
service increment, no employment after the contributor has
reached the age of 65 years shall be included, and no service
increment shall be paid on excess of $100 per month.
(2) Each contributor shall, in the future and retroactively to August 7,
1967, or to the date of the commencement of his employment as a
member of the Police Department, whichever is later, pay into the
retirement fund a monthly sum in addition to his or her retirement
contribution, which shall be equal to 1/2 of 1% of his or her salary,
provided that such payment shall not exceed the sum of $1 per
month, and provided that such service increment contribution shall
not be paid after a contributor has reached the age of 65 years.
(3) Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and
in the same manner as retirement contributions and may be
withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the
employment of the City, subject to the same conditions by which
retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons who
retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.
C. Widows.
(1) In addition to the payments authorized to be made hereunder and
notwithstanding the limitation placed thereon, the widow of a
member of the Association, or if she survives and subsequently dies
or remarries, then the child or children under the age of 18 of a
member of the Association who has less than 10 years of service
and who dies or is killed on or after the effective date of this article
shall, during her lifetime or so long as she does not remarry in the
case of a widow or until reaching the age of 18 years in the case of
a child or children (in the case of children said pension shall be
distributed equally among those surviving and qualifying), be
entitled to receive a pension of 25% of his annual compensation.
[Amended 5-7-1973 by Ord. No. 2280]
(2) The widow of a member of the Association or a member who retires
on pension, or if no widow survives or if she survives and
subsequently dies or remarries, then the child or children under
the age of 18 of a member of the Association who has 10 full years
of service or more or a member who retires on pension who dies or
is killed on or after the effective date of this article shall, during her
lifetime or so long as she does not remarry in the case of a widow or
until reaching the age of 18 years in the case of a child or children
(in the case of children, said pension to be distributed equally
among those surviving and qualifying), be entitled to receive a
pension of 50% of his annual compensation in the case of a member
who dies or is killed while in the service or the pension the member
was receiving in case of member retired on pension. [Amended
5-7-1973 by Ord. No. 2280]
§ 55-21 OIL CITY CODE § 55-21
1:100
(3) Each contributor shall, in the future and retroactively to August 7,
1967, or to the date of the commencement of his employment as a
member of the Police Department, whichever is later, pay into the
retirement fund a monthly sum in addition to his or her retirement
contribution and service increment contribution which shall be
equal to 1% of his salary.
(4) Widow's pension contribution shall be paid at the same time and in
the same manner as retirement contributions and may be
withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the
employment of the City before they become entitled to a pension
hereunder, and in the event that the member is killed in the service,
leaving no widow to survive him and no child or children eligible to
receive payments, the total of the widow's pension contributions
paid into the fund by said member shall be paid to the estate of the
deceased member.
D. Optional military time. [Added 11-30-1988 by Ord. No. 2481;
amended 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 2624; 8-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2832]
(1) A member of the Association is hereby granted an option which
must be exercised in writing within six months after the member
has successfully completed his or her probationary employment
period, attaining status as a full-time employee and has become a
member of the Association.
The aforementioned request will be made in writing to send to
the Police Pension Fund Board, in care of the City Manager of the
City of Oil City, 21 Seneca Street, Oil City, PA 16301, requesting
a computation of the required contribution. The amount of the
required contribution shall then be computed upon the evidence
submitted with said request, evidencing full-time active duty
service in the United States Armed Forces, rendered prior to the
member's employment with the City of Oil City Police Department.
Any current member who has not previously utilized the option to
purchase pension credit for military service will have 12 months
from the date of passage of this article to invoke his or her rights
under this section.
After being sent a notice of the required amount of the
contribution to effect purchase, a member of the Association must
pay the full amount of the required contribution to effectively
conclude a purchase of the additional service time for the purpose
of computing pension benefits.
The required contribution shall be computed by computing the
sum of the amount of a patrolman's contribution added to the
amount of the City's contribution during the years the full-time
active duty military service occurred.
§ 55-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-21
1:101
For the purposes of retirement from service, a member of the
Association who has made the required contribution or purchase
to the pension fund shall thereafter be entitled to add his or
her years of eligible service with the City as a member of the
police force, the number of years of military service for which said
required contribution of purchase has been made, not to exceed
three years of such military service. The member shall be entitled
to use any military time purchased hereunder as credit towards
his or her minimum service obligation as an active member of
the police force with a combined minimum service of 20 years,
for the purposes of retirement under City Code, Police Pension,
§ 55-21D(1).
(2) The right or option hereby granted shall be personal to a member
of the Association and may not be elected or effected by a payment
or contribution by any person other than the member of the
Association electing to effect said purchase as provided under this
section of this article.
E. Limited vested benefit. [Added 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 2571]
(1) Each member of the association may, before completing the
minimum age and minimum period of continuous service
requirements but after having completed 12 years of full-time
service, be entitled to vest his or her retirement benefits, subject to
the following conditions:
(a) The member must file with the Board a written notice of his or
her intention to vest;
(b) The member must include in the notice the date the member
intends to terminate his or her service as a full-time police
officer;
(c) The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the
date of notice to vest;
(d) The member must be in good standing with the Department on
the date of notice to vest; and
(e) The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of said notice to vest
or the highest average annual salary which the member
received during any five years of service preceding said date,
whichever is higher.
(2) Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued his or her full-time
employment with the Department, the member shall notify the
Board, in writing, that the member desires to collect his or her
pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled
to receive under this section shall be computed as follows:
§ 55-21 OIL CITY CODE § 55-21
1:102
(a) The initial determination of the member's base retirement
benefits shall be computed on the salary indicated on the
notice to vest; and
(b) The portion of the base retirement benefits due the member
shall be determined by applying to the base amount the
percentage that his or her years of service actually rendered
bears to the years of service which would have been rendered
had the member continued to be employed by the Department
until his or her minimum retirement date.
F. Cost-of-living adjustments (COLA). [Added 9-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2653; amended 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2679]
(1) Monthly benefit increase. Members who, as of January 1, 1999,
have been retired at least five years, but less than 10 years, are
awarded an increase in their current monthly benefit equal to $25
per month; members who, as of January 1, 1999, have been retired
10 years but less than 15 years are awarded an increase in their
current monthly benefit equal to $50 per month; members who, as
of January 1, 1999, have been retired 15 years, but less than 20
years, are awarded an increase in their current monthly benefit
equal to $75 per month; members who, as of January 1, 1999, have
been retired 20 years, but less than 30 years, are awarded an
increase in their current monthly benefit equal to $150 per month;
and members who, as of January 1, 1999, have been retired 30
years or more are awarded an increase in their current monthly
benefit equal to $300 per month. These cost-of-living increases
shall be offset by any other COLA(s) awarded to these retirees
either by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other entity,
including the City of Oil City.
(2) Annual cost-of-living adjustments. An annual cost-of-living
adjustment (COLA) shall be made to all members who have retired
after a minimum of 20 years of active service, excluding members
that are retired on a disability pension, in which case the minimum
years of active service shall not apply. That adjustment shall be
equal to and upon the release of the percentage increase in the
United States Department of Labor's CPI for the preceding year,
with a maximum cap on such increase of 4.0% per year. There shall
be an additional restriction that no increase shall allow the pension
amount of any retiree to exceed 1/2 of the current salary being paid
to a police officer of the highest pay grade. There shall also be a cap
on the cumulative increases of the COLA equal to 50% of the
original monthly benefit of each retiree. In the event that the
minimum municipal obligation (MMO) calculation as required
under Pennsylvania Act 205 of 1984 as prepared by the City's Chief
Administrative Officer and accepted by City Council indicates that
a contribution to the Police Pension Plan is required after
application of member contributions, there will be a suspension of
the COLA increases until the subsequent MMO calculation
§ 55-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-21
1:103
§ 55-22. Disability pension. [Amended 7-12-1971 by Ord. No. 2249;
5-7-1973 by Ord. No. 2280; 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2570]
indicates that no contribution is required. If a suspension of the
COLA increases is required, such suspension shall be effective
beginning January 1 of the year following the preparation and
acceptance of the MMO calculation. Likewise, COLA increases
shall again become effective on January 1 of the year following the
preparation and acceptance of the MMO calculation that indicates
that no contribution is required. In the event that a COLA
suspension is necessary, the Police Pension Board shall be notified
in writing of that circumstance. All costs associated with the
calculation and administration of this COLA provision will be borne
by the fund. [Amended 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2682]
A. Definition. As used in this section, "total disability" shall mean
permanent mental or physical impairment which renders the police
officer unable to perform his duties.
B. Work-related disability benefits.
(1) Any police officer who dies or becomes totally disabled due to
injuries sustained in the line of duty shall be deemed to be fully
vested in the Police Pension Fund, regardless of the annual number
of years of credited service and shall be eligible for immediate
retirement benefits.
(2) Claims under this section shall be decided by the governing body of
the City. Proof of disability shall be competent medical evidence
provided by the claimant. The governing body of the City may at
any time have the claimant examined by its own physician.
(3) Claims under this section may be brought as the regulations of the
City Council prescribe. Hearings and appeals shall be as provided
in Title 2 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes (relating to
administrative law and procedure).
(4) The Pension Fund shall be subrogated to the right of the claimant
to the extent of any payments made under the Act of June 2, 1915
(P.L. 736, No. 338), known as the "Pennsylvania Workmen's
Compensation Act."32
C. Non-work-related disability benefits. Any police officer who has less
than 10 years of service and who dies or is totally disabled due to
injuries or mental incapacities not in the line of duty and is unable to
perform the duties of a police officer shall be entitled to a pension of
25% of his annual compensation. For death or injuries received after 10
years of service, the compensation shall be 50% of his annual
compensation.
32.Editor's Note: See now the Workers' Compensation Reform Act of 1997, Title 77 of the
Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated.
§ 55-21 OIL CITY CODE § 55-22
1:104
§ 55-23. Refunds.
D. Payment of benefits. The disability pension shall be payable to the
police officer during his lifetime, and if he shall die, the pension
payment that he is receiving shall be continued to be paid to his spouse
if such person survives or, if such person subsequently dies or
remarries, then the child or children under the age of 18 years of the
police officer.
E. Proof of total and permanent disability shall consist of the sworn
statements of three practicing physicians of the City of Oil City,
designated by the Board to examine the member, to the effect that such
member is in a permanent condition of health which will wholly and
permanently disable him from performing the duties of a police officer,
and each member making application for such pension shall submit to
examination by three physicians designated by the Board before
consideration shall be given to his application by the Board. The Board
may, in its discretion, require proof in addition to the sworn statements
of the three physicians designated by it.
A. If a member of the Association contributing to the fund shall be
dismissed from the police force of the City of Oil City, or for any cause
cease to be a member of the force before he or she becomes entitled to
a pension hereunder, his or her membership in the Association and his
or her right to pension shall forthwith cease, but in such event the total
amount of the contributions paid into the fund by such person shall,
upon request, be refunded to him or her in full without interest.
B. If such person received a refund, as herein provided, and shall later
reenter the employ of the City as a member of the police force, such
member may return to the pension fund the amount withdrawn, in
which event the period of 20 years herein provided for shall be
computed by including the period during which he or she was
previously employed as a member of the police force, otherwise the
period shall be computed from and after the date of reemployment.
C. In the event of the death of a member of the Association before he or
she becomes entitled to the pension herein provided for, the total of the
contributions paid into the fund by said member shall be paid to the
estate of said deceased employee without interest.
D. In the event of the death of a member of the Association while receiving
a pension hereunder, but before the amount of the pension received
shall equal the total amount of contributions paid into the fund, the
difference between the amount received as pension and the amount
contributed to the fund by the deceased member shall be paid to the
estate of said deceased employee.
§ 55-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-24
1:105
§ 55-24. Nontransferability of pensions.
The pensions herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or
execution and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated and shall
not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 55-25. City employees not to qualify.
No person receiving a pension hereunder shall be employed by the City in
any capacity, except in an office elected by popular vote, and during the
term of said office, said person shall not be entitled to said pension.
§ 55-26. Manner of payment.
No payments shall be made from the funds entrusted to the Board except
by check or order signed by the Treasurer and Secretary and countersigned
by the Mayor as President of said Board.
§ 55-27. Bond required for Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall give surety bond approved by the Board in such sum
as the Board may determine for the faithful performance of his duties. The
premium for such bond shall be paid by the Board out of the funds entrusted
to it.
§ 55-28. Powers and duties of Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to keep account of all moneys coming
into his hands belonging to the Board and all disbursements of the same.
All moneys received by the Treasurer shall forthwith be deposited in the
depository chosen by said Board in the name of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 55-29. Audits.
The Board, or someone employed by it, shall at least once each year audit
the accounts of the Treasurer, and a written report shall be submitted to the
Board and to the Council of the City of Oil City of its financial condition and
of the amounts received and paid out during the period audited and of all
investments made by the Board and the condition of such investments.
§ 55-30. Disposition of moneys.
A. A sum sufficient to meet current requirements shall be kept on deposit
by the Board at the current depository. The balance of the moneys
coming into the possession of the Board shall be, as soon as may be
convenient, invested by the Board or delivered to such officers of the
City or citizens thereof or corporations located therein as Council may
direct for the custody and management thereof and investment in:
§ 55-24 OIL CITY CODE § 55-30
1:106
(1) The bonds or obligations of the United States or the United States
Treasury or those for the payment of principal and interest on
which the faith and credit of the United States is pledged.
(2) Bonds or other interest-bearing obligations of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or those for the payment of principal and interest
on which the faith and credit of the commonwealth is pledged.
(3) Bonds or interest-bearing obligations of any county, city, borough,
township or school district of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or those for the payment of which the faith and credit of such
political subdivision is pledged, provided that, at the date of the
investment of such bonds or other interest-bearing obligations,
such political subdivision is not in default in payment of principal
and interest owed by it on any part of its bonded indebtedness.
(4) Mortgages of one or more individuals or corporations securing
bonds or other obligations, subject to the following provisions:
(a) At the time of the recording of any such mortgage in the office
of the recorder of deeds of the proper county, or at the date of
any extension or renewal thereof, such mortgage shall meet
the following requirements:
[1] Such mortgage shall be or become a first lien upon
improved real estate within the City of Oil City, Venango
County, Pennsylvania, prior to all other liens, except taxes
previously levied or assessed but not then payable, and
except taxes then due payable, or delinquent, for the
payment of which taxes provision has been made in the
mortgage settlement.
[2] The face amount of the bonds or other obligations secured
by such mortgage shall not exceed 2/3 of the estimated fair
value of such real estate, as determined by the Board or a
committee by the Board appointed to view and value such
real estate.
[3] All such mortgages shall be taken and held in the name of
the Police Pension Fund Board of Oil City, Pennsylvania.
[4] Such mortgage shall be payable not more than five years
after the date thereof or the date of any renewal or
extension thereof.
[5] All satisfactions or mortgages or similar documents on
payment in full thereof shall be executed on behalf of the
Board by the President and attested by the Secretary or
Treasurer.
(5) Trust certificates for a fractional interest or interest in a mortgage
or in a pool or fund containing mortgages, real estate bonds,
§ 55-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-30
1:107
railroad obligations, obligations of public utility corporations,
obligations of telephone companies, which are legal investments
for fiduciaries under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania now in force, or which may hereafter be enacted.
(6) Any other investment which is legal for trust funds.
(7) Street or sewer improvement bonds of the City of Oil City,
Pennsylvania, secured by liens on real estate and not pledging the
general faith and credit of the City; provided, however, that not
more than 10% of the fund, including interest accumulations in
addition thereto, shall at any time be invested in any one issue of
sewer or street bonds of the City of Oil City, payable out of or
secured by special assessments made for such improvements.
B. The Board may purchase certificates of deposit in any national bank or
trust company organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in the City of Oil City, or deposit the funds in its
possession in a savings account in the name of the Police Pension Fund
Board in any national bank or trust company organized under the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the City of Oil City.
§ 55-30 OIL CITY CODE § 55-30
1:108
ARTICLE III
Firemen's Pension Fund
[Adopted 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 2224 (Ch. 41, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 55-31. Fund established.
A firemen's pension fund be and the same is hereby established by the City
of Oil City and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "fund."
§ 55-32. Creation of Firemen's Pension Fund Board.
The direction and control of the fund shall be and is hereby committed,
subject to the regulations herein contained and such other regulations as
Council may, by ordinance, hereafter from time to time prescribe, to a
board which is hereby created and which shall be known as the "Firemen's
Pension Fund Board" and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Board."
§ 55-33. Members of Board; terms of office.
A. The Board shall consist of seven members, viz.:
(1) The Mayor of the City of Oil City, who shall be ex officio Chairman
thereof and whose membership on said Board shall be concurrent
with his term of office as Mayor.
(2) The City's Manager, whose membership on said Board shall be
concurrent with his term of office as City Manager. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344]
(3) A member of City Council appointed by the Mayor, who shall be ex
officio Treasurer thereof and whose membership on said Board
shall be concurrent with his term of office as Councilman.
[Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344]
(4) The City Controller, whose membership on said Board shall be
concurrent with his term of office as City Controller.
(5) The Chief of the Bureau of Fire, whose membership shall be
concurrent with his appointment as Chief of the Bureau of Fire.
(6) Two duly appointed, confirmed and active members of the Bureau
of Fire of the City of Oil City, elected in a manner approved by
Council by and from the members of the Firemen's Pension Fund
Association, hereinafter created, who are entitled to participate in
the fund created hereby, one of whom shall serve for a term of two
years and one for a term of four years, and whose successors shall
be elected for a term of four years. A vacancy occurring during a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the election of a
successor in the same manner as his predecessor.
§ 55-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-33
1:109
§ 55-34. Compensation; reimbursement of expenses.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and shall be
reimbursed from the fund for any necessary expenditures, and no member
shall suffer loss of salary or wages through serving on the Board.
§ 55-35. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board may, from time to time, subject to the limitations of this article
and of law:
§ 55-36. Meetings, records and reports of Board.
B. The Council shall also, by resolution, appoint one or more of its
members, as the case may be, to serve upon the Pension Fund Board for
such periods of time as Council, by said resolution, shall so direct; not
to exceed, however, said Councilman's term of office. [Added
6-12-1972 by Ord. No. 2263]
A. Adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the fund and the
transaction of its business not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article or any supplement or amendment thereto duly enacted. All such
rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the approval of
Council, and Council may from time to time, by ordinance, alter, modify,
change or repeal such rules and regulations and establish new rules
and regulations for the administration of the fund by the Board and the
transaction of its business.
B. Appoint a Secretary and such medical, clerical and other employees as
may be necessary.
C. Determine and fix the compensation of all persons employed by the
Board.
D. Care for, manage, invest and dispose of, as part of the fund, all money or
property, real, personal or mixed, taken by the City of Oil City by gift,
grant, devise or bequest in trust for the benefit of such pension fund,
subject to the provisions of this article and future regulations by
Council and subject to such directions not inconsistent herewith as the
donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
A. Hold a meeting at least once annually at a time and place selected by
the Board and prepare or cause to be prepared an annual report stating
the conditions of the investments of the fund and evidencing the
receipts, charges and disbursements during the previous year, which
report shall be made a part of the record of said proceedings, and a
copy of which shall be filed with the Council of the City of Oil City on or
before the first meeting of Council in February of the following year.
[Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344]
B. Hold such special meetings as the efficient discharge of its duties may
require, and the Chairman may, upon the request of the members of the
§ 55-33 OIL CITY CODE § 55-36
1:110
§ 55-37. Creation of Firemen's Pension Fund Association.
§ 55-38. Powers and duties of Association.
The members of the Association shall, subject to the limitations of this
article and of law:
Board, in writing, call a special meeting of the Board on 24 hours'
notice to each member, which notice shall state whether such meeting
is to be convened for general or special business; such notice may be
waived by the unanimous consent of the members.
C. Keep all permanent records and accounts and perform all duties as
shall be necessary for the efficient execution of this article.
D. Furnish to Council such financial and other reports as it may, from time
to time, request.
A. An association is hereby constituted and created, which shall be known
and designated as the "Firemen's Pension Fund Association," herein
referred to as the "Association."
B. The membership of the Association shall consist of each active member
of the Bureau of Fire now employed by the City and who previously
accepted the provisions of Ordinance No. 2066 by affixing his signature
to the Firemen's Relief Fund Roll in the manner provided for in Section
14 of said Ordinance No. 2066.
C. Persons hereafter employed shall elect membership in the Association
by electing in writing, within 60 days following his employment, by
signing of the Firemen's Pension Fund Roll which shall be maintained
by the Secretary of the fund.
D. Each active member of the Bureau of Fire who files an application
within the period of 60 days provided for in Subsection C hereby shall
be automatically admitted to membership. Each member of the Bureau
who fails to file an application within said period of 60 days shall not
thereafter be admitted to membership except by majority vote of the
members of the Association, and no member of the Bureau shall be
admitted to membership who fails to file an application within the
period of one year following the enactment of this article or of his or her
employment.
E. Each member of the Bureau of Fire hereafter employed shall, at the
time of admission to membership in the Association, contribute to the
fund in accordance with this article from the date of his or her
employment as a member of the Bureau of Fire.
A. Adopt rules and regulations for the administration and transaction of
business.
§ 55-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-38
1:111
§ 55-39. Expulsion from Association.
B. Elect officers in accordance with established rules and regulations to
represent the Association.
C. Certify to the Board annually a list of the members of the Association in
good standing and the amount of salaries and wages paid to each
member as a member of the Bureau of Fire of the City, together with a
list of members of the Association who were, during said year,
dismissed or who resigned or terminated their service and the date
thereof.
D. Furnish to the Board and Council, upon request, such information
relative to the subject of this article as the Board or Council shall
require.
A. Expulsion by members.
(1) A member of the Association may be expelled from membership
and deprived of his right of participation in the fund by a 2/3 vote of
the members of the Association for one or more of the following
causes:
(a) Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor under the laws of the
United States or any state or commonwealth.
(b) Becoming a habitual drunkard.
(c) Failing to comply with the provisions of this article or any
supplements or amendments thereto or any general
regulations adopted pursuant hereto relating to the
management of the fund or the transaction of the business of
the Association.
(2) No member of the Association shall be expelled pursuant to this
subsection nor deprived of his right to participate in the fund
without due notice and full hearing, at which he shall be afforded
the opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by
counsel if he so desires. In every such case, a written complaint
shall be filed with the Association by a member of the Association
or some officer of the City of Oil City and, promptly thereafter, a
day for hearing shall be fixed by the President of the Association,
notice of which hearing and of the filing of the complaint shall be
given to each member of the Board and each member of the
Association, including the person or persons complained of, by mail
addressed to each of their respective post office addresses at least
five days prior to the time fixed for the hearing.
B. Expulsion by Board.
§ 55-38 OIL CITY CODE § 55-39
1:112
§ 55-40. City contributions to fund. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 2344]
The City of Oil City shall annually, on or before the first day of June each
year, appropriate and pay into the fund a sum of money sufficient to meet
the requirements of and to maintain such fund, which sum in no year shall
be less than 1/2 of 1% nor more than 3% of all City taxes levied by the
City, other than taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of
the City or any part thereof; provided, however, that Council may exceed
the limitations imposed herein if an additional amount is deemed necessary
to provide sufficient funds for payments to widows of members retired on
pension or killed or who die in the service.
§ 55-41. Association member contributions to fund.
(1) A member of the Association may likewise be deprived of his right
of participation in the fund by a majority vote decision of the
members of the Board for one or more of the following causes:
(a) Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor under the laws of the
United States or the commonwealth.
(b) Becoming a habitual drunkard.
(c) Failing to comply with the provisions of this article or any
supplements or amendments thereto or any general
regulations adopted pursuant hereto relating to the
management of the fund or the transaction of the business of
the Association.
(2) No member of the Association shall be expelled pursuant to this
subsection nor deprived of his right to participate in the fund
without due notice and full hearing, at which he shall be afforded
the opportunity to present witnesses and be represented by
counsel if he so desires. In every such case, a written complaint
shall be filed with the Board by a member of the Association or a
taxpayer of the City of Oil City and, promptly thereafter, a day for
hearing shall be fixed by the President of the Board, notice of which
hearing and of the filing of the complaint shall be given to each
member of the Board and each member of the Association,
including the person or persons complained of, by mail addressed
to each of their respective post office addresses at least five days
prior to the time fixed for the hearing. All such hearings shall be
open to the public.
A. Each member of the Association shall contribute to the fund monthly,
until retirement, a sum equal to 4% of his monthly wage or salary.
B. The payment of the monthly sum or contribution herein provided for by
members of the Association shall cease and determine at the time the
member received the pension hereinafter provided for.
§ 55-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-41
1:113
§ 55-42. Payments to be made from fund moneys.
Payments of pensions or allowances under this article shall be made solely
out of the moneys and property in the Firemen's Pension Fund and shall
not be a charge on any other fund in the treasury of the City or under its
control.
§ 55-43. Maintenance of fund moneys required.
§ 55-44. Benefits.
C. Each member of the Bureau of Fire of the City of Oil City by applying for
membership in the Association shall authorize the City to deduct the
payments to be made under this section semimonthly from his or her
monthly wage or salary and to pay the amount so deducted for and on
behalf of such member to the Board herein created for said fund.
D. Should any member of the Association become partially or totally
disabled in the course of his employment as an active member of the
Bureau of Fire of the City of Oil City and receive workers' compensation
as a result of the injuries so sustained and no wages or salary from the
City of Oil City, then, during the period in which he received only
workers' compensation payments, no contributions by such member to
the fund shall be required.
A. There shall at all times be maintained in the fund property or moneys in
a sum sufficient to repay in full all members of the Bureau of Fire of the
City of Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to
participate therein, or their estates, as herein provided, the amount of
their total contributions out of salary or wages into the fund, and no
person shall be entitled to payments of pension except out of property
or moneys in excess of said sum.
B. If at any time the excess over the amount required to repay to the then
members of the fund or their estates, the amount of their contributions
into the fund is insufficient to pay in full all pensions which may then be
due and payable, such excess shall be apportioned among all of the
members.
A. Retirement.
(1) Each member of the Association at any time after he or she shall
have served for 20 years as an active member of the Bureau of Fire
of the City of Oil City shall, upon application, be retired from
service; and after said date, the Board shall, subject to the
limitations and restrictions herein contained, pay said member
from the fund during the remainder of his or her natural life, in
monthly installments, an annual pension in a sum equal to 50% of
the annual pay of such member, computed at the monthly rate of
such member at the date of his retirement or at the highest average
annual salary which the member received during any five years of
§ 55-41 OIL CITY CODE § 55-44
1:114
service preceding the date of retirement, whichever shall be the
higher; provided, however that, except as to service increments,
the payments so made shall not in any case exceed in any one year
1/2 of the annual pay of such member computed at such monthly
or average annual rate, whichever is the higher. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344; 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 2625;
6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2662]
(2) Each member retired herein shall be subject to service from time to
time as a firemen's reserve until unfitted for such service, when he
may be finally retired by reason of age or disability.
(3) Should any paid fireman who, having attained the age of 65 years
and having been in service of the Bureau of Fire for a period of 20
years, desire not to be retired from active service, he may apply to
the Board of Managers to be retained in active service, provided
that he procure at his cost a statement in writing from two
reputable physicians of the City, setting forth that he is physically
and mentally capable of giving full efficient service to the
Department. If such application is approved by the Board of
Managers, it shall recommend to Council the retention of the
applicant. The Board of Managers may at any time order a
reexamination of the applicant, and if he is found incapable, his
immediate retirement shall be recommended to Council forthwith.
(4) Each member of the Association who is a member of the
Association at the time he attains the age of 70 years, and he shall
have served for 20 years as an active member of the Bureau of Fire
of the City of Oil City, shall upon attaining the age of 70 years be
retired from service and shall, subject to the limitations and
restrictions herein contained, receive from the fund during the
remainder of his or her natural life in monthly installments an
annual pension in an amount equal to 50% of the annual pay of
such member, computed at the monthly rate of such member at the
date of his retirement or at the highest average annual salary
which the members received during any five years of service
preceding the date of retirement, whichever shall be the higher;
provided, however, that, except as to service increments, the
payments so made shall not in any case exceed in any one year 1/2
of the annual pay of such member computed at such monthly or
average annual rate, whichever is the higher. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344; 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 2625]
(5) No person shall be entitled to the payments of pension under this
section at any time or during any period that the principal of the
fund and the accumulated interest thereon shall be insufficient to
repay in full to all the members of the Bureau of Fire of the City of
Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to
participate therein, or their estates, as herein provided, the amount
of their total contributions out of salary or wages into the fund.
§ 55-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-44
1:115
(6) If at any time the excess in said fund over and above that required
to repay contributions to the members of the Bureau of Fire of the
City of Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to
participate therein, or their estates, is insufficient to pay in full all
pensions which may then be due and payable, such excess shall be
apportioned among all of the persons then entitled to pensions in
proportion to the amount of pension due them respectively, and all
pensions then due and payable shall be abated proportionately.
B. Service increment. In addition to the retirement allowance hereinabove
provided for, and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon
such retirement allowances and upon contributions, every contributor
who shall become entitled to the retirement allowance shall also be
entitled to the payment of a service increment in accordance with and
subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth:
(1) Service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the
number of whole years after having served the minimum required
by this article during which a contributor has been employed by the
City and paid out of the City Treasury and multiplying said number
of years so computed by an amount equal to 1/40 of the retirement
allowance which has become payable to such contributor in
accordance with the provisions of this article. In computing the
service increment, no employment, after the contributor has
reached the age of 65 years, shall be included, and no service
increment shall be paid in excess of $100 per month.
(2) Each contributor shall pay into the retirement fund a monthly sum
in addition to his or her retirement contribution which shall be
equal to 1% of his or her salary, provided that such payment shall
not exceed the sum of $1 per month, and provided that such service
increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor has
reached the age of 65 years.
(3) Any person who was a member of the Bureau of Fire on July 20,
1968, and who on that date had reached the age of 65 years shall
have his service increment computed on the years of employment
prior to the date of reaching his 65th birthday.
(4) Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and
in the same manner as retirement contributions and may be
withdrawn in full without interest by persons who leave the
employment of the City, subject to the same conditions by which
retirement contributions may be withdrawn, or by persons who
retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.
C. Widows.
(1) A widow of a member of the Association shall be entitled to receive
during her lifetime the pension payable to the member or which
would have been payable had he been retired at the time of his
death if such member was retired on pension on or after January 1,
§ 55-44 OIL CITY CODE § 55-44
1:116
1968, or was killed or died in the service on or after January 1,
1968. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 2344; 10-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 2575]
(2) If no widow survives or if she survives and subsequently dies, then
the child or children under the age of 18 years of a member of the
Association who is killed in the service or who dies in the service on
or after January 1, 1968, shall, until reaching the age of 18 years,
be entitled to receive a pension calculated at and amounting in the
aggregate to 50% of the pension payable to the member had he
been retired at the time of his death. [Amended 10-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 2575]
(3) Each contributor shall pay into the retirement fund a monthly sum
in addition to his or her retirement contribution and service
increment contribution, which shall be equal to 1% of his salary.
(4) Widow's pension contribution shall be paid at the same time and in
the same manner as retirement contributions and may be
withdrawn in full, without interest, by persons who leave the
employment of the City before they become entitled to a pension
hereunder, and in the event that the member dies leaving no widow
to survive him and no child or children eligible to receive payments,
the total of the widow's pension contributions paid into the fund by
said member shall be paid to the estate of the deceased member.
D. Limited vested benefit. [Added 10-10-1994 by Ord. No. 2575]
(1) Each member of the Association may, before completing the
minimum age and minimum period of continuous service
requirements, but after having completed 12 years of full time
service, be entitled to vest his or her retirement benefits, subject to
the following conditions:
(a) The member must file with the Board a written notice of his or
her intention to vest.
(b) The member must include in the notice the date the member
intends to terminate his or her service as a full-time firefighter.
(c) The termination date shall be at least 30 days later than the
date of notice to vest.
(d) The member must be in good standing with the Department on
the date of notice to vest.
(e) The Board shall indicate on the notice to vest the rate of the
monthly pay of the member as of the date of said notice to vest
or the highest average annual salary which the member
received during any five years of service preceding said date,
whichever is higher.
§ 55-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-44
1:117
(2) Upon reaching the date which would have been the member's
retirement date had the member continued his or her full-time
employment with the Department, the member shall notify the
Board, in writing, that the member desires to collect his or her
pension. The amount of retirement benefits the member is entitled
to receive under this subsection shall be computed as follows:
(a) The initial determination of the member's base retirement
benefits shall be computed on the salary indicated on the
notice to vest; and
(b) The portion of the base retirement benefits due the member
shall be determined by applying to the base amount the
percentage that his or her years of service actually rendered
bears to the years of service which would have been rendered
had the member continued to be employed by the Department
until his or her minimum retirement date.
E. Optional military time. [Added 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 2625]
(1) A member of the Association is hereby granted an option which
must be exercised in writing within six months after the member
has been notified of the amount of his required contribution to
effect the purchase. For this purpose, the date of the letter of the
City notifying the member of his required contribution amount
shall commence said six-month period. A member of the
Association shall have the right, exercisable within the aforesaid
six-month period, if he is presently a member of the Association on
the date of the final passage of this subsection of this article, by
written notification within 30 days of the date of the final passage
of this subsection; or if he becomes a member of the Association
after the date of the final passage of this subsection, by written
notification within 30 days of the date he becomes a member of the
Association; to send to the Fire Pension Fund Board, in care of the
City Manager of the City of Oil City, 21 Seneca Street, Oil City,
Pennsylvania 16301, requesting a computation of the required
contribution. The amount of the required contribution shall then be
computed upon the evidence submitted with said request,
evidencing full-time active duty service at any time in the United
States Armed Forces, United States Army, United States Navy,
United States Marine Corps and/or United States Air Force and in
the United States Coast Guard only for active duty service in time
of war.
(2) After being sent a notice of the required amount of the contribution
to effect purchase, a member of the Association must pay the full
amount of the required contribution within the aforesaid six-month
period to effectively conclude a purchase of the additional service
time for the purpose of computing pension benefits.
§ 55-44 OIL CITY CODE § 55-44
1:118
§ 55-45. Disability pension. [Amended 2-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2344;
10-10-1994 by Ord. No. 2575; 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 2599;
2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 2625; 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2662]
(3) The required contribution shall be computed by computing the sum
of the amount of a firefighter's contribution added to the amount of
the City's contribution during the years the full-time active duty
military service occurred.
(4) For purposes of retirement from service, a member of the
Association who has made the required contribution or purchase to
the pension fund shall thereafter be entitled to add to his or her
years of eligible service with the City as a member of the Fire
Department the number of years of military service for which said
required contribution or purchase has been made, not to exceed
three years of such military service subsequent to September 1,
1940. The member may not use any military time purchased
hereunder as a credit towards his or her military service as an
active member of the Association for retirement purposes under
§ 55-44A(1) above. [Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2662]
(5) The right or option hereby granted shall be personal to a member
of the Association and may not be elected or effected by a payment
or contribution by any person other than the member of the
Association electing to effect said purchase as provided under this
section of this article.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — Permanent mental or
physical impairment which renders the firefighter unable to perform his
duties.
B. Total and permanent disability (service-connected). Each active
member of the Bureau of Fire of the City of Oil City who is a member of
the Association and who is not eligible for pension under any of the
other provisions of this article and who dies or shall become
permanently and totally disabled as a result of injury incurred while
engaged in active duty and in the regular service rendered the City, and
whether the same is compensable under the workers' compensation
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or otherwise, and who shall,
by reason of such injury or sickness, be rendered totally and
permanently unable to engage in the duties of an active member of the
Bureau of Fire shall, upon due proof to the Board of such permanent
and total disability, be eligible to receive a normal pension from the
fund beginning forthwith and continuing during his lifetime.
C. Total and permanent disability (non-service-connected). All pensions
which are granted for firefighters who die or become totally and
permanently disabled outside the regular service rendered the City and
§ 55-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-45
1:119
§ 55-46. Refunds.
not connected with service for the City shall be entitled to a benefit of
50% of his annual normal pension if he has less than 10 years of regular
service, and 100% of his normal pension if he has 10 or more years of
regular service.
D. The Pension Fund shall be subrogated to the right of the member to the
extent of any payments made under the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736,
No. 338), known as the "Pennsylvania Workmen's Compensation Act."33
E. Proof of total and permanent disability shall consist of the sworn
statements of three practicing physicians, designated by the Board to
examine the member, to the effect that such member is in a permanent
condition of health which will wholly and permanently disable him from
performing the duties of an active member of the Bureau of Fire. Each
member making application for such pension shall submit to an
examination by three physicians designated by the Board before
consideration shall be given to his application by the Board. The Board
may, in its discretion, require proof in addition to the sworn statements
of the three physicians designated by it, and notwithstanding
acceptance by the Board of proof of total and permanent disability, a
member shall from time to time upon demand by the Board, but not
more often than once a year after such disability has continued for two
years, for the purpose of verifying that said disability is actually total
and permanent, furnish due proof that he actually continues in the state
of disability defined above, and should the Board at any time upon
reasonable cause conclude that said member is not totally and
permanently disabled, it shall discontinue the payments of pension of
such member.
F. No person shall be entitled to the payments of pension under this
section at any time or during any period that the principal of the fund
and the accumulated interest thereon shall be insufficient to repay in
full to all of the members of the Bureau of Fire of the City of Oil City
their contribution toward the fund, and entitled to participate therein,
or their estate, as herein provided, the amount of their total
contributions out of salary or wages into the fund.
G. If at any time the excess of said fund over and above that required to
repay contributions to the members of the Bureau of Fire of the City of
Oil City then contributing toward the fund and entitled to participate
therein, or their estates, is insufficient to pay in full all pensions which
may then be due and payable, such excess shall be apportioned among
all of the persons then entitled to pensions in proportion to the amount
of pension due them respectively, and all pensions then due and payable
shall be abated proportionately.
33.Editor's Note: See now the Workers' Compensation Reform Act of 1997, Title 77 of the
Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated.
§ 55-45 OIL CITY CODE § 55-46
1:120
§ 55-47. Nontransferability of pensions.
The pension herein provided for shall not be subject to attachment or
execution and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated and shall
not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 55-48. Manner of payment.
No payments shall be made from the funds entrusted to the Board except
by check or order signed by the Treasurer and Secretary and countersigned
by the Mayor as President of said Board.
§ 55-49. Bond required for Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall give surety bond approved by the Board in such sum
as the Board may determine for the faithful performance of his duties. The
premium for such bond shall be paid by the Board out of the funds entrusted
to it.
A. If a member of the Association contributing to the fund shall be
dismissed from the Bureau of Fire of the City of Oil City or for any cause
cease to be a member of the Bureau before he or she becomes entitled
to a pension hereunder, his or her membership in the Association and
his or her right to pension shall forthwith cease, but in such event the
total amount of the contributions paid into the fund by such person
shall, upon request, be refunded to him or her in full without interest.
B. If such member received a refund, as herein provided, and shall later
reenter the employ of the City as a member of the Bureau of Fire, such
member may return to the pension fund the amount withdrawn, in
which event the period of 20 years herein provided for shall be
computed by including the period during which he or she was
permanently employed as a member of the Bureau of Fire; otherwise,
the period shall be computed from and after the date of reemployment.
C. In the event of the death of a member of the Association before he or
she becomes entitled to the pension aforesaid, and such member is not
survived by a widow or child or children entitled to payments as
hereinbefore provided, the total amount of contributions paid into the
pension fund by the member shall be paid to his estate, without
interest.
D. In the event that the total amount of contributions paid into the fund by
a member is not received by the member or by his widow or child or
children, as hereinbefore provided, the difference between the amount
received as pension and the amount contributed to the fund by the
deceased member shall be paid to his estate, without interest.
§ 55-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-50
1:121
§ 55-50. Powers and duties of Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to keep account of all moneys coming
into his hands belonging to the Board and all disbursements of the same.
All moneys received by the Treasurer shall forthwith be deposited in the
depository chosen by said Board in the name of the Firemen's Relief Fund.
§ 55-51. Audits.
The Board or someone employed by it shall at least once a year audit the
accounts of the Treasurer, and a written report shall be submitted to the
Board and to the Council of the City of Oil City of its financial condition and
of the amounts received and paid out during the period audited and of all
investments made by the Board and the condition of such investments.
§ 55-52. Disposition of moneys.
A sum sufficient to meet current requirements shall be kept on deposit by
the Board at the current depositary. The balance of the moneys coming into
possession of the Board shall be, as soon as may be convenient, invested by
the Board in investments authorized by the Fiduciaries Investment Act of
May 26, 1949, P.L. 1828, as amended.34
34.Editor's Note: See 20 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ 55-50 OIL CITY CODE § 55-52
1:122
ARTICLE IV
Employees' Pension Fund
[Adopted 10-25-1971 by Ord. No. 2255; amended in its entirety
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2730 (Ch. 41, Art. IV, of the 1986 Code)]
§ 55-53. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meaning, set forth in this section, unless a different meaning is otherwise
clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the participant's annual benefit
determined in accordance with § 55-56B, including service increment
benefit pursuant to § 55-56E, which amounts shall be based upon the
participant's average annual compensation and years of credited service
determined as of such date and which shall represent the annual benefit
that would be payable in the normal form as of the participant's normal
retirement age (or the actuarial equivalent thereof), provided the
participant satisfies any requirements set forth hereafter for entitlement to
receive such benefit. In no event, however, shall the accrued benefit exceed
the maximum limitation, determined as of the date of computation, provided
under § 55-56K. All accrued benefits are subject to all applicable limitations,
reductions, offsets and actuarial adjustments provided by the plan prior to
the actual payment thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction or
otherwise.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
(enacted as Act 205 of 1984), as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The factors to be used in determining
actuarial equivalents shall be seven-percent interest, and UP-1984 Mortality
Table rates, unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AUTHORIZED LEAVE OF ABSENCE — Any leave of absence granted in
writing by the employer for reasons, including, but not limited to, accident,
sickness, pregnancy or temporary disability, education, training, jury duty
or such other reasons as may necessitate authorized leave from active
employment.
AVERAGE ANNUAL COMPENSATION — The average of the annual
compensation of the participant during the last or any five years of credited
service prior to termination of employment, whichever provides the highest
average.
BENEFICIARY — The person or legal entity designated by the participant to
receive any applicable benefits under the plan payable upon the occurrence
§ 55-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-53
1:123
of the death of the participant. In the event that a participant does not
designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary does not survive the participant,
the beneficiary shall be the surviving spouse, or if there is no surviving
spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there is no surviving issue, the estate;
but if no personal representative has been appointed, to those persons
who would be entitled to the estate under the intestacy laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had died intestate and a
resident of Pennsylvania.
BREAK IN SERVICE — Any period of time after employment has
commenced during which an employee fails to maintain a continuous period
of employment.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
employer who has primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs of the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — The base salary or wages paid to an employee by
the employer with respect to personal services rendered as an employee,
excluding therefrom any extra or additional forms of remuneration such as
amounts paid as allowance or reimbursement for expenses, payments made
by the employer to this or any other employee welfare or benefit plans on
behalf of its employees, and amounts paid as lump sums for accumulated
sick time or for back-pay damage awards or settlements other than to the
extent that such amounts are credited to periods of time when they would
otherwise have accrued or been earned such that no amounts are credited
in a manner which would result in duplication of remuneration for any
particular period of time. Compensation shall be limited on an annual basis
for purposes of this article to the amount specified in accordance with IRS
Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under IRS Code Section 415(d).
CONTRACT OR POLICY — Any insurance or annuity contract issued by an
insurance company in accordance with the requirements of the plan.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Oil City, Pennsylvania.
DISABILITY RETIREMENT DATE — The date when a participant who has
completed at least 15 years of credited service terminates employment due
to a total and permanent disability.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date on which a participant attains 55
years of age and has completed at least 12 years of credited service.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by the employer and who is not
otherwise participating in a pension plan or retirement program sponsored
by the employer which recognizes credit for the same period of service to
the employer.
EMPLOYER — The City of Oil City, Pennsylvania, a political subdivision of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 55-53 OIL CITY CODE § 55-53
1:124
EMPLOYMENT — The period of time for which an employee is directly or
indirectly compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as an employee. Employment may include, for the
purpose of determining years of credited service, an authorized leave of
absence to the extent it is specifically granted in writing by the employer
and permitted pursuant to applicable law.
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — Any legal reserve life insurance
company licensed to do business in one or more states of the United States.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The first day next following the date when
a participant retires which is subsequent to the participant's normal
retirement age.
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION — The minimum annual obligation of
the municipality as determined by the actuary and certified by the chief
administrative officer pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The minimum age at which a participant
may retire with a normal retirement benefit pursuant to § 55-56A, based on
the number of completed years of credited service at the time of retirement,
as follows:
Years of Credited Service Normal Retirement Age
10 but less than 20 62
20 but less than 30 60
30 or more 55
NOTICE or ELECTION — A written document prepared in the form
specified by the plan administrator and delivered as follows: If such notice
or election is to be provided by the employer or plan administrator, it shall
be mailed in a properly addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the last
known address of the person entitled thereto, on or before the last day of
the specified notice or election period; or if such notice or election is to be
provided to the employer or the plan administrator, it must be received by
the recipient on or before the last day of the specified notice or election
period.
PARTICIPANT — Any employee who has commenced participation in this
article in accordance with § 55-54 and has not for any reason ceased to
participate hereunder.
PENSION FUND — The assets of the plan, which shall be accounted for
separately from the assets of any other plans maintained by the employer
and which shall be administered under the supervision of the employer in
accordance with the terms of the plan.
PENSION PLAN BOARD — The Board appointed pursuant to the provisions
of applicable law to administer the plan as more fully described herein
under § 55-61.
PLAN — The City of Oil City Employees' Pension Plan.
§ 55-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-53
1:125
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR or ADMINISTRATOR — The Pension Plan Board.
In the event no such Board is appointed, the plan administrator shall be the
Council.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 2007, the effective date of this amended
and restated plan.
SERVICE INCREMENT — The amount calculated pursuant to § 55-56E on
behalf of a participant who has elected to be covered by such benefit for
each completed year of credited service in excess of 20 years, subject to the
limitation described in § 55-56K.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform any customary
duties of employment with the employer. The employer shall determine
whether a participant has incurred a total and permanent disability based
upon the results of an examination by three physicians approved by the
employer.
YEAR(S) OF CREDITED SERVICE —
Refers to twelve-month periods during which a participant is
continuously employed in employment, measured from the date on
which participation in the plan shall commence and annual
anniversaries thereof and/or the date that reemployment of a
participant shall commence and anniversaries thereof, provided that
the employee has authorized the payment of employee contributions
to the plan. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such
participant receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with
respect to a period of employment for which employee contributions
are required, such period of employment shall not be included in years
of credited service thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
such distribution. The total number of years of credited service shall be
calculated in completed years and months of service.
A.
A year of credited service shall also include any period of qualified
military service as determined under the requirements of Chapter 43
of Title 38, United States Code, provided that the participant returns
to employment following such period of qualified military service and
the participant makes payment to the plan in an amount equal to
the participant contributions that would otherwise have been paid to
the plan during such period of qualified military service. The amount
of participant contributions shall be based upon an estimate of the
compensation that would have been paid to the participant during
such period of qualified military service as determined by the average
compensation paid to the participant during the 12 months immediately
preceding the period of qualified military service. The amount of
participant contributions so calculated must be paid into the plan
before the end of the period that begins on the date of reemployment
B.
§ 55-53 OIL CITY CODE § 55-53
1:126
§ 55-54. Participation in plan.
§ 55-55. Contributions.
and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the period that has a
duration of three times the period of qualified military service, or the
date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
A. Eligibility for participation. Each employee shall be eligible to
participate in the plan as of the first day of employment, provided that
all administrative prerequisites such as authorizing the payment of
employee contributions via payroll deduction have been fulfilled. Each
employee who was a participant in the plan on the day prior to the
restatement date shall continue to be a participant on and after the
restatement date, subject to the terms and conditions of the plan as set
forth herein.
B. Participation requirements. Each participant hereunder shall be
required to make contributions to the plan, as provided in § 55-55A
hereof, and shall execute and complete any enrollment or application
forms as required by the plan administrator.
C. Reemployment. Each employee who had previously been employed by
the employer and incurred a break in service shall, upon reemployment,
have prior years of credited service recredited for all purposes under
the plan upon repayment to the plan of any amount of accumulated
contributions which had been distributed pursuant to § 55-60B.
D. Change in status. A participant who remains in the service of the
employer but ceases to be an employee eligible for participation
hereunder, or ceases or fails to make any contributions which are
required as a condition of participation hereunder, shall have no further
benefit accruals occur until the individual again qualifies as a
participant hereunder eligible to resume such accrual of benefits.
E. Leave of absence. During any leave of absence that is not an authorized
leave of absence, a participant shall be deemed an inactive participant
and shall not be given credit for years of credited service nor continue
to accrue any benefits hereunder. If the employee is not reemployed by
the expiration of such leave of absence, participation in the plan shall
cease on the date on which such leave of absence commenced. During
any authorized leave of absence, a participant shall continue to receive
credit for years of credited service to the extent such credit is
specifically granted in writing by the employer and is permitted
pursuant to applicable law.
F. Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the administrator with such
information as will aid the administrator in the administration of the
plan. Such information shall include all pertinent data on employees for
purposes of determining their eligibility to participate in this plan.
§ 55-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-55
1:127
A. Employee contributions.
(1) As a condition of participation hereunder, each participant shall be
required to have contributions deducted from the participant's
compensation and contributed to the plan at a rate of 3 1/2% of the
participant's compensation subject to taxation under IRS Code
Section 3101(a) and 5% of the remainder of the participant's
compensation.
(2) Each participant who makes an election under § 55-56D and each
employee who became a participant of the plan on or after January
1, 1993, shall be required to have contributions deducted from the
participant's compensation and contributed to the plan at a rate of
5% after the effective date of such election or participation.
(3) Each participant who makes an election pursuant to § 55-56E to be
covered by the service increment benefit shall be required to
contribute an amount in addition to the percentages hereinbefore
prescribed equal to 0.5% of the participant's compensation after
the effective date of such election; provided, however, that such
service increment contribution shall not be paid after the
participant attains age 65.
(4) Effective January 1, 1993, the employer has elected to reclassify
employee contributions as employer contributions pursuant to
Internal Revenue Code Section 414(h)(2), which reclassification
shall result in a reduction of the participant's taxable gross income
for federal income tax purposes equal to the amount of such
reclassified contributions.
B. Employer contributions. The actuary, in accordance with the Act, shall
annually determine the minimum municipal obligation of the employer.
The employer shall pay into the pension fund, by annual appropriations
or otherwise, the contributions necessary to satisfy the minimum
municipal obligation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained
herein shall preclude the employer from contributing an amount in
excess of the minimum municipal obligation.
C. State aid. General municipal pension system state aid, or any other
amount of state aid received by the employer in accordance with the
Act from the commonwealth, may be deposited into the pension fund
governed by this article and shall be used to reduce the amount of the
minimum municipal obligation of the employer.
D. Gifts. The Council is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
otherwise any money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the
plan and cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The
care, management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be
vested in the Council or its delegate, the plan administrator, subject to
the direction of the donor and not inconsistent with applicable laws and
the terms of the plan.
§ 55-55 OIL CITY CODE § 55-55
1:128
§ 55-56. Retirement benefits.
E. No reversion to the employer. At no time shall it be possible for the plan
assets to be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the
exclusive benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, except that
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if
the contribution was made due to a mistake of fact and the contribution
is returned within one year of the discovery of the mistaken payment of
the contribution or the plan is terminated, as provided in § 55-63.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to a normal
retirement benefit after retirement on or after attainment of normal
retirement age.
B. Normal retirement benefit.
(1) Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to
Subsection A hereof shall receive a benefit commencing on the
participant's normal retirement age and paid in the normal form as
provided in § 55-59A hereof. The annual amount of the normal
retirement benefit shall be equal to 2.5% of the participant's
average annual compensation multiplied by the participant's years
of credited service up to a maximum benefit of 50% of average
annual compensation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, each
participant shall have the normal retirement benefit determined
hereunder reduced by an amount equal to 40% of the primary
insurance amount of social security paid or payable to the
participant. Such reduction shall commence as of the attainment of
the age at which social security benefits are payable to the
participant and determined as of that date based only on the
compensation for services rendered in employment and shall only
be redetermined if a decrease in the social security primary
insurance amount shall result in a corresponding decrease in the
amount of the reduction determined herein.
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue in employment beyond the
attainment of normal retirement age, subject to the employer's rules
and regulations regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met
the requirements of Subsection A continues in employment beyond the
participant's normal retirement age, there shall be no retirement
benefits paid until employment has ceased and the participant's
retirement actually commences. The retirement benefit of a participant
described in this Subsection C shall be calculated in accordance with
Subsection B on the basis of average annual compensation as of the
participant's actual retirement and shall commence on the participant's
late retirement date.
D. Elimination of social security reduction.
§ 55-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-56
1:129
(1) Each participant of the plan as of January 1, 1991, who shall retire
after January 1, 1991, shall be eligible to eliminate the social
security primary insurance amount reduction applicable in the case
of a benefit payable pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
(2) Each participant who makes an election, prior to retirement, to
eliminate the said reduction shall be required to make employee
contributions at the rate of 5% of the participant's compensation
commencing on the date such election is made. Such a participant
must pay, in a lump-sum payment at the time of election or in
installment payments as agreed by Council, an amount equal to the
difference between the participant's actual accumulated
contributions at the time of election and the employee
contributions which would have been paid if the participant had
paid all employee contributions at the rate of 5% of the
participant's compensation. A participant who makes such an
election after January 1, 1993, shall also be required to pay interest
calculated from January 1, 1993, to the date of payment at a rate
equal to the average percentage interest gain on plan investments
from January 1, 1993, to the date of determination.
(3) Each participant who makes an election after retirement to
eliminate the said reduction shall pay, in a lump-sum payment at
the time of election, an amount equal to the difference between the
participant's actual accumulated contributions at the time of
election and the employee contributions which would have been
paid if the participant had paid all employee contributions at the
rate of 5% of the participant's compensation. A participant who
makes such an election after January 1, 1993, shall also be required
to pay interest calculated from January 1, 1993, to the date of
payment at a rate equal to the average percentage interest gain on
plan investments from January 1, 1993, to the date of
determination. Such elimination shall be effective after the date the
said election is made and shall not require any adjustment on
account of benefit payments received prior to the date such
election is made unless otherwise specifically approved by Council.
E. Service increment.
(1) Each participant of the plan as of January 1, 2001, who shall retire
after January 1, 2001, and each future employee may elect to be
covered by the service increment benefit by notifying the plan
administrator in writing by December 31, 2000, or within 30 days
of the employee's first day of employment. A participant who does
not make such an election and/or does not authorize the deduction
of employee contributions in accordance with § 55-55A as
applicable to participants covered by the service increment benefit
shall forever waive and relinquish the opportunity to be covered by
the service increment benefit.
§ 55-56 OIL CITY CODE § 55-56
1:130
(2) A participant who has elected to be covered by the service
increment benefit pursuant to the preceding paragraph and who
retires after completing 20 years of credited service shall be
entitled to receive a service increment benefit in addition to the
retirement benefit determined under Subsection B. The amount of
the service increment benefit shall equal 1.25% of average annual
compensation multiplied by the total number of completed whole
years of credited service in excess of 20 years. In computing the
amount of service increment benefit, years of credited service
completed after the participant attains age 65 shall not be
included. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2738]
(3) A participant who retires after electing to be covered by the service
increment benefit but is not eligible for a service increment benefit
may withdraw the amount of accumulated contributions
attributable to the service increment benefit.
F. Early retirement. Each participant whose employment is terminated
prior to his normal retirement age, other than by death or disability, but
after early retirement date shall be entitled to an early retirement
benefit.
G. Early retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled to
a benefit pursuant to Subsection F shall receive a benefit commencing
on the early retirement date, paid monthly in an amount equal to the
participant's accrued benefit, reduced by 0.5% for each full month by
which the early retirement date precedes the normal retirement age.
H. Application for benefit. A participant must complete and execute an
application for benefit on a form and in the manner prescribed by the
plan administrator and deliver the said application to the plan
administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which benefit
payments are to commence. Notwithstanding anything contained
herein to the contrary, no retirement benefit payments or any other
benefit payments shall be due or payable on or before the first day of
the month coincident with or next following the date that is 30 days
after the date the plan administrator receives the application for
benefit.
I. Limitation of liability. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the
employer, the plan administrator, any fiduciary or any agent or
representative of any of the foregoing to provide any retirement or
other benefit to any participant or beneficiary which cannot be provided
from the assets available in the pension fund, whether such benefits are
in pay status or otherwise payable under the terms of the plan. The
Council retains the right to amend or terminate this article consistent
with applicable law at any time, with or without cause, and whether or
not such action directly or indirectly results in the suspension,
reduction or termination of any benefit payable under the plan or in pay
status, and without liability to any person for any such action.
§ 55-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-56
1:131
J. Special provision for restated plans.
(1) The benefit amount of any participant who may have retired prior
to the restatement date shall not be in any way altered by the
provisions of this article, except where otherwise expressly
indicated herein, and shall continue to be determined on the basis
of the terms of the plan in effect on the day preceding the
restatement date.
(2) Pursuant to the provisions of applicable law, each participant under
the plan as of the restatement date may be entitled to all of the
benefits, rights or features of the plan as in effect prior to the
restatement date. Such participants shall therefore be entitled, to
the extent required under applicable law, to the greater of the
benefits, rights and features determined in total under this
amended and restated plan or the sum of the benefits, rights and
features determined in total and accrued as of the restatement date
plus the benefits, rights and features determined in total and
accrued after the restatement date. As of the restatement date,
there shall be no further accruals of the benefits, rights and
features determined in total pursuant to the terms of the plan prior
to the restatement date.
K. Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this
article to the contrary, no benefit provided under this article
attributable to contributions of the employer shall exceed, as an annual
amount, the amount specified in IRS Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) as
adjusted pursuant to IRS Code Section 415(d), assuming the form of
benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits). The
limitations described in this Subsection K shall be governed by the
following conditions and definitions:
(1) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a
qualified participant (a participant with respect to whom a period
of at least 15 years of service, including applicable military service,
as a full-time employee of a police or fire department is taken into
account in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation
contained in this Subsection K(2) shall not apply;
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
§ 55-56 OIL CITY CODE § 55-56
1:132
§ 55-57. Disability retirement.
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined herein
commencing at age 65;
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained
a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated;
(5) In the case of a participant with fewer than 10 years of service or
participation, the limitation expressed in this Subsection K shall be
reduced by 1/10 for each year of participation less than 10 with
respect to IRS Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) or each year of service
less than 10 years in the case of the limitation in Subsection K(4),
but in no event shall this limitation be less than 1/10 of the
applicable limit;
(6) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with IRS Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder
as applicable to government plans in general and this article in
particular; and
(7) In the case of a survivor benefit under § 55-58B or a disability
retirement benefit under § 55-57B, the adjustment under
Subsections B and E hereof shall not apply, and the applicable
limitation shall be the limitation contained herein without regard to
the age or years of service or participation of the benefit recipient.
A. Disability retirement. A participant who has completed at least 15 years
of credited service and who incurs a total and permanent disability
before attaining normal retirement age shall be entitled to a disability
retirement benefit as of the disability retirement date.
B. Disability retirement benefit. A participant who shall be entitled to a
disability retirement benefit under Subsection A shall receive a benefit
commencing on the participant's disability retirement date and paid in
the normal form as provided in § 55-59A hereof. For a participant whose
total and permanent disability was incurred in the line of or as a direct
result of the participant's duties of employment with the employer, the
annual amount of the disability retirement benefit shall be equal to 50%
of the participant's average annual compensation. For a participant
whose total and permanent disability did not occur in the line of duty,
the annual amount of the disability retirement benefit shall be equal to
25% of the participant's average annual compensation.
§ 55-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-57
1:133
§ 55-58. Death benefits.
C. Payment of disability benefit. Payment of a disability retirement benefit
shall be made in the normal form under § 55-59A commencing on the
participant's disability retirement date and ending on the earlier of the
date of death of the participant or the date that the participant's total
and permanent disability shall cease. If the participant's total and
permanent disability shall cease prior to the attainment of the
participant's normal retirement age, the participant shall be deemed to
have terminated employment as of the disability retirement date for
purposes of this article unless the participant shall resume active
employment within three months following the date on which such total
and permanent disability ceased. A participant who fails to resume
active employment after total and permanent disability ceases shall not
be entitled to a distribution of accumulated contributions pursuant to
§ 55-60B to the extent that the total amount of disability retirement
benefits paid exceeds the value of the participant's accumulated
contributions as of the disability retirement date and shall not be
entitled to any other benefits under the plan as a result of the
accumulation of any years of credited service as of the disability
retirement date.
D. Verification of disability. The plan administrator shall determine
whether a participant shall have incurred a total and permanent
disability, and in the case of a service-related disability, that the total
and permanent disability was directly related to the participant's duties
of employment. Proof of total and permanent disability shall consist of
the sworn statement of three practicing physicians, designated by the
plan administrator, that the participant has incurred a total and
permanent disability and that it was directly related to the participant's
duties of employment, if applicable. If the plan administrator shall
determine that a participant who is totally and permanently disabled
has recovered sufficiently to resume active employment or if a
participant refuses to undergo a medical examination as directed by the
plan administrator (such a medical examination may not be required
more frequently than once in any given twelve-month period), the
payment of disability retirement benefits shall cease.
E. Cessation of disability. A participant who is receiving payment of
disability retirement benefits under this article must notify the plan
administrator of any change in condition which may cause the
participant's entitlement to receipt of such benefits to cease. If a
participant fails to provide immediate notice to the plan administrator
of any such change in status, and thereby continues to receive payment
of benefits hereunder to which the participant is not entitled, the plan
administrator may take whatever action is necessary and permitted
under applicable law to recover any amount of improper payments,
including offsetting such amounts against any future payment of
retirement or other benefits under the plan or legal action. The plan
administrator may also recover the costs of any such action.
§ 55-57 OIL CITY CODE § 55-58
1:134
A. Death of participant. Upon the occurrence of the death of a participant,
there shall be benefits payable in accord with the following sections of
this § 55-58.
B. Survivor benefits.
(1) Before retirement eligibility. If a participant shall die after 15 years
of credited service while still an employee of the employer, a
survivor benefit shall be payable as described in Subsection B(3). If
the participant's death was incurred in the line of or as a direct
result of the participant's duties of employment with the employer,
the amount of the survivor benefit shall be equal to 37.5% of the
participant's average annual compensation as of the date of death.
If the participant's death was not service related, the amount of the
survivor benefit shall be 25% of the participant's average annual
compensation as of the date of death.
(2) After retirement eligibility or actual retirement. If a participant
shall die after commencement of benefit payments hereunder
pursuant to § 55-56B, C, F and § 55-57A or after attaining a normal
retirement age under the plan or reaching his early retirement
date, while still an employee of the employer, a survivor benefit
shall be payable as described in Subsection B(3) in an amount
equal to 75% of the amount that the participant was receiving (in
the case of a retired participant) or 75% of the accrued benefit (in
the case of an active participant) the participant would have been
eligible to receive had the participant retired on the date of death.
The accrued benefit applicable to a participant who had not yet
reached a normal retirement age under the plan shall include early
retirement reductions pursuant to § 55-56G. Notwithstanding the
preceding, survivor benefits shall not be subject to any reduction
for social security. In no event shall the survivor benefit payable
under this § 55-58B(2) be less than the amount calculated pursuant
to § 55-58B(1) for participants who die before retirement eligibility.
(3) Payment of survivor benefits. The survivor benefit shall be paid to
the surviving spouse, if any, until the date of death of the surviving
spouse. Upon the death of the surviving spouse, or if there is no
surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid in equal shares
to the surviving dependent children of the deceased participant.
Dependent children shall include the children of the deceased
participant who have not attained 18 years of age. The shares
payable to the surviving dependent children shall be adjusted as
each child ceases to be eligible to receive a share of the benefit
hereunder.
C. Death prior to retirement. If a participant shall die prior to the
commencement of the payment of any retirement or other benefits
under this article, and without eligibility for payment of a survivor
benefit under Subsection B, the beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a
distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions determined
§ 55-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-58
1:135
§ 55-59. Payment of benefits.
as of the date of death of the participant. If the participant has received
disability retirement benefits hereunder, the amount of distribution of
accumulated contributions shall be reduced by the amount of disability
retirement benefits which have been paid hereunder.
D. Death after retirement. If a participant shall die after the payment of
any retirement or other benefits under this article have commenced,
except as provided for in Subsection B, there shall be no entitlement to
any additional payments hereunder, and all obligation to the
participant, the participant's beneficiary, or any other party claiming
any right, title or interest by way of the participant's participation
herein shall cease. Notwithstanding the preceding, if the total of the
benefit payments to the participant and surviving spouse, if applicable,
were less than the amount of the participant's accumulated
contributions at the time of retirement, the balance shall be paid to the
participant's beneficiary.
A. Normal form. The normal form for payment of retirement benefits shall
be an annuity for the life of the participant paid monthly.
B. Commencement of benefits. Except as otherwise provided herein, a
participant may make an election to commence receiving distribution of
retirement benefits as of the participant's early retirement date, normal
retirement age or late retirement date, whichever is applicable,
provided the participant has completed the required years of credited
service, or may defer such payments to a date not later than the
required date for commencement of benefits determined under
Subsection C. Retirement benefit payments shall be paid as of the first
day of each month, and the first benefit payment shall be in an amount
equal to the participant's regular monthly benefit multiplied by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days from the
participant's retirement date to the end of the month, and the
denominator of which is the full number of days in the applicable
month.
C. Required distributions.
(1) Time frame for distribution.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the entire
benefit of any participant who becomes entitled to benefits
prior to death shall be distributed either:
[1] Not later than the required beginning date; or
[2] Over a period beginning not later than the required
beginning date and extending over the life of such
participant or over the lives of such participant and a
designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending
beyond the life expectancy of such participant, or the joint
§ 55-58 OIL CITY CODE § 55-59
1:136
life expectancies of such participant and a designated
beneficiary).
(b) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this article
dies prior to the date when the entire interest has been
distributed after distribution of benefits has begun in
accordance with Subsection C(1)(a)[2] above, the remaining
portion of such benefit shall be distributed at least as rapidly as
under the method of distribution being used under Subsection
C(1)(a)[2] as of the date of death.
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this article dies
before distribution of the benefit has begun, the entire interest of
such employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of
such employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any
portion of the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit
of) a designated beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over
the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such
distributions shall begin not later than one year after the date of
the employee's death or such later date as provided by regulations
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury; then for purposes of the
five-year rule set forth in the preceding sentence, the benefit
payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed on the
date on which such distributions begin. Provided, however, that
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the designated
beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then the date
on which distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier
than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2; and further provided, if the surviving spouse dies before the
distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied
as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions and
procedures shall apply:
(a) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar
year following the later of the calendar year in which the
employee attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which the
employee retires.
(b) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this article according to its
rules.
(c) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been
paid to the surviving spouse if such amount will become
payable to the surviving spouse upon such child's reaching
majority (or other designated event permitted under
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury).
§ 55-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-59
1:137
(d) For purposes of this subsection, the life expectancy of an
employee and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case
of a life annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently
than annually.
D. Small amounts. If the plan administrator determines that the value of a
participant's accrued benefit is so small as to make pension payments in
the normal form administratively impractical, the plan administrator
may cause such payments to be made at such other periodic intervals as
are administratively practical, but no less frequently than annually.
E. Nonduplication of benefit. To avoid any duplication of benefits, a
participant who is receiving a retirement benefit under this article and
who shall resume employment shall have benefit payments suspended
until the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
date such employment shall cease. Upon resumption of benefit
payments, such participant shall receive the greater of the amount of
the suspended benefit or the amount of benefit based upon average
annual compensation and years of credited service as of the date that
such period of resumed employment shall cease.
F. Personal right of participant. The right to receive any benefits under
this article is a personal right of the participant and shall expire upon
the death of the participant. No heir, legatee, devisee, beneficiary,
assignee or other person claiming by or through a participant shall have
any interest in any benefits hereunder unless clearly and expressly so
provided by the terms of this article. A participant's election, failure to
make an election or revocation of an election hereunder shall be final
and binding on all persons.
G. Direct rollovers.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a
distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by
the plan administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by
the distributee in a direct rollover.
(2) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Eligible rollover distribution" is any distribution of all or any
portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except
that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for
the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the
distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of
10 years or more; any distribution to the extent such
distribution is required under IRS Code Section 401(a)(9); and
the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross
§ 55-59 OIL CITY CODE § 55-59
1:138
§ 55-60. Termination of employment.
income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net
unrealized appreciation with respect to employer securities).
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section
of the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be
an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not
includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid
only to an individual retirement account or annuity described
in Section 408(a) or (b) of the IRS Code, or to a qualified
defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a)
of the Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so
transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of
such distribution which is includible in gross income and the
portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
(b) "Eligible retirement plan" is a qualified trust described in IRS
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account
described in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement
annuity described in Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan
described in Code Section 403(a), an annuity contract
described in Code Section 403(b), an eligible plan under
Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state,
political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred
into such plan from this article.
(c) "Distributee" includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving
spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or
former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified
domestic relations order, as defined in IRS Code Section
414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of the
spouse or former spouse.
(d) "Direct rollover" is a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
A. Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all
interest and rights under this article limited to those contained in the
following sections of this § 55-60.
B. Distribution of accumulated contributions. A participant whose
employment with the employer shall terminate for any reason other
than death or total and permanent disability prior to attainment of early
retirement date or normal retirement age shall be entitled to receive a
distribution of accumulated contributions. Upon receipt of such
§ 55-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-60
1:139
accumulated contributions, said participant and beneficiary shall not be
entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Deferred retirement benefit.
(1) A participant who shall have completed at least 12 years of credited
service and whose employment with the employer shall terminate
for any reason other than death or total and permanent disability
prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall be entitled to
elect to receive a deferred retirement benefit in lieu of a
distribution of accumulated contributions under Subsection B.
Such a deferred retirement benefit shall be in an amount equal to
the accrued benefit determined as of the date the participant's
employment terminated and shall commence when the participant
attains a normal retirement age. A participant may elect to
commence payments at his early retirement date, in which case,
the accrued benefit shall be reduced for early commencement
pursuant to § 55-56G. No benefits shall be payable until application
for a benefit has been made under § 55-56H hereof.
(2) Involuntary termination. Notwithstanding the preceding, a
participant who shall have completed at least 12 years of credited
service and whose office or employment with the employer shall be
terminated without his voluntary action, other than due to death or
total and permanent disability, prior to completion of 20 years of
credited service shall be entitled to elect to receive a deferred
retirement benefit in an amount equal to the accrued benefit and
shall commence on or after the date on which the participant
attains age 60 and after application for benefit has been made
under § 55-56H hereof, in lieu of the benefit described in the
preceding subsection.
(3) A participant who shall have completed at least 20 years of credited
service and whose office or employment with the employer shall be
terminated without his voluntary action, other than due to death or
total and permanent disability, prior to attainment of a normal
retirement age shall be entitled to elect to receive a deferred
retirement benefit in an amount equal to the participant's accrued
benefit as of the date of termination of employment, in lieu of the
benefit described in the first paragraph of this Subsection C. If such
an election is made, the participant must continue to pay
contributions into the pension fund on a monthly basis equal to the
monthly amount due and paid under § 55-55 during the last full
month of employment, with such contributions to continue until the
participant attains 55 years of age. Such deferred retirement
benefit shall commence thereafter upon application pursuant to
§ 55-56H. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2738]
D. Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal
process and shall be payable only to the participant or designated
§ 55-60 OIL CITY CODE § 55-60
1:140
§ 55-61. Administration.
beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer unless the
subject of a domestic relations order mandated by a court of competent
jurisdiction that clearly provides for proper distribution of a portion of
the pension benefit payments to an alternate payee (former spouse of
the participant) and does not require any benefit to be paid in excess of
the available earned and accrued under the plan.
E. Forfeiture. Rights under this article shall be subject to forfeiture as
provided by the act of July 8, 1978 (P.L. 752, No. 140), known as the
"Public Employee Pension Forfeiture Act."
A. Plan administrator. The Pension Plan Board shall be the plan
administrator and shall have the power and authority to do all acts and
to execute, acknowledge and deliver all instruments necessary to
implement and effectuate the purpose of this article. The plan
administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf to any persons
it deems appropriate. If a plan administrator is not appointed, the
Council shall be the plan administrator.
B. Pension Plan Board.
(1) The Pension Plan Board shall consist of the Mayor, City Controller,
City Manager, a retired City employee and two participants to be
chosen by the participants who are contributing to the pension
fund as well as one member of Council.
(2) Each member of the Pension Plan Board shall serve in that capacity
until the earliest of death, resignation or removal. Each member,
not including the Mayor, City Controller or City Manager, of the
Pension Plan Board may resign by giving written notice to the
Council and other members of the Pension Plan Board 30 days prior
to the date of resignation. Any vacancy on the Pension Plan Board
shall be filled in accord with the provisions governing initial
appointment as a member of the Pension Plan Board.
(3) The Pension Plan Board may organize itself in any manner deemed
appropriate to effectuate its purposes hereunder, provided that:
(a) It shall act by a majority of its members at the time in office
either by vote at a meeting or in writing without a meeting;
(b) It shall appoint a Chairman, a Secretary who may, but need not
be a Pension Plan Board member, and such other agents as it
may deem advisable;
(c) It may authorize any one or more of its members to execute any
document or documents including any application, request,
certificate, notice, consent, waiver or direction and shall notify
the Council, in writing, of each such member so authorized;
§ 55-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-61
1:141
however, if no such member is so authorized, the Chairman
shall be deemed to be so authorized;
(d) It shall meet at least one time in each plan year; and
(e) It shall maintain and keep such records as are necessary for
the efficient operation of the plan and preservation of the
Pension Fund or as may be required by any applicable law,
regulation or ruling, and shall provide for the preparation and
filing of such forms, reports or documents as may be required
to be filed with any governmental agency or department and
with the participants and/or other persons entitled to benefits
under the plan.
C. Authority and duties of the plan administrator.
(1) The plan administrator shall have full power and authority to do
whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary for the
proper administration and operation of the plan. The interpretation
or construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by
the plan administrator or any action of the plan administrator taken
in good faith shall be final and conclusive upon all parties hereto,
whether employees, participants or other persons concerned. By
way of specification and not limitation and except as specifically
limited hereafter, the plan administrator is authorized:
(a) To construe this article;
(b) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any
employee to participate herein;
(c) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
(d) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(e) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant
and/or other person in filing any application or election;
(f) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required
by law or as the plan administrator deems appropriate,
information explaining the plan;
(g) To require from the employer or any participant such
information as shall be necessary for the proper administration
of the plan; and
(h) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the
administration of the plan, including such legal, clerical,
accounting, actuarial and investment services as may be
required by any applicable law or laws.
§ 55-61 OIL CITY CODE § 55-61
1:142
(2) The plan administrator in its capacity as plan administrator shall
have no power to add to, subtract from or modify the terms of the
plan or change or add to any benefits provided by the plan, or to
waive or fail to apply any requirements of eligibility for benefits
under the plan. Further, the plan administrator shall have no power
to adopt, amend or terminate the plan, or to determine or require
any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Council in its capacity as the governing body of the
employer.
D. Plan administration expense. All reasonable expenses incident to the
functioning of the plan administrator, including, but not limited to, fees
of accountants, counsel, actuaries and other specialists and other costs
of administering the plan, may be paid from the pension fund upon
approval by the plan administrator to the extent permitted under
applicable law and not otherwise paid by the employer.
E. Hold harmless. No member of the Council nor the plan administrator
nor any other person involved in the administration of the plan shall be
liable to any person on account of any act or failure to act which is
taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing their respective
duties under the terms of this article. To the extent permitted by law,
the employer shall, and hereby does agree to, indemnify and hold
harmless the plan administrator and each successor and each of any
such individual's heirs, executors and administrators, and the plan
administrator's delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank,
firm or corporation which is independent of the employer and which
renders services to the plan for a fee) from any and all liability and
expenses, including counsel fees, reasonably incurred in any action,
suit or proceeding to which he is or may be made a party by reason of
being or having been the plan administrator or a delegate or appointee
of the plan administrator, except in matters involving criminal liability,
intentional or willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance
to cover claims of a nature described above, then there shall be no right
of indemnification except to the extent of any deductible amount under
the insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed
the insured amount.
F. Approval of benefits.
(1) The plan administrator shall review and approve or deny any
application for retirement benefits within 30 days following receipt
thereof or within such longer time as may be necessary under the
circumstances.
(2) Any denial of an application for retirement benefits shall be in
writing and shall specify the reason for such denial.
G. Appeal procedure. Any person whose application for retirement
benefits is denied, who questions the amount of benefit paid, who
believes a benefit should have commenced which did not so commence
§ 55-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-61
1:143
or who has some other claim arising under the plan ("claimant") shall
first seek a resolution of such claim under the procedure hereinafter set
forth.
(1) Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the plan
administrator which shall fully describe the nature of the claim.
The plan administrator shall review the claim and make an initial
determination approving or denying the claim.
(2) If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the plan administrator
shall, within 90 days (or such other period as may be established by
applicable law) from the time the application is received, mail
notice of such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may
be extended by the plan administrator if special circumstances so
require for up to 90 additional days by the plan administrator's
delivering notice of such extension to the claimant within the first
ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and, if a notice
of denial, shall set forth:
(a) The specific plan provisions on which the denial is based;
(b) An explanation of additional material or information, if any,
necessary to perfect such claim and a statement of why such
material or information is necessary; and
(c) An explanation of the review procedure.
(3) Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have
the right to request a full and fair review by the Council of the
initial determination. Such request for review must be made by
notice to the Council within 60 days of receipt of such notice of
denial. During such review, the claimant or a duly authorized
representative shall have the right to review any pertinent
documents and to submit any issues or comments in writing. The
Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of the notice requesting
such review (or in special circumstances, such as where the
Council in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days of
receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person
or persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be
final, conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall
contain specific references to the pertinent plan provisions on
which the decision is based.
(4) Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay
status shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first
payment which would be adjusted if the claim is granted, unless the
plan administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
(5) A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time
§ 55-61 OIL CITY CODE § 55-61
1:144
§ 55-62. The pension fund.
limitations specified above shall be deemed to have waived such
claim or right to review.
(6) Nothing contained herein is intended to abridge any right of a
claimant to appeal any final decision hereunder to a court of
competent jurisdiction under 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752. No decision
hereunder is a final decision from which such an appeal may be
taken until the entire appeal procedure of this § 55-61G of the plan
has been exhausted.
A. Operation of the pension fund.
(1) The Council of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized to hold and
supervise the investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject
to the provisions of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and of this article and any amendment thereto.
(2) The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the
plan and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the
expenses of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the
employer.
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the
exclusive benefit of its employees. It expects to make the
contributions to the pension fund required under the plan. The
employer shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in
the pension fund; benefits are payable only from the pension fund
and only to the extent that there are monies available therein.
(4) The pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer
under the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the
provisions hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds
thereof. The pension fund shall be held, managed and administered
pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in the plan, the employer has exclusive authority and
discretion to manage and control the pension fund assets. The
employer may, however, appoint a trustee, custodian and/or
investment manager, at its sole discretion.
B. Powers and duties of employer. With respect to the pension fund, the
employer shall have the following powers, rights and duties, in addition
to those vested in it elsewhere in the plan or by law, unless such duties
are delegated.
(1) To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable
and to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest
thereon.
§ 55-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-62
1:145
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or
as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property; to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and, in connection therewith, to grant proxies, discretionary
or otherwise.
(7) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be
appropriate for the purposes of this article, no matter where
situated, including in those cases where a bank has been appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder the savings department of its own
commercial bank.
(8) In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all
of the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts,
take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although
not specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem
necessary to administer the pension fund.
(9) To maintain and invest the assets of this article on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans
maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
(10) To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective
commingled trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company,
including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this
article with assets of other eligible, participating plans through
such a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the
plan which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be
subject to all of the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust,
as amended from time to time, which declaration, if required by its
§ 55-62 OIL CITY CODE § 55-62
1:146
terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan,
to the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled
trust fund by the plan.
(11) To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry
out the provisions of the plan, provided that, if a trustee is
appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
(12) To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
(13) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon, and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund,
any taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to
the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with respect to
the interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to
pay; to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax,
assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or made against
or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
(15) To appoint any persons or firms (including, but not limited to,
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists) or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance, as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with
the management of the fund; to the extent not prohibited by
applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely conclusively
upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good faith reliance upon the advice or opinion of such persons
or firms, provided such persons or firms were prudently chosen by
the employer, taking into account the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons
or firms to perform their assigned functions.
(16) To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all
or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons
or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that act),
or is an insurance company qualified to manage, acquire or dispose
of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one state; in
such event, the employer shall follow the directions of such
investment manager or managers with respect to the acquisition
and disposition of fund assets but shall not be liable for the acts or
omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it be
§ 55-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-62
1:147
§ 55-63. Amendment and termination.
under any obligation to review or otherwise manage any fund
assets which are subject to the management of such investment
manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the
trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment
manager except with the express written consent of the employer.
C. Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account but may invest contributions
and any profits or gains therefrom in common investments.
D. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is
appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by
law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the
trustee in carrying out his functions, shall constitute a charge upon the
employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after
30 days' written notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no
obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and in the event of its failure
to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same, or to reimburse
itself for the payment thereof, from the pension fund.
E. Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be
evaluated annually or at more frequent intervals by the trustee, and a
written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund, and
as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and
such additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the
condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements and other
transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
F. Value of the pension fund. All determinations as to the value of the
assets of the pension fund and as to the amount of the liabilities thereof
shall be made by the employer or its appointed trustee, whose decisions
shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto, the
participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In making any such
determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to seek and rely
upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers, appraisers
and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports as to
sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this article at any
time or from time to time by an instrument in writing executed in the
name of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly
authorized to execute such instrument and delivered to the Council;
provided, however:
§ 55-62 OIL CITY CODE § 55-63
1:148
(1) That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any
beneficiary of a deceased participant of any of the benefits to which
each is entitled under this article with respect to contributions
previously made;
(2) That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this article other than for the benefit of employees, and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in § 55-63E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by the
employer; and
(3) That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 55-64C has been prepared and presented to the Council in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument in
writing executed in the name of the employer.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either that the plan administrator
continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with the provisions or that the plan administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to the vested
accrued benefit to the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
§ 55-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-63
1:149
§ 55-64. Funding standard requirements.
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance in excess of employer contributions shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Actuarial valuations.
(1) The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as
of the beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered
calendar year, beginning with the year 1985. Such actuarial
valuation shall be prepared and certified by an approved actuary, as
such term is defined in the Act.
(2) The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial
valuation report or experience investigation required by the Act or
any other expenses which are permissible under the terms of the
Act and which are directly associated with administering the plan
shall be an allowable administrative expense payable from the
assets of the pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include
but not be limited to the following:
(a) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized
investments and investment management fees;
(b) Accounting expenses;
(c) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(d) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or
to defend the fund; and
(e) Legitimate travel and education expense for pension plan
officials; provided, however, that the municipal officials of the
§ 55-63 OIL CITY CODE § 55-64
1:150
§ 55-65. Miscellaneous.
employer, in their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services
provided to the plan to ensure that the expenses are necessary,
reasonable and benefit the pension plan; and, further provided,
that the plan administrator shall document all such expenses
item by item and, where necessary, hour by hour.
B. Duties of chief administrative officer.
(1) Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the
supervision of the chief administrative officer.
(2) The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any
given plan year. The chief administrative officer shall submit the
financial requirements of the plan and the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer to the plan annually and shall certify the
accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the Act.
C. Benefit modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the employer, the chief administrative officer of the plan
shall provide to the Council a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Council the impact of the proposed
benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements of the
plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the employer with
respect to the plan.
A. Employment rights. Participation in this plan shall not give any right to
any employee to be retained in the employ of the employer nor shall it
interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee and
to deal with such employee without regard to the effect that such
treatment might have upon participation in this plan.
B. Meaning of certain words. As used herein, the masculine gender shall
include the feminine gender and the singular shall include the plural in
all cases where such meaning would be appropriate. Headings of
sections are inserted only for convenience of reference and are not to
be considered in the construction of the plan.
C. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish
to the plan administrator (and, where applicable, the trustee)
information in the employer's possession as the plan administrator and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under
the plan.
D. Severability of provisions. Should any provisions of this article be held
illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this article, and the plan shall be
§ 55-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-65
1:151
construed and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had
never been inserted herein.
E. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of pension benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining the
participant and that no guardian or committee has been appointed for
the participant, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining the participant,
and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to
have been made to such participant.
F. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants of
this plan and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be free, clear and
discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts, contracts
or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be contracted,
and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred by any
participant or beneficiary.
G. Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable
under the plan to or on behalf of a participant who has died, if the plan
provides that the payment of such benefits shall be made to the
participant's estate, and if no administration of such participant's estate
is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the plan
administrator, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving
spouse of such deceased participant, or if there be no such surviving
spouse, to such participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the plan
administrator from insisting upon the commencement of estate
administration proceedings and the delivery of any such benefits to a
duly appointed executor or administrator.
H. Assets in pension fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
give any participant or beneficiary any interest in any specific property
of the pension fund or any right except to receive such distributions as
are expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless
otherwise specifically required by other applicable laws, no past,
present or future officer or agent of the employer or plan administrator
shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person
under any provision of the plan.
§ 55-65 OIL CITY CODE § 55-65
1:152
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 80
ABANDONED OR VACANT PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blighted Property Review Committee — See
Ch. 15.
Construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 242.
Tax exemptions for improvements to
deteriorated property — See Ch. 285, Art. X.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — A property or structure that is vacant for more than 30
days and is or has been, the subject of:
ASSESSED VALUE — The amount posted or listed on the public records
as assessed value for a property either recorded or published by Venango
County, Pennsylvania.
CITY — The City of Oil City, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that, on its own or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is vacant. Such conditions shall include, but are not
limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail, past-due utility notices, and/or disconnected
utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, clutter, the absence of
window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence
of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation,
statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents or government
employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE — The process by which a property, placed as security
for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor
(borrower) defaults.
A. A mortgage foreclosure action or notice;
B. A bankruptcy sale or notice;
C. A delinquent tax sale or notice; or
A mortgage foreclosure action where the title to the property has been
retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure
or transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
D.
§ 55-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:153
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HIGH GRASS — All grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees
or shrubs, in excess of 12 inches high. This term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens.
OWNER — Any person:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, financial institution,
bank, credit union, savings and loan company, investment firm, government
agency, government authority, municipal corporation or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES — Has the same meaning as property.
PROPERTY — Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion
thereof, located within the City. Included in this definition are the buildings
or structures located on the property regardless of condition.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
VACANT — Any building, structure or property that is not legally occupied.
§ 80-2. Inspections.
Any person who owns vacant property within the City of Oil City shall
perform, or contract to have performed, an inspection of the property within
10 days of purchase, and again prior to January 21 of each year, and, if
a property is vacant, it shall be inspected by the owner, or his designee,
monthly until the property becomes legally occupied or the property is
legally sold to another person.
§ 80-3. Registration.
A. Having a legal or equitable interest in a property;
Having a legal interest in a property recorded in the official records of
the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
B.
Otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by
a court.
C.
A. If any property is found to be vacant or abandoned or shows evidence of
vacancy, the owner shall register the property with the Oil City Code
Enforcement Office on a form or forms to be provided by the City and
pay a registration fee established in § 80-7 of this chapter.
§ 80-1 OIL CITY CODE § 80-3
1:154
§ 80-4. Maintenance requirements.
Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be kept free of
weeds, high grass, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, garbage, junk, debris,
rubbish, clutter, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local
law), discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture,
clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items
that give the appearance that the property is abandoned; and
B. Registration shall contain:
(1) The name of the owner(s) of the property;
(2) The direct street/office mailing address of the owner(s) (no post
office box addresses are permitted);
(3) A direct contact name and phone number for the owner(s);
(4) The local property management company responsible for the
security, maintenance, marketing of the property; and
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the Oil City Code
Enforcement Office.
C. Registration fees shall not be prorated.
D. The annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form.
E. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year or
remaining portion of the calendar year in which the registration was
initially required.
F. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year.
G. Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall remain under
the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance
standards of this chapter for so long as they remain vacant.
H. Any owner or his designee that has registered a property under this
chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change to the Oil City Code Office.
A. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior of the structure; and
B. Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained.
"Landscape" includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation.
"Landscape" does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt,
decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor/outdoor carpet or
any similar material; and
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-4
1:155
§ 80-5. Security requirements.
§ 80-6. Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the
City of Oil City Code Enforcement Office shall have the authority to require
the owner of any property affected by this chapter to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures, including, but not limited to,
securing any and all door, window or other openings, installing additional
security lighting, increasing on-site inspections frequency, employment of
an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required
to arrest the decline of the property.
C. Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains
clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either
case, a property with a pool or spa must comply with the minimum
security fencing requirements of the Oil City Property Maintenance
Code; and
D. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any property owner of any
obligations set forth in any other ordinance of the City of Oil City,
including, but not limited to, the Oil City Property Maintenance Code.35
A. Properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be
maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to
unauthorized persons or vermin, rats and other pests.
B. "Secure manner" includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking
of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any
other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior
of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of broken windows,
securing means the reglazing or boarding of the window.
C. If a property has been condemned, the property shall be posted with the
name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the owner and
local property management company. The posting shall be no less than
three inches by five inches and shall be of a font and writing that is
legible and shall contain, along with the name, the City of Oil City
vacant property registration number, a twenty-four-hour contact
number and the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO
REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be
placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the
property so it is visible or secured to the exterior of the building or
structure facing the street to the front of the property or, if no such area
exists, on an area of sufficient size to support the posting in a location
that is visible to the front of the property, but not readily accessible to
vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with
weather-resistant materials.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Property Maintenance.
§ 80-4 OIL CITY CODE § 80-7
1:156
§ 80-7. Fees; delinquent fees as lien.
§ 80-8. Enforcement.
Violations of this chapter shall be enforced by the Oil City Code
Enforcement Office.
§ 80-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subject to all
costs of prosecution, a fine in the amount of not less than $500 and no more
than $1,000 for the first two continual and uncorrected violations, or for
the third and any subsequent continual and uncorrected violation, a fine of
$1,000; or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days in addition to
those fines imposed in this section. Unpaid fines shall be registered as a lien
against the violating property.
Chapter 84
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 84-1. Purpose and findings.
A. The registration fee required under § 80-3 of this chapter shall be $25
per vacant property as defined in § 80-1. In addition to the yearly fee
required by this chapter, any person who is found to be in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in any summary proceeding, post a
one-time nonrefundable security deposit for each and every property
owned and required to be registered by this chapter in an amount equal
to 1/2 the assessed value of the registered property.
B. For any person who fails to pay the registration fee or the
nonrefundable security deposit required in § 80-7A in full when due,
said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing to the City, and the
City may enter a lien on any violating property as provided by law.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in the Third Class City Code to
promote and secure the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of
the citizens of the City of Oil City; to regulate and inspect the use
and occupancy of public buildings; to regulate places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation; and to prevent and
prohibit public nuisances due to adverse secondary effects, the City
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1
1:157
of Oil City (hereinafter "City") enacts this chapter to minimize and
control the adverse secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses
and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens;
protect the citizens' property values and the character of
surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight.
(2) The City has determined that licensing is a legitimate and
reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of
adult-oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and
to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their
establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(3) The City does not intend this chapter to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment but to enact a contentneutral
ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of adultoriented
businesses. It is not the intent of the City enacting this
legislation to deny any person their rights of speech protected by
the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or both, nor is it the intent of the
City to impose by this chapter any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and other
materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the City does not
intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view,
or both, any sexually oriented materials or conduct protected by
the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or both, nor does it intend to
restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that
distributors or exhibitors may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
these sexually oriented materials.
B. Legislative, judicial and research findings. The City finds:
(1) Law enforcement personnel have determined, and statistics and
studies performed in a substantial number of communities in this
commonwealth and in the United States have indicated, that adultoriented
businesses have adverse secondary effects, including
those specified and recognized at 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501(a), which
secondary effects should be regulated to protect the public's
health, safety and welfare. These secondary effects include, but are
not limited to, the spread of communicable diseases; the
performance of sexual acts in public places; the presence of
discarded sexually oriented materials on public and private
property; sexual harassment; obscenity, prostitution and other
illegal sexual activities; crime; decreased property values and
neighborhood deterioration.
(2) Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult-oriented businesses on the community as presented: a) in
depositions and hearings conducted by the United States District
§ 84-1 OIL CITY CODE § 84-1
1:158
Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania and the United States
District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania; b) on
findings incorporated in the following cases: City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 41 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc.,
501 U.S. 560 (1991); c) from studies and reports from other cities
throughout the country, including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Biloxi, Mississippi; Seattle, Washington;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas;
and d) on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's
Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses,
(June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); the City finds:
(a) Adult-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently
uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments, and there
is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
(b) Certain employees of adult-oriented businesses as defined in
this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher
incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than other
employees of other establishments.
(c) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex,
occur at adult-oriented businesses, especially those which
provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing
films, videos or live sex shows. Furthermore, adult bookstores
tend to attract homosexual men who engage in unprotected,
high-risk sexual activities. Offering and providing such space
encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy
conditions.
(d) Persons frequent adult theaters, adult arcades and other adultoriented
businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within
the premises of such adult-oriented businesses.
(e) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in adult-oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, Hepatitis B, Non A and
Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
(f) The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of
October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and
HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood
components, and from an infected mother to the newborn.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1
1:159
(g) According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and
HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts.
(h) Sanitary conditions in some adult-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of
the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of
the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain their
facilities.
(i) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in areas of adult-oriented businesses where persons view
adult-oriented films.
(j) Numerous studies have indicated that adult-oriented
businesses have a substantial negative impact on property
values and cause neighborhood blight.
(k) The findings noted in Subsection B(2)(a) through (j) raise
substantial governmental concerns.
(3) Adult-oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects in the
nature of creating a public nuisance, which secondary effects
should be regulated to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the general public.
(4) Adult-oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial government concerns.
(5) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
operators of the adult-oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see
that their adult-oriented businesses are run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as
well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the adult-oriented business, fully in possession and control of the
premises and activities occurring therein.
(6) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises that have adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters and bookstores.
(7) Requiring licensees of adult-oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidences of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
§ 84-1 OIL CITY CODE § 84-1
1:160
§ 84-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following word and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place in which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or, for any form of consideration,
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(8) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
adult-oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually-transmitted
diseases.
(9) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to
such activity.
(10) The fact that an applicant for an adult-oriented-business-use
license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the
rational assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in that
conduct in the breach of the provisions of this chapter. The barring
of such individuals from the ownership and/or management of
adult-oriented businesses in the City serves as a deterrent to and
prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(11) The limitation of operating hours of adult-oriented businesses from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and closure of
such businesses on Sunday and holidays reduces the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses, including, in particular, latenight
noise levels, crime, sexually offensive materials and activities
in public areas, as well as promoting the public health, safety and
welfare.
(12) The reasonable regulation and supervision of adult-oriented
businesses tends to discourage sexual acts and prostitution and
thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of patrons, clients
and customers of these businesses.
(13) The continued unregulated operation of such adult-oriented
businesses would be detrimental to the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
(14) The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the City
will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:161
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguishable or
characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representation which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
In terms of this definition, the term "principal purpose" shall be defined
as occupying 50% or greater of the total gross floor area of the business
that is open for public access.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas" or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
C.
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures which are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
A.
A live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a significant
or substantial portion of the performance which includes any actual
or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition or
viewing of specified anatomical areas or persons in a state of nudity or
seminudity; or
B.
§ 84-2 OIL CITY CODE § 84-2
1:162
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or
other commercial establishment where adult entertainment is presented for
money or other forms of consideration.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, tavern, concert hall, banquet hall, party
room, conference center, restaurant, nightclub, club, bar, recreation center,
indoor amusement center, dance hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or seminudity or performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified sexual areas or specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of an
adult-oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether
or not the person is determined an employee, independent contractor,
agent, lessee, lessee of a dance floor or space or otherwise, and whether
or not said person is paid a salary, wage or compensation by the operator
of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISH — Includes any of the following:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate an adult-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new
business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adultoriented
business, to any adult-oriented business;
B.
The addition of any adult-oriented business or sexually oriented use to
any other existing adult-oriented business or sexually oriented use; or
C.
D. The relocation of any adult-oriented business.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:163
the application for a license, and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in an adultoriented
business.
KNOWINGLY — Having a general knowledge of or reason to know, or a
belief or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of
both:
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person appears seminude, in
a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. Nude model studios shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which includes a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation;
private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably accessible to examination by a licensee.
A.
The age of a minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
That no sign is visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
one time.
C.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
§ 84-2 OIL CITY CODE § 84-2
1:164
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; gambling or distribution of a controlled
substance, or any similar offenses to those described above that are
covered under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries.
A.
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(2)
Less than five years has elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within a twenty-four-month period.
(3)
B.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
C.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy;
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in A and B above; or
C.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:165
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor areas occupied by
the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas existing on the date of
licensing.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Includes any of the
following:
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms
or other enclosures which are available for viewing:
§ 84-3. License required.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control; and
B.
Any change in the identity of the officers or directors of a corporation
operating an adult-oriented business.
C.
Films, movies, videos or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or who offer
performances or presentations characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) For any person to establish and operate an adult-oriented business
after the effective date of this chapter without a valid adultoriented
business license issued by the City pursuant to this
chapter;
(2) For any person to establish and operate an adult-oriented business
after the effective date of this chapter or to employ a person to
work for the adult-oriented business who is not licensed as an
adult-oriented business employee by the City pursuant to this
chapter;
(3) For any person to obtain employment with an adult-oriented
business after the effective date of this chapter without have
secured an adult-oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter;
(4) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter,
for any person to continue to operate an adult-oriented business
already in operation on the effective date of this chapter without a
valid adult-oriented business license pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter;
§ 84-2 OIL CITY CODE § 84-3
1:166
(5) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter,
for any person operating an adult-oriented business in operation at
the time of the enactment of this chapter to employ a person to
work for that adult-oriented business who is not licensed as an
adult-oriented business employee by the City pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter; and
(6) Beginning on the 180th day after the effective date of this chapter,
for any person working as an employee of an adult-oriented
business on the effective date of this chapter to continue such
employment without having secured an adult-oriented business
employee license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Application for a business or employee license must be made on a form
provided by the City. For purposes of this chapter, the responsibility for
conducting any investigation, receiving and processing any application,
and issuing or denying any license required under this chapter shall be
the Oil City Chief of Police.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as to enable the City to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as the
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has twenty-percent or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as an applicant. Each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
E. Adult-oriented business license applications. The completed application
for an adult-oriented business license shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents.
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual. The individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age;
(b) A partnership. The partnership shall state its complete name
and the names of all partners; whether the partnership is
general or limited; and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
(c) A corporation. The corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, the type or classification of the
corporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation and qualified and
authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names and
§ 84-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:167
capacity of all officers and directors, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and address of the registered
office;
(d) Any entity other than a partnership or corporation. The entity
shall submit the information required in Subsection E(3)
through (10) of this section below for each person exercising
control over the entity.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
a) the adult-oriented business' fictitious name; and b) submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar adultoriented
business ordinance from another municipality, county or
jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the adult-oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and/or whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or
an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
or was licensed under this chapter or other similar adult-oriented
business ordinance from another municipality, county or
jurisdiction whose license has previously been denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked,
as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar adultoriented
business ordinance from another municipality, county or
jurisdiction and, if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses.
(6) The specific classification of adult-oriented use for which the
applicant is filing, along with a detailed description of each and
every activity encompassed by the proposed adult-oriented use,
which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or
intended compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(7) The location of the proposed adult-oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
§ 84-3 OIL CITY CODE § 84-3
1:168
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s),
(10) The applicant(s)' driver's license number(s), social security
number(s), and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification
number(s).
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
(12) If an applicant wishes to operate an adult-oriented business which
shall show on the premises any films, video cassettes, other video
reproductions, or live entertainment which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas in a viewing room or booth
of less than 150 square feet of floor space, then the applicant shall
also comply with the application requirements set forth in § 84-12
of this chapter.
(13) A statement of intended operating hours in compliance with
§ 84-18 of this chapter.
(14) An infectious disease control plan to protect employees and the
public from bodily fluids or infectious contamination. A copy of the
plan shall be attached to the application and shall be OSHA
(Occupational Safety and Health Act) compliant.
F. Adult-oriented business employee applications.
(1) Before any applicant may be issued an adult-oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the City the following information:
(a) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage"
names) or aliases used by the individual;
(b) Age, date and place of birth;
(c) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(d) Present residence address and telephone number;
(e) Present business address and telephone number, if any;
(f) Date, issuing state and driver's license number or other
identification card information;
(g) Social security number; and
(h) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
§ 84-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:169
§ 84-4. Issuances of licenses.
(2) Attached to the application form for an adult-oriented business
employee license shall also be the following:
(a) At the time the application is filed, the City will take a color
photograph of the employee applicant clearly showing the
applicant's face, which photograph shall be used to complete
the criminal background check required by this chapter.
(b) A statement detailing any licensing history of the applicant for
the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the employee application, including whether such applicant
previously operated or was/is seeking to operate, in this or any
other county, municipality, state or country, any type of
business, or has ever had a license, permit or authorization to
conduct any type of business denied, revoked or suspended, or
had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, state the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the
denial, revocation or suspension, and attach such information
to the application.
(c) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so,
the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.
(d) A statement acknowledging that the employee has reviewed
the infectious disease control plan adopted by the adultoriented
business.
G. Any and all adult-oriented businesses in operation within the City as of
the effective date of this chapter must apply for the required licenses
and pay any applicable license fees under this chapter and,
furthermore, must come into full compliance with this chapter within
180 days after the effective date of this chapter.
H. To the extent permitted by law, all applications for licenses required by
this chapter and materials submitted therewith shall be maintained by
the City in a confidential file which shall not be made available to the
public, except that all adult-oriented business licenses shall be available
for public inspection.
A. Upon the filing of a fully completed application for an adult-oriented
business license or employee license, the application shall then be
referred to the Police Chief as the licensing administrator for purposes
of this chapter for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained in the application and any attachments thereto. The
processing and investigation of the applications shall be completed
§ 84-3 OIL CITY CODE § 84-4
1:170
within 30 days of the date that the fully completed application is filed
with the City. Any incomplete application shall be returned to the
applicant and the thirty-day period for processing and investigation
shall not commence until a fully completed application has been filed
and accepted. After the processing and investigation, the City shall
issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity,"
as defined in this chapter.
(4) The license is to be used for operation of a business or employment
in a business that is prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter.
(5) The applicant has had an adult-oriented business license or adultoriented
business employee license permanently revoked by the
City within one year of the date of the current application.
(6) The required application, investigation and license fees have not
been paid.
(7) An applicant's license to operate an adult-oriented business issued
by any other jurisdiction has been revoked within the preceding
twelve-month period.
(8) The application demonstrates that the proposed adult-oriented
business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(9) If the adult-oriented business license or adult-oriented business
employee license is denied, nonrenewed, suspended or revoked,
such action shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 84-9 of this
chapter.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon submission of the required written application by the
applicant and a finding by the City that the applicant has not been
convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license which
would have been grounds to deny the initial license application. The
renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set
forth in § 84-5 of this chapter.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is being granted, the expiration date, the address of
the adult-oriented business or employee, and the specific classification
of adult-oriented use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall be
§ 84-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-4
1:171
§ 84-5. Fees.
§ 84-6. Inspection.
Subject to the consent of an applicant or licensee, the Police Chief may
inspect the premises of any adult-oriented businesses for purposes of
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adultoriented
business so that they may be easily viewed at any time.
D. Applications for licenses required by the City under this chapter shall
be processed and either denied or approved in 30 days after a complete
application is filed with the City. A letter notifying the applicant of such
denial or approval shall be mailed to the applicant within 30 days of the
submittal of a complete application. It the City fails to render a decision
granting, denying or renewing a license required by this chapter within
30 days after a complete application is filed with the City, the license
required by this chapter shall be deemed to have been approved. This
"deemed approved" rule shall apply to both applications for adultoriented
business licenses and adult-oriented business employee
licenses.
E. An adult-oriented business license shall be issued for the specific
classification of adult-oriented use permitted by this chapter and
applied for.
F. Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension, nonrenewable or
revocation of a license may appeal, in writing within 10 days from the
date of such denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation to the City
Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 84-9 of this
chapter.
A. Every application for a new adult-oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a five-hundred-dollar nonrefundable application and
investigation fee.
B. Every application for renewal of an existing adult-oriented business
license shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable renewal
license fee of $200 within 30 days of the license renewal.
C. Every application for an adult-oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual fifty-dollar nonrefundable application,
investigation and license fee.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Oil City Police
Department, at which time the application shall be forwarded to the
Chief of Police who is designated as licensing administrator for review,
investigation and approval or denial of the completed application.
E. The schedule of fees set forth in this section may be amended from time
to time by proper action of City Council.
§ 84-4 OIL CITY CODE § 84-6
1:172
ensuring compliance with this chapter during any time it is open for
business. In the event that the Police Chief has probable cause to believe
that an adult-oriented business is operating in violation of this chapter,
he may inspect the premises of the adult-oriented business for purpose
of ensuring compliance with this chapter during any time it is open for
business.
§ 84-7. Expiration of license.
§ 84-8. Suspension and revocation.
A. Each license issued under this chapter shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
provided in § 84-3 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made
at least 30 days before the expiration date; if made less than 30 days
before the expiration date, the date of the expiration of the license will
not be extended.
B. When the Police Chief denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for a one-year period from the date of denial. If
subsequent to denial the Police Chief finds that the basis for denial of
the renewal license has been corrected and abated to his satisfaction,
the applicant shall be granted a license after at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date of denial.
A. The Police Chief shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has
violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter.
B. The Police Chief shall revoke a license if the cause for suspension in
§ 84-8A occurs and the license has been previously suspended within
the preceding twelve-month period.
C. The Police Chief shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the adult-oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the licensed premises;
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment of any City, county or state
taxes or fees; or
§ 84-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-8
1:173
§ 84-9. Appeals.36
(7) A licensee has failed to develop and follow an infectious disease
control plan to protect employees and the public.
D. When the Police Chief revokes the license, the revocation shall continue
for a one-year period, and the licensee shall not be issued an adultoriented
business license for a one-year period from the date the
revocation became effective. If, however, subsequent to revocation the
Police Chief finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected
or abated to his satisfaction, the applicant shall be granted a license
after at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective.
A. All license application denial, renewal, suspension or revocation
decisions shall be sent in writing to the applicant or licensee. All
decisions which deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a license shall
state specifically the ordinance requirement not met and any other
basis for the decision. After denial of an application or denial of a
renewal of an application, or after the suspension or revocation of any
license, the applicant or licensee may appeal the decision pursuant to
procedures contained in the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et
seq. and 751 et seq.) to the City Council, except as modified herein. Any
such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the City Manager within 10
days from the date of the mailing of the decision appealed and shall
specify, in detail, the basis for the appeal. Failure or refusal to file said
appeal or specify the basis of said appeal with the City Manager shall be
deemed a conclusive determination as to the issue or matters
addressed by the written decision. If an appeal is timely filed, City
Council will then, within 20 days from the date the appeal is filed,
establish and advertise a Local Agency Law hearing pursuant to 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq. The hearing date will be set no
later than 30 days from the date the advertisement is published. A
written decision shall then be rendered within 10 business days from
the conclusion of such hearing. In the case of a denial of a license
renewal, or in the case of a license suspension or revocation, the
licensee may continue to operate to the same extent as immediately
prior to the suspension or revocation until the earlier of: 1) the
expiration of the 10 days' appeal period without filing an appeal; or 2)
the date of a final decision dismissing the appeal.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council may appeal to
the court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the Local Agency Law (2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.) and 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 933(a)(2).
The City shall, upon filing such appeal, consent to any request by a
license applicant or licensee to the court to give expedited review of
such appeal. The City shall certify any record to the court within 20
days after the appeal is filed. In the case of denial of a license renewal
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 84-8 OIL CITY CODE § 84-9
1:174
§ 84-10. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another party, nor shall a
licensee operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 84-11. Additional regulations regarding expansion of existing or
creation of new adult-oriented businesses.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if that person causes or permits
the operation, establishment or maintenance of an unlicensed adultoriented
business activity in the same building, structure or portion thereof
containing other licensed adult-oriented business activities or causes or
permits an expansion of a previously licensed adult-oriented business
activity in any building, structure or portion thereof without first obtaining
the necessary license to operate or expand that adult-oriented business
activity.
§ 84-12. Regulations pertaining to exhibitions in viewing rooms.
or in the case of a license's suspension or revocation, the licensee may
continue to operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the
suspension or revocation until the earlier of:
(1) The expiration of the thirty-day appeal period without filing an
appeal; or
(2) The date of a decision dismissing an appeal by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented
business which shows on the premises a film, video cassette, live
entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in a viewing room of less
than 150 square feet of floor space shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
managers' stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and the designation of any portion of the premises in which patrons
will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
in which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram such as an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the North and to some designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The City may waive the
§ 84-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-12
1:175
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant certifies
that the diagram with configurations that were previously
submitted and approved has not been altered since it was
prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the City.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain
video-reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
designated managers' stations, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from at least one of the managers' stations to any areas of the
premises to which patrons are permitted access for any purpose.
The view that is required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) above remains unobstructed at all
times by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials, and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted as per
the application filed pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between the
viewing rooms or booths.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make or create an opening of
any kind between the viewing booths or rooms.
§ 84-12 OIL CITY CODE § 84-12
1:176
§ 84-13. Additional regulations to prevent physical contact with
patrons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person in an adult-oriented
business to knowingly and intentionally appear in a seminude or nude
condition, unless that person is an employee. The employee, while nude or
seminude, shall be at least two feet from any patron or customer on a stage.
The stage must be elevated at least two feet from the floor level.
§ 84-14. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§ 84-15. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
(12) The licensee, during each business day, shall regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths or
rooms to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths or rooms to be constructed of or permanently
covered by nonporous, easily cleanable materials. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used
within 48 inches of the floor.
(15) A licensee shall brief all employees as to the approved infectious
disease control plan and OSHA regulations before and during
employment at intervals of at least six months and shall maintain
records demonstrating that all employees have been so informed
during those intervals. These records shall be made available to the
City upon request.
B. A licensee or employee having a duty under Subsection A(1) through
(15) above commits a violation of this chapter if he/she knowingly fails
to fulfill that duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this chapter if
the person appears in a state of nudity on the premises of a nude model
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person
§ 84-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-15
1:177
§ 84-16. Additional regulations.
§ 84-17. Prohibition against children in adult entertainment
business.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of an adult-oriented
business.
§ 84-18. Hours of operation.
No adult-oriented business shall be open for business before 8:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to
any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity, in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room that is open to the public.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly and
intentionally in a public place:
(1) Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse, as defined by the Pennsylvania Crime Code; or
(2) Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
B. For purpose of this chapter, "public places" include all outdoor areas
owned by or open to the general public and all buildings and enclosed
places owned by or open to the general public, including but not limited
to places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance
halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members,
and party rooms or halls restricted to adults or to patrons invited to
attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. The section shall
not apply to:
(1) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant under two years of age; or
(2) The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form of artistic
and theatrical performances.
C. It is the intention of the City that this section be construed, enforced
and interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible
infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech, free expression,
due process, equal protection or fundamental rights.
§ 84-15 OIL CITY CODE § 84-18
1:178
An adult-oriented business shall be closed at all times on Sundays and legal
federal or state-recognized holidays.
§ 84-19. Violations and penalties.
The City shall enforce any violation of this chapter through a civil
enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge. The civil
enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by complaint or by such other
means as may be provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any
provision of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not
more than $500 for each violation, plus all court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the enforcement proceedings. In any
case where a penalty for a violation of this chapter has not been timely
paid and the person upon whom the penalty was imposed is found to have
been liable therefor in civil proceeding, the violator shall be liable for the
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the enforcement
proceedings. A separate violation shall arise for each day or portion thereof
in which a violation is found to exist for each section of the ordinance which
is found to have been violated. Additionally, the City shall be exempt from
the payment of costs in any civil case brought to enforce an ordinance in
accordance with this paragraph. Further, the City may enforce any violation
of this chapter through an equity action brought in the Court of Common
Pleas of Venango County.
Chapter 88
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 166.
§ 84-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-19
1:179

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose
§ 88-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Public Safety Alarm System Ordinance."
§ 88-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing burglary,
robbery, fire or medical alarm systems, businesses and agents within the
City, to require permits and fees therefor and to establish fines for violation
thereof.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-2
1:181

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 88-3. Words and terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be
construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing or
installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS —
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
or used for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire or need for medical
assistance within a building, structure or facility or for alerting others to
the commission of an unlawful act or hazard within a building, structure or
facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when actuated. "Alarm systems" include, but are not limited to, direct dial
telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which
are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or
perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not
included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by the
telephone company to protect telephone systems which might be damaged
or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. An alarm system includes
all of the necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of
burglary, robbery, fire, need for medical assistance or other hazard in a
single building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission
of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both.
APPLICANT — A person who files an application for a new or renewal
permit as provided by this chapter.
AUDIBLE ALARM — A device designed for the detection of burglary,
robbery, fire or medical assistance on premises which generates an audible
sound on the premises when it is actuated.
CITY — The City of Oil City.
DAY — A calendar day.
The occupation by any individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be
sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved
or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
A.
Exemption. The provisions of this subsection do not include a business
which engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system, unless
such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems.
B.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:183
DIRECT LINK SYSTEM — An alarm system that is directly connected to the
City's safety communications center panel (police and/or fire) and emits an
audible alarm therein upon activation.
FALSE ALARMS — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or his employees or agents. In addition, the
use of an alarm to summon Police or Fire Department personnel for reasons
other than those listed on alarm system permits will also be considered a
"false alarm." "False alarms" shall not include alarms caused by electrical
interruptions, floods or other natural disasters.
INDIRECT LINK SYSTEM — An alarm system that is not directly connected
to the City's safety communications center panel (police and/or fire), but
which indirectly summons Police or Fire Department personnel by emitting
a sound or transmitting a signal or message when activated.
NONRESIDENT PERMITTEE — A nonresident household or business
located outside the corporate limits of the City of Oil City who has met
all the obligations and requirements of this chapter and has been issued a
permit hereunder.
PERMITTEE — Any person who shall be granted a permit, as provided in
this chapter and his agents and representatives.
PERSON — Natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
POLICE CHIEF — The appointed head of the Oil City Police Department or
his designated representative.
PROPRIETOR ALARM — An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm
business.
REPORTING TELEPHONE — Any intrusion-detection device which, when
activated, causes, either mechanically, electronically or by any other
automatic means, intrastate dialing of any telephone number and then
transmits a prerecorded message.
RESIDENT PERMITTEE — A resident household or business of the City of
Oil City who has met all the obligations and requirements of this chapter
and has been issued a permit hereunder.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or
otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business.
§ 88-3 OIL CITY CODE § 88-3
1:184
ARTICLE III
Regulations and Requirements
§ 88-4. Standards.
All alarm systems installed within the City or attached to the City's public
safety communications center shall be designed to operate in a manner
which will not create a hazard to person or property, result in electrical
interference or become a nuisance to the neighborhood area.
§ 88-5. Shutting off alarm.
Upon notification by the City's Police Department that an audible alarm
is activated, the permittee, his representative or his alarm agent shall
immediately proceed to silence the alarm, and the silencing shall be finished
within 30 minutes. Alternatively, the alarm system may be equipped with an
automatic shutoff device which shall silence the alarm within 30 minutes,
thus eliminating the need for a personal response as otherwise required
by this section. Any alarm system that does not meet the silencing
requirements of this section shall be considered to be a false alarm, and the
penalty provisions of § 88-21 shall apply.
§ 88-6. Record of inspection.
Each alarm business, alarm agent or permittee shall display to the Police
Chief, when requested, his record of inspection or repair of an installed
alarm system.
§ 88-7. Instruction of alarm operators.
Each alarm business, alarm agent or permittee which installs or services an
alarm system shall clearly instruct the operators of the alarm systems in the
proper use and operation of the alarm system as frequently as necessary,
especially in those factors which can cause false alarms.
§ 88-8. Use of subscriber number.
No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate or cause to
be used or operated or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide
or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation,
either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means initiate the
intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned
to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior written
consent of such subscriber. The term "telephone number" includes any
additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the
business of providing communication services and facilities to be used by
means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to such
primary number when the primary telephone number is in use. In no case
will the prerecorded message from such reporting telephone terminate at
any City-owned facility unless such message emanates from a permittee.
§ 88-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-9
1:185
§ 88-9. Unlawful sirens.
It is unlawful to install on the exterior or interior of a building an intrusiondetection
device or burglar alarm system which, upon actuation, emits a
sound exceeding 85 decibels (when measured from outside the premises),
which is similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or in vehicles used
for civil defense purposes.
§ 88-10. Compliance required.
No person shall connect or continue to have connected any burglary,
robbery, fire or medical alarm system to the City public safety
communications center or other City communications center unless the
alarm system complies with all requirements of this chapter.
§ 88-9 OIL CITY CODE § 88-10
1:186
ARTICLE IV
Permit and License Requirements
§ 88-11. Businesses.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business within
the City without complying with all applicable federal, state or local laws,
including those related to permits, licenses and taxation. Each alarm
business owner and operator is required to provide the Police Chief with the
name, address and phone number of each new subscriber within the City
prior to the activation of the new alarm system or upon notification that an
existing alarm system has been sold or transferred to another subscriber.
§ 88-12. Agents.
No person shall operate as an alarm agent within the City without
complying with all applicable federal, state or local laws, including those
related to permits, licenses and taxation.
§ 88-13. Alarm systems.
No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for
and receiving an alarm permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 88-14. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to
automobiles.
§ 88-15. Notice of change.
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required
by this chapter, the applicant/permittee or his representative shall give
written notice thereof to the Police Chief within 10 days after such change.
§ 88-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-15
1:187

ARTICLE V
Permits
§ 88-16. Issuing authority.
The issuing authority shall be the City.
§ 88-17. Applications.
Applications for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the
Police Department and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. The fee
is not refundable. The Police Department shall prescribe the form of the
application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act
upon the permit application. The permit shall be denied if the alarm system
does not comply with standards adopted pursuant to this chapter or if the
applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement
of a material fact in the application for permit.
§ 88-18. Permits. [Amended 2-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2795]
The fees for an alarm system permit are established below, and such
permits issued shall expire one year after said issuance, or January 1 of
the succeeding year, whichever comes first. Permit fees for permits issued
during the course of the current year shall be calculated on a pro rata basis.
Applications for renewal of permits shall be processed in the same manner
as applications for the initial permit. Permits shall be nontransferable. Upon
receiving an application from any person for an alarm permit, the Police
Chief may cause an investigation to be made of the system to be installed to
determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter and
all applicable laws and ordinances.
Permit
Fees
(per alarm location)
Resident Fees (annual permit)
Direct link systems
Residential/nonresidential $150
Indirect link systems
Residential/nonresidential $30
Nonresident Fees (annual permit)
Direct link systems
Residential/nonresidential $200
Indirect link systems
Residential/nonresidential $100
§ 88-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-19
1:189
§ 88-19. Emergency numbers required.
The alarm permittee shall supply, on his application for permit, the names,
addresses and phone numbers of at least two persons to call in the event
of an emergency. If the permittee has arranged for a service contract,
emergency telephone numbers of the service company shall be supplied. In
the case whereby the contact phone numbers shall change, said permittee
shall notify the City of any changes within seven calendar days.
§ 88-19 OIL CITY CODE § 88-19
1:190
ARTICLE VI
Maintenance; False Alarms; Disconnection
§ 88-20. Maintenance; inspections.
§ 88-21. False alarms. [Amended 2-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2795]
§ 88-22. Disconnection of service.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to disconnect service and terminate
responses to an alarm system where the alarm user has been assessed
with five or more penalties in any calendar year and to suspend any City
response until such time as the alarm user has his alarm system certified
A. Each permittee shall maintain each alarm system in good working
order, providing the necessary service to prevent false alarms, to
prevent malfunctions endangering persons or property and to prevent
other malfunctions.
B. Each permittee shall cause each alarm system to be inspected regularly
by a representative of the company with a service contract or other
person qualified to inspect and service such equipment at least once
every six months. Inspections shall be complete enough to detect any
likely malfunctions and may include testing of the equipment. No alarm
system, however, shall be tested with a resulting transmission of the
alarm to the public safety communications center of the City unless the
City is so notified in advance. The person making the inspection shall
provide a written report to the permittee, and the report shall be kept
on hand for 12 months, subject to being shown to any representative of
the Police Department of the City when requested during business
hours.
A. For any alarms that are responded to by the Oil City Police and/or Fire
Departments and are found to be false, the following charges shall be
made to the permittee:
(1) Two or less false alarms in a calendar year: no penalty.
(2) Three to four false alarms in a calendar year: $50 per false alarm.
(3) Five or more false alarms in a calendar year: $100 per false alarm.
B. Notification thereof to the permittee shall be made within 10 days from
the false alarm.
C. For the purposes of this section, alarms will not be considered false and
no penalty fee shall be imposed if: 1) corrective measures are instituted
within 72 hours after the alarm has been transmitted and written proof
of repairs is given to the Police Chief; or 2) a person who has accidently
caused a false alarm immediately calls the affected department of the
City in time to prevent a response of personnel and equipment to the
premises.
§ 88-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-22
1:191
as repaired and functioning properly by a company which installs and
maintains alarm systems.
§ 88-22 OIL CITY CODE § 88-22
1:192
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 88-23. Exempt parties.
The United States Government, the state, counties, municipal corporations,
departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from fees
required by this chapter.
§ 88-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300, and costs
of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 88-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-24
1:193
Chapter 92
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 130. Peace and good order — See Ch. 221.
§ 88-24 OIL CITY CODE § 88-24
1:194
ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 2-9-1981 by Ord. No. 2395 (Ch. 61, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 92-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words or phrases, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof, whether rectified or
diluted, with or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall
include synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol
that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes any drink or drinkable liquid,
preparation or mixture which contains alcohol.
CONTAINER — Includes any receptacle, vessel or form of package, keg,
can, bottle, cup, glass, mug or conduit used or capable of using for holding,
storing, transferring or shipment of alcoholic beverages.
OPEN CONTAINER — Includes any container which has been unsealed for
the purpose of removing the contents thereof or from which contents may
be removed due to such unsealing.
VEHICLE — Includes every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported, except devices used exclusively upon
rails or tracks.
§ 92-2. Prohibited conduct; exception for certain events.
A. Prohibition: Except when permitted in accordance with Subsection B
below, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or be in
possession of any alcoholic beverage in an open container in any public
park within the corporate limits of the City of Oil City or on any street,
roadway, alley or public sidewalk within the said corporate limits or in
or on any public facility of the City. In no circumstance shall any person
consume any alcoholic beverage or be in possession of any alcoholic
beverage in an open container while in or on a vehicle being operated
upon or parked, stopped or standing on a street, roadway, alley or
public sidewalk or in any public parking area or in or on any public park
or public facility within the corporate limits of the City.
B. Exception: City-approved special events.
(1) The City Manager may grant approval to individuals or
organizations to conduct special events which have a public or
quasi-public purpose, as determined by the City Manager, within
the prohibited public areas designated in Subsection A. During
such events, alcoholic beverages may be sold by or under the
auspices of the individual or organization and possessed and
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:195
consumed by patrons of the event, if each of the following
conditions is observed:
(a) The individual or organization has submitted a written
application to the City Manager a minimum of 60 days prior to
the beginning of the event. The request must contain a detailed
description of the special event proposed to be conducted,
including all elements set forth in Subsection B(3) below. The
City Manager will coordinate review of the request by the
Police, Fire and Public Works Departments and such other
departments as the City Manager shall designate. The City
Manager reserves the right to disapprove any such request if it
is determined to be inconsistent with the public interest or to
have an adverse effect upon public safety, health or welfare.
(b) The individual or organization has obtained a special occasion
permit issued by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(c) The individual or organization has executed an agreement with
the City at least 30 days in advance of the event, which
agreement will contain, but not be limited to, the following
elements:
[1] A designation of the event dates and hours of sale of
alcoholic beverages. The City retains, in its sole discretion,
the right to approve or disapprove such dates and hours.
[2] A plan for enclosing, restricting or controlling access to
the special event area, which must be approved by the
Police, Fire and Public Works Departments as well as any
other governmental agency which may have jurisdiction.
[3] A plan for police protection, crowd and traffic control. The
plan and personnel necessary to implement it shall be
approved by the Police Department and furnished at the
expense of the organization.
[4] Provisions for sanitary facilities and for safety inspections
as determined to be necessary by the Fire and Building
and Zoning Departments.
[5] A provision which will indemnify and hold the City, its
officials and employees harmless from any claim and
comprehensive general liability and a separate liquor
liability insurance provision in a minimum amount of
$1,000,000 combined single limit on each coverage,
evidenced by a certificate approved by the City Solicitor.
[6] A provision which reserves the right of the City to
immediately revoke permission and to suspend or
terminate the event or any portion of it if any element of
the agreement is violated.
§ 92-2 OIL CITY CODE § 92-2
1:196
§ 92-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before any Magisterial District Judge
having jurisdiction of such offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $300 or to undergo imprisonment not exceeding 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the Magisterial District Judge.
[7] Any other provision, term, plan or condition deemed
necessary by the City, including cost recovery to the City.
(2) Events sponsored or co-sponsored by the City and conducted upon
municipal property or at municipal facilities may also be approved
by City Council, subject to compliance with the foregoing
requirements, as applicable.
C. The Council of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and empowered
to prepare, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations to implement
this article. Such rules and regulations shall have the full force and
effect of law unless modified, revoked or repealed by Council.
§ 92-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-3
1:197
Chapter 98
BICYCLES
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Skateboards — See Ch. 259.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A device having two tandem wheels of a diameter not less than
10 inches and propelled by human power.37
STREET — Includes all public highways, boulevards, streets, lanes, alleys
and all public places within the City of Oil City.
§ 98-2. Bicycle registration required.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any public street within the
City of Oil City unless said bicycle has been properly registered, tagged and
licensed as hereinafter provided.
A. Every owner of a bicycle residing within the City of Oil City shall list and
register said bicycle with the Police Department of the City of Oil City at
police headquarters and shall make application for such registration to
the Chief of Police on a form provided for that purpose. If the owner is a
minor under the age of 18 years, then his parents, or one of them, or if
said minor does not reside with his parents, or either of them, then the
adult person having care of said minor or the adult person with whom
said minor resides, shall make such listing and registration and the
application therefor on behalf of said minor owner. [Amended
9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 2450]
B. Registrations of bicycles shall be serially numbered and kept on file by
the Chief of Police in his office as a public record.
C. The Chief of Police, upon receiving proper registration of a bicycle,
shall affix, or cause to be affixed, to the rear mudguard, frame or other
rear portion of the bicycle, an identification tag or plate serially
numbered to correspond to the bicycle registration in such position as
to be plainly visible from the rear. A registration card shall be issued to
the owner of each properly registered bicycle.
D. No charge for the registering and tagging of bicycles shall be made.
However, a charge of $0.25 shall be made for the issuance of duplicate
37.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions regulating pedalcycles, see 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3501 et
seq.
§ 92-3 OIL CITY CODE § 98-2
1:198
registration cards and/or plates. Such charges for duplicate
registrations shall be paid to the Chief of Police at the time of issuance
of duplicate registration.
E. It shall be the duty of the owner to see that such tag or plate is attached
to the bicycle for which it is issued and that it remains attached thereto
during the existence of such license.
F. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the following:
(1) The number of each registration.
(2) The date issued.
(3) The name and address of the person to whom issued.
(4) The make and number of each bicycle frame.
(5) A record of all bicycle registration fees collected.
G. Bicycles registered under the provisions of this chapter shall be
registered on or before June 1, 1950, and on or before the 30th day of
April of each year thereafter. The Chief of Police shall affix, or cause to
be affixed, a new identification tag or plate to each bicycle at the time of
such registration.
H. Within 10 days after the sale, transfer or dismantling of any registered
bicycle, such information shall be reported to the Chief of Police by the
person in whose name the bicycle was registered. Such person may
have the identification tag or plate of his former bicycle transferred to
another bicycle owned by him without payment of an additional fee
upon proper registration of such bicycle with the Chief of Police.
I. It shall be the duty of any purchaser or transferee of any registered
bicycle to make application for new registration of such bicycle and for
new tag or plate.
J. Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report within five days to the Chief of
Police of the following:
(1) Of every bicycle purchased or sold by said dealer, giving the name
and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold.
(2) A description of such bicycle by name or make.
(3) The frame number thereof.
(4) The number of the identification plate, if any, found thereon.
K. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is properly registered and tagged and unless such bicycle is
provided with the equipment required under the terms of this chapter.
§ 98-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-2
1:199
§ 98-3. Examination of applicant.
§ 98-4. Inspection of bicycles.
The Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative, shall inspect each
bicycle presented for registration and shall refuse to license any bicycle
found to be in an unsafe condition mechanically or lacking the equipment
specified as necessary under the terms of this chapter.
§ 98-5. Required equipment.
§ 98-6. Bicycle operation.
L. It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the identification tag or plate, frame number
of the bicycle or the registration card issued to the owner thereof.
M. All license cards and registration cards shall expire on the 30th day of
April following the date of issue, and all bicycles shall be reregistered
and retagged annually and with the same payment as provided for
originally.
A. Before a bicycle registration is issued, the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate personally, in such manner as the Chief of Police shall
direct, that he or she is the proper person and is capable of riding a
bicycle; further, such applicant shall satisfactorily pass an examination
to determine his knowledge of safe riding rules and practices as this
chapter and the Chief of Police may from time to time prescribe.
B. If the owner of a bicycle is a minor for whom an application is made by
an adult, as hereinbefore provided, the minor shall be deemed the
applicant for the purpose of this section.
A. Every bicycle operated upon a public street at any time, during the
period of one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise, and at any
other time when there is not sufficient light under normal atmospheric
conditions to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
street at a distance of 300 feet ahead, shall be equipped with a lighted
lamp on the front thereof and shall also be equipped with a red reflector
or lamp on the rear, exhibiting or reflecting a red light, visible under
like conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet to the rear of such
bicycle. Said reflector or lamp on the rear shall be of a diameter of at
least 1 1/2 inches.
B. No bicycle shall be registered, nor shall any person operate a bicycle
upon the public streets of the City of Oil City, unless the same is
equipped with a mechanical braking device in good working condition,
with a bell, horn or other warning device in good working condition
(except sirens of all types which are forbidden and shall be unlawful
hereunder), and unless the mechanical parts of the bicycle shall be in
good working condition.
§ 98-2 OIL CITY CODE § 98-6
1:200
§ 98-7. Violation of traffic rules.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle to violate any traffic rules or
ordinances of the City of Oil City or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
that are applicable to bicycles or to motor vehicles.
§ 98-8. Operation by children.
A. A bicycle shall be operated only on the roadway of streets and as near to
the right-hand side as possible. Bicycles shall not be operated on
sidewalks in the City of Oil City. This provision shall, however, not apply
to a child under 10 years of age operating a bicycle in a purely
residential part of the City under the control or guidance of his parent
or an adult person.
B. The operator of a bicycle shall obey all official traffic signals, signs and
other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
C. The operator of a bicycle emerging from a driveway or building shall
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on the sidewalk and to all
vehicles on the roadway.
D. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry any other person upon the
handlebar, frame or any part of the bicycle. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of bicycles built to be operated by two or
more persons.
E. The operator of a bicycle shall not indulge in any abnormal or trick
riding and shall keep at least one hand on the handlebars at all times
when in use.
F. Operators of bicycles shall not ride in any manner other than single file,
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
G. Operators of bicycles shall not hitch onto vehicles or street cars upon a
roadway.
H. The operator of a bicycle shall park the same upon the roadway at the
curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a
building, except windows or glass doors thereof, in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a bicycle to permit any child to
operate his bicycle upon a public street of the City of Oil City, unless
such child or person is capable of operating a bicycle with safety to
himself and the public generally.
B. If a child shall have satisfactorily passed an examination by the Police
Department of the City of Oil City to determine his ability to ride a
bicycle, and to determine his knowledge of safe riding rules and
§ 98-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-8
1:201
§ 98-9. Bicycles owned by nonresidents.
Any bicycle owned and operated by a nonresident of the City of Oil City shall
not be required to be registered under the provisions of this chapter but
shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter.
§ 98-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 110
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 142.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 150.
Fuel gas code — See Ch. 174.
Mechanical code — See Ch. 200.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 230.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238, Art. I.
practices prescribed under this chapter, the passing of such
examination shall be prima facie evidence under this chapter of the
ability of such child to operate a bicycle with safety.
A. If the owner or operator of any bicycle shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter, said bicycle may be taken and impounded by the Police
Department of the City of Oil City and so held by said Department for a
period not exceeding 15 days, to be determined by the Chief of Police of
said Department.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating § 98-2I, J, K or L or § 98-8
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be subject to a
fine of not less than $5 nor more than $25, together with the costs of
prosecution.
C. Any person violating any other provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, in addition to the penalty
provided for in Subsection A, be subject to a fine not to exceed $5,
together with the costs of prosecution.
§ 98-8 OIL CITY CODE § 98-10
1:202
ARTICLE I
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 8-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2665 (Ch. 71, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 110-1. Adoption of standards.38
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated
as the "International Residential Code," 2009 Edition, including Appendix
Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and J, as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Oil City,
County of Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more
than three stories in height in the City of Oil City, and provisions, conditions
and terms of said Residential Code are with this referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed in § 110-3 of this article.
§ 110-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2623 of the City of Oil City, entitled "CABO One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code of the City of Oil City,"39 and all other ordinances or
parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed.
§ 110-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the "International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Oil City"
and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
R101.3 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum
requirements to safeguard life or limb, health and public welfare.
R108.1 through R108.5, entitled "Fee Schedule," is amended to read
as follows:
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2623, adopted 1-12-1998, appeared as former Art. II, CABO
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:203
The fee for each building permit and required inspections shall be $10 for
$0 to $1,000; $25 for $1,001 to $5,000; $30 for $5,001 to $6,000; $35
for $6,001 to $7,000; $40 for $7,001 to $8,000; $45 for $8,001 to $9,000;
$50 for $9,001 to $10,000; $55 for $10,001 to $11,000; $60 for $11,001
to $12,000; $65 for $12,001 to $13,000; $70 for $13,001 to $14,000; $75
for $14,001 to $15,000; $80 for $15,001 to $16,000; $85 for $16,001 to
$17,000; $90 for $17,001 to $18,000; $95 for $18,001 to $19,000; $100 for
$19,001 to $20,000; and over $20,000, $100, plus $6 for each additional
$1,000 or part thereof. When the project includes work normally covered
by a plumbing, electrical, mechanical or energy permit, the fees for those
permits shall not be separately charged, but rather the value of such work
shall be included in the total project costs.
R108.4 Work prior to permit. In the event work is commenced on
any project prior to the issuance of a building permit, the fees for the
acquisition of a permit shall be doubled.
R108.4 Plan examination. In addition to the fees listed above, the
following fees shall be charged when applicable. The fee for each plan
examination shall be computed at 40% of the building permit fee. In no
instance shall the fee be less than $25.
R108.4 Demolition - razing. Fees shall be as follows: $65 up to 10,000
square feet and $2 for each additional 1,000 square feet for commercial
buildings (all floors and basements); $30 up to 1,500 square feet and $1.50
for each additional 250 square feet for residential dwellings (all floors and
basements); $15 up to 1,000 square feet and $1 for each additional 250
square feet for garages and sheds (all floors and basements).
R108.4 Reinspection fee: $50. A reinspection shall be assessed after due
notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provision of
Sections R113.4 and R114.3 and the violation, illegal action or unsafe
condition continues.
R113.4 Violation penalties. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
or more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and any fee or
fees, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
R114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work
in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100
or more than $1,000.
§ 110-3 OIL CITY CODE § 110-3
1:204
R112.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal
a decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better
form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form
obtained from the Code Official within 20 days after the notice was sent.
Reference Standards40
Code Inserts:
IBC 2009 International Building Code
IPC 2009 International Plumbing Code
IMC 2009 International Mechanical Code
NEC 2008 National Electrical Code
IPMC 2009 International Property Maintenance Code
IECC 2009 International Energy Conservation Code
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:205

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2777]
§ 110-4. Adoption of Building Code. [Amended 2-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 2796]
The City of Oil City hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
to 7210.1103, as may be amended from time to time, and its regulations,
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of
Oil City and the Oil City Library. The City will designate an employee to
serve as the Code Official and may also contract with an approved thirdparty
agency or agencies on an as-needed basis for enforcement and plan
review services. The Uniform Construction Code (hereinafter sometimes
collectively referred to as "the code"), contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 to 450, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference as the Building Code of the City
of Oil City. The provisions therein shall establish minimum standards for
the construction and maintenance of buildings and structures. All of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, along with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed in § 110-6 of this article.
§ 110-5. Inconsistent ordinance repealed. [Amended 2-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 2796]
Ordinance Number 2701 of the City of Oil City, entitled "the Building Code
of the City of Oil City," and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with this article are hereby repealed.
§ 110-6. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Uniform Construction Code are hereby revised
as follows:
A. Section 401.1, entitled "Definitions," shall be amended to include the
following definition:
City — City of Oil City
B. Section 401.2a, entitled "Municipal and Third-Party Agency Fees," is
deleted in its entirety and is amended to read as follows: [Amended
2-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2796]
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-6
1:207
(a) The following fees shall apply to the City's issuance of a permit
for the construction and/or alteration of a building or structure:
$10 for $0 to $1,000; $25 for $1,001 to $5,000; $30 for $5,001
to $6,000; $35 for $6,001 to $7,000; $40 for $7,001 to $8,000;
$45 for $8,001 to $9,000; $50 for $9,001 to $10,000; $55 for
$10,001 to $11,000; $60 for $11,001 to $12,000; $65 for $12,001 to
$13,000; $70 for $13,001 to $14,000; $75 for $14,001 to $15,000;
$80 for $15,001 to $16,000; $85 for $16,001 to $17,000; $90 for
$17,001 to $18,000; $95 for $18,001 to $19,000; $100 for $19,001
to $20,000. Over $20,000 shall be $250 plus an additional $10 for
each additional $1,000 or part thereof.
Act 157 of 2006 amended Act 45 of 1999, the Uniform Construction
Code Act (UCC), to require municipalities administering and enforcing
the UCC to assess a fee of $4 (which may be amended from time
to time) on each construction or building permit issued under the
authority of this Act. The fee shall be in addition to any other fee
imposed for the permit.
When the project includes work normally covered by a plumbing,
electrical, mechanical or energy permit, the fees for those permits
shall not be separately charged, but rather the value of such work shall
be included in the total project costs.
(1) Work started prior to obtaining a permit. In the event work is
commenced on any project prior to the issuance of a building
permit. The fees for the acquisition of a permit shall be doubled.
(2) Plan examination. In addition to the fees listed above, the following
fees shall be charged when applicable. The fee for each plan review
examination on all commercial projects shall be computed as
follows: up to $1,000,000, 0.0013 X construction valuation;
$1,000,000 to $5,000,000, $1,300 + (0.0004 X construction
valuation); over $5,000,000, $3,300 + (0.00031 X construction
cost); individual disciplines, 25% of building plan review;
accessibility, $125. In no instance shall the total fee be less than
$130.
The fee for each plan review examination on all residential
projects shall be computed as follows: The fee for each plan
examination shall be computed at 40% of the building permit fee.
In no instance shall the fee be less than $25.
(3) Demolition – razing. Fees shall be as follows: $500 for commercial
buildings (all floors and basements), $100 for residential dwellings
(all floors and basements), and $30 for garages and sheds (all floors
and basements).
(4) Reinspection fee: $50. A reinspection fee shall be assessed after
due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions of Section 403.83 and the violation, illegal action or
unsafe condition continues.
§ 110-6 OIL CITY CODE § 110-6
1:208
C. Section 403.21, entitled "Uniform Construction Code," subsection (a)(2)
shall be amended by deleting the current language and replacing with
the following:
(2) The "ICC Electrical Code" and the "2008 Edition of the NFPA 70,
National Electrical Code," including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D
and E.
D. Section 403.81, entitled "Stop-work order," shall be amended by
deleting subsection (c) in its entirety and replacing it with the
following:
(c) A person who continues construction after service of a stop-work
order, except for construction that is necessary to remove a
violation or an unsafe condition, may be subject to the penalties
under Section 903 of the Act (35 P.S. § 7210.903) as outlined
below. A building code official may seek enforcement of a stopwork
order in a court of competent jurisdiction.
Penalties for violation(s): Any individual, firm or corporation that
violates any provision of the Act commits a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more that
$1,000 and costs. Each day that a violation of the Act continues
shall be considered a separate violation. The amount of the penalty
shall be forwarded to the entity with enforcement jurisdiction.
E. Section 403.121, entitled "Board of Appeals," is amended in the
following manner:
A. Section 403.121(b) shall be amended by adding the following
sentence to the end of the subsection:
"The Board shall have no authority to waive the requirements of
this Code."
B. Section 403.121(c) shall be amended by adding the following to the
subsection:
(5) The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the
City Manager, with the advice and consent of City Council.
Each Board member shall serve for a five-year term or until a
successor has been appointed. The Board shall adopt rules of
procedures for conducting its business.
C. Section 403.121(f) shall be amended by adding the following
sentence to the end of the subsection:
"All costs associated with the hearing shall be paid by the
appellant."
F. A new section entitled "PRE-ACT 45 PROVISIONS" shall be added to
Chapter 403 (Administration), as follows:
PRE-ACT 45 PROVISIONS
Section 403
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-6
1:209
(a) Any new building or renovation to existing buildings for which an
application for a permit was made to the City before April 9, 2004,
will be subject to any applicable codes that were in effect prior to
the passage of this article.
(b) Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed
as cited in § 110-5 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or
remedy or character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
(c) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the City of Oil City on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full
force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from
time to time.
(d) All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the City not
governed by the code and/or modified by this article shall remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 8. Reference standards.
This chapter shall be amended to delete the various code references
and include the following code references in their place:
The provisions of Chapters 2 to 29 and 31 to 35 of the 2009
International Building Code. Chapter 27 (Electrical) requires that
all electrical components, equipment and systems in buildings and
structures covered by the IBC comply with the requirements of
NFPA 70-2008, National Electric Code.
Appendixes E (Supplementary Accessibility Requirements) and H
(Signs) of the 2009 International Building Code are adopted.
Chapter 11 requires that buildings and facilities also comply with
the accessibility requirements found in the ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003,
Accessible and usable buildings and facilities standard.
The 2009 ICC Electrical Code
The 2008 Edition of the NFPA National Electrical Code, including
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D and E
The 2009 International Energy Conservation Code
The 2009 International Existing Building Code
Work on existing, nonresidential buildings can comply with these
code requirements or Chapter 34 of the International Building
Code 2009.
All appendixes and resource information are adopted.
The 2009 International Fire Code
Appendixes B, C, D, E
§ 110-6 OIL CITY CODE § 110-6
1:210
The 2009 International Fuel Gas Code
Any LPG requirements are superseded by the requirements of
Pennsylvania's Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act41 (and
regulations)
The 2009 International Mechanical Code
The 2009 International Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities
The 2009 International Plumbing Code
The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code
The 2009 International Residential Code
Sections AE501 to AE503 and AE601 to AE605 of Appendix E and
Appendix G (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) of the 2009
International Residential Code
Appendix G of the 2009 International Residential Code
The 2009 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code
Supplementary requirements that may be used to mitigate
firesafety and life-safety hazards in unique wildland areas
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1329.1 et seq.
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-6
1:211
Chapter 115
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238, Art. I.
§ 115-1. Street names at street corners.
The names of all the streets in the City shall be affixed at each street corner.
§ 115-2. Lots to be numbered.
The lots on each and every street in the City shall be numbered, and the
frontage of each lot shall be the same as laid out on the City Map, to each
of which shall be given an alternate number, commencing with number one
upon one side of the street and with number two on the other side.
§ 115-3. Map of street names and numbers to be filed.
The work of affixing the names of streets and measuring and dividing the
frontage for numbering shall be done under contract, and a map or chart
of the streets, showing the numbers as aforesaid, shall be deposited in the
office of the City Controller.
§ 115-4. Property owners to affix building numbers. [Amended
12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
The owner or owners of each house or building fronting on any public street
within the City shall, within 30 days after the measuring and dividing of said
streets as aforesaid, cause to be affixed to his or their house or building,
in a conspicuous place thereon, in legible figures no less than two inches
in height, the number or numbers thereof, and the owner or owners of any
house or other building hereafter built upon any public street shall, within
30 days after such building shall be completed or occupied, affix thereon
the number or numbers thereof as aforesaid, and in case of the neglect of
any owner or owners to comply with the provisions of this section, the City
Engineer shall cause the necessary numbers to be affixed and the expense
to be collected from such owner or owners.
§ 115-5. Functions of City Engineer. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord.
No. 2456]
The City Engineer shall designate the point upon each street at which the
numbers shall commence, and the affixing of the names of streets upon the
corners thereof shall be done under his direction.
Chapter 120
§ 110-6 OIL CITY CODE § 115-5
1:212
CEMETERIES
§ 120-1. Burials in established cemeteries only. [Amended
12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
It shall be unlawful to bury any human body at any place within this City
except within an established cemetery.
§ 120-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of the first section of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined in a sum not to exceed $25, and any person
digging a grave for the burial of any human body, or assisting therein, shall
be fined in a sum not to exceed $10.
Chapter 126
CURFEW
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME — Eastern standard time, except for the period
established by proclamation Eastern daylight saving time as "official City
time."
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as applied to
associations or partnerships, shall include the members or partners thereof
and, as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian or any adult person,
21 years of age or over, responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 126-2. Unlawful conduct of minors.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor who has not attained the 16th
anniversary of the date of his birth to remain in or upon any public place
or any establishment in the City of Oil City between the hours of 10:15
§ 115-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-2
1:213
§ 126-3. Unlawful conduct of parents.
§ 126-4. Unlawful conduct of owners and operators of
establishments.
§ 126-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official City time, except that
on Fridays and Saturdays and all nights between June 1 and September
15, inclusive, the hours shall be from 11:15 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor, 16 years of age but under 18 years of
age, to remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
between the hours of 11:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day,
official City time, except that on Fridays and Saturdays and all nights
between June 1 and September 15, inclusive, the hours shall be from
12:15 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the same day.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by a parent, or to a minor upon an errand or other legitimate business
directed by such minor's parent, or to any minor who is engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours, provided that said
minor carries identification and evidence in writing to this effect.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to permit any minor to
remain in or upon any public place or any establishment between the
hours specified under § 126-2A and B hereof.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent who
accompanies a minor or to a parent who directs a minor upon an errand
or other legitimate business or to any parent of a minor engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours, provided that the
minor carries written identification and written evidence to that effect.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment or his agents or
employees knowingly to permit any minor unaccompanied by a parent
to remain upon the premises of said establishment during the hours
restricted under § 126-2A and B.
B. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating the provisions of this
chapter shall obtain information from such minor as to his name and
address, age and the name of his parent or parents. The minor shall
thereupon be taken to police headquarters and held in custody. The
minor's parent or parents shall be notified of the violation and required
to report to police headquarters for the purpose of accompanying the
minor to his home. The information obtained from the minor shall be
§ 126-2 OIL CITY CODE § 126-5
1:214
§ 126-6. Curfew signal.
As a convenience to those minors who have not attained the 16th
anniversary of the date of their birth, a signal will be given by three blasts
of the fire siren at 10:00 p.m. between September 16 and May 31, inclusive,
and at 11:00 p.m. between June 1 and September 15, inclusive, official City
time.
Chapter 130
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers — See Ch. 92, Art. I. Nuisance properties — See Ch. 208, Art. I.
§ 130-1. Acts of disorderly conduct enumerated.
Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, upon the streets, lanes,
alleys, parks, public places or private premises in the City of Oil City,
Pennsylvania, he shall be found drunk; engage in, aid or abet any riot,
affray, unlawful assemblage or fight; use loud, boisterous, profane, indecent
or vulgar language; act in a loud boisterous manner; make or cause to
be made any loud boisterous noise or disturbance; loaf or loiter upon the
streets, lanes, avenues, alleys or public places of the City to the annoyance
of the public; obstruct the entrance to any public or private building; fire
any gun, pistol or other firearm or explode any explosives or fireworks
of any kind; willfully obstruct any public street, lane, avenue or alley,
pavement, footwalk or crossing; write, post or expose to view any lewd or
indecent word, picture or device; indecently expose his person; prowl or
loiter around or upon any of the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys, parks, public
transmitted to the Chief of Police, who shall cause a written notice to
be mailed to the parent or parents of the minor advising of the violation
of this chapter.
B. Any parent who shall permit a minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter, after having received notice of a prior violation, shall be fined
not less $5 nor more than $100 for each violation, together with
judgment of imprisonment not exceeding 10 days if any fine imposed,
together with costs, is not paid within 10 days of the date of imposition
thereof.
C. Any operator of an establishment and any agents or employees of any
operator who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $300 for each violation, together with
judgment of imprisonment not exceeding 30 days if any fine imposed,
together with costs, is not paid within 10 days of the date of imposition
thereof.
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:215
places or private premises for the purpose of inviting immoral or indecent
conduct; establish or carry on upon the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys or
public places any show, game or other demonstration for the purpose of
attracting a crowd without the permission of the Police Department of the
City of Oil City; congregate with others or loaf or loiter in and around
poolrooms, bowling alleys, taverns and other public or private places to
the annoyance of the public; fail to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a
police officer where acts of disorderly conduct are being committed in the
immediate vicinity.
§ 130-2. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct in the
City of Oil City.
§ 130-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be subject to pay a fine
not exceeding $300 and costs for each offense and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Venango County Jail for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 134
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 134-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any animal, domestic or wild, other than man, which may be
affected by rabies.
CAT — Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
CONTROL OF AN ANIMAL — That the same is on a leash not more than
eight feet in length; or is under voice control in the presence of a competent
person; or is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or is within the
property limits of its owner or harborer or upon the premises of another
person with the consent of that person.
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
KENNEL — A facility where animals, normally dogs and cats not owned
by the proprietor, are temporarily sheltered, fed, watered and exercised in
return for a fee.
LIVESTOCK — Any camelid or hooved animal, including, but not limited to,
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, mules, burros, goats, deer, elk, sheep, llamas,
alpacas and vicunas, whether or not raised for domestic or commercial
use, breeding, exhibition or sale, and any animals normally found in the
§ 130-1 OIL CITY CODE § 134-1
1:216
wild state which are being kept for exhibition purposes or as private
pets.[Added 4-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2830]
OWNER — Any person having right of property in any animal, who keeps an
animal, who has an animal in his care or custody, or who knowingly permits
an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, estate or other legal entity.
POULTRY — Any species of domestic or wild fowl, including, but not limited
to, chickens, turkeys, confined pigeons, ostriches, emus, rheas,
cassowaries, waterfowl, game birds or birds of prey, whether or not raised
for domestic or commercial use, food production, breeding, exhibition or
sale.[Added 4-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2830]
SHADE — Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of
June through September.
SHELTER — As it applies to dogs, a moisture-proof structure of suitable
size to accommodate the dog and allow the retention of body heat, made
of durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the
ground and with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof material.
Such structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable
bedding to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
VOICE CONTROL — That an animal:
§ 134-2. Livestock and poultry forbidden. [Added 4-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 2830]
No person shall hereafter keep or maintain any livestock or poultry within
the municipal boundaries of the City of Oil City except as provided in
§ 134-3 of this chapter.
§ 134-3. Exceptions. [Added 4-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2830]
Those persons who keep or maintain any livestock or poultry within the
municipal boundaries of the City of Oil City as of the effective date of this
section:
A. Is physically capable of hearing normal commands;
Is, at the time under consideration, within reasonable proximity to
the controller so that shouting or excessively loud commands are not
necessary;
B.
Has been adequately trained in obedience so as to be capable of
understanding control commands; and
C.
Either continually demonstrates or is able to demonstrate on demand
response to a command that will cause the animal to immediately come
into close proximity to the controller and cease any kind of aggressive
behavior or action that would be offensive to other persons or animals.
D.
§ 134-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:217
§ 134-4. Damage to private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or cat to
permit such dog or cat to go upon any private lands or premises without the
permission of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush
or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree, garden or other item of
personal property in any manner whatsoever or to defecate thereon.
§ 134-5. Removal of excrement; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog or cat to
be on property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person
unless such person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device
for scooping excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission
of excrement to a receptacle located upon the property owned or possessed
by such person. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.
§ 134-6. Public areas.
No dog or cat shall be allowed in any parks, beaches or any swimming
areas open to the public in the City, whether under control or otherwise.
This section shall not apply to a person who is visually, audibly or physically
handicapped.
§ 134-7. Pens, yards and runs.
All pens, yards or runs or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall
be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and kept in good repair. In
addition, any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog or
cat on his property shall promptly remove and properly dispose of all animal
waste on said property so as not to create a health hazard on the property
and to prevent foul odors from being emitted onto adjacent properties.
§ 134-8. Location of shelters.
No doghouse, pen or kennel shall be maintained closer than 40 feet to any
habitable residence or structure other than that occupied by the owner or
occupants of the premises upon which the dogs are kept.
A. May continue to keep or maintain the said livestock or poultry until the
death of said livestock or poultry or until the owner discontinues such
keeping or maintenance of livestock or poultry, whichever event shall
first occur; and
B. In the event of the death of any existing livestock or poultry, may
replace (on a one-for-one basis) the deceased livestock or poultry.
§ 134-3 OIL CITY CODE § 134-9
1:218
§ 134-9. Fences.
Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be securely
constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair and shall
not be allowed to become unsightly.
§ 134-10. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog or cat to
permit the same to run at large. For the purpose of this section, "running at
large" shall be defined to be the presence of a dog or cat at any place except
upon the premises of the owner. A dog or cat shall not be considered to be
running at large if it is on a leash or under control of a person physically
able to control it.
§ 134-11. Impoundment.
Whenever any police officer or other person designated by the Chief of
Police shall find any dog or cat running at large as defined in this chapter,
he shall, if possible, pick up and impound such animal in such place as the
Chief of Police may direct.
§ 134-12. Nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog
which habitually barks, howls or yelps or any cat which habitually cries or
howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood
or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be public nuisances.
§ 134-13. Complaints.
A. Whenever any person shall complain to the Police Department that a
dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually
cries or howls is being kept by any person in the City, the Police
Department shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint
has been received and that the person should take those steps
necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
B. If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or cat as
set forth in Subsection A above is ineffective, then a verified complaint
of at least two citizens not from the same family may be presented to
the Police Department, alleging that a dog which habitually barks,
howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is being kept by
any person within the City. The Police Department shall inform the
owner of such dog or cat that said petition has been received and shall
cite the owner of the dog or cat for the violation alleged in said petition.
§ 134-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-14
1:219
§ 134-14. Cruelty or abuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously inflict
unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture or abuse or cruelly beat, strike or
abuse any animal or, by any act, omission or neglect, abuse or inflict any
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal,
whether such animal belongs to such person or to another, except that
reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing
animals.
§ 134-15. Food and shelter.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any animal to fail, refuse or
neglect to provide such animal with food, potable water, shade or shelter or
to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy, cold or
inclement weather or to carry any such animal in or upon any vehicle in a
cruel or inhumane manner.
§ 134-16. Report of animal bites.
Anyone having knowledge or reason to believe that any animal in the City
has bitten a person shall report within 24 hours, so far as is known, the
name and address of the owner and circumstances of the animal. Such
reports concerning bites shall be made to the Police Department.
§ 134-17. Rabies control.
§ 134-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 138
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 142
A. Whenever any domesticated animal has bitten a person, it shall be
confined in such place as the Police Department may direct and for such
period of observation as may be necessary, unless such animal is too
vicious and dangerous to be impounded safely, in which case it may be
killed and its head shipped to the appropriate commonwealth agency
for rabies examination.
B. Whenever a wild animal has bitten a person, it shall be killed, avoiding
damage to the head (brain) area, and shipped to the appropriate
commonwealth agency under refrigeration, but not frozen, for rabies
examination.
§ 134-14 OIL CITY CODE § 134-18
1:220
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
§ 142-1. Adoption of standards.42
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as the "NFPA
70, National Electrical Code," including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D and
E (this edition of NFPA 70 was approved as an American National Standard
on August 15, 2007), be and hereby is adopted as the Electrical Code of the
City of Oil City, County of Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
for the control of electrical systems and installations as herein provided,
and each and all regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, are with this referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed in § 142-3 of this
chapter.
§ 142-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2618 of the City of Oil City, entitled the "Building Code of the
City of Oil City,"43 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 142-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby added, as follows:
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2618, adopted 1-12-1998, appeared as former Ch. 71,
Building Construction, Art. I, BOCA National Building Code.
§ 134-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:221
Work prior to permit. In the event work is commenced on any project
prior to the issuance of an electrical permit, the fees for the acquisition of
a permit shall be doubled.
Fee Schedule. The fees for electrical work shall be indicated in the
following schedule: $10 for $0 to $1,000; $25 for $1,001 to $5,000; $30
for $5,001 to $6,000; $35 for $6,001 to $7,000; $40 for $7,001 to $8,000;
$45 for $8,001 to $9,000; $50 for $9,001 to $10,000; $55 for $10,001 to
$11,000; $60 for $11,001 to $12,000; $65 for $12,001 to $13,000; $70
for $13,001 to $14,000; $75 for $14,001 to $15,000; $80 for $15,001 to
$16,000; $85 for $16,001 to $17,000; $90 for $17,001 to $18,000; $95
for $18,001 to $19,000; $100 for $19,001 to $20,000; and over $20,000,
$100 plus $6 for each additional $1,000 or part thereof. When the project
includes work normally covered by a plumbing, electrical, mechanical or
energy permit, the fees for those permits shall not be separately charged,
but rather the value of such work shall be included in the total project
costs.
Plan examination. The fee for each plan examination shall be computed
at 40% of the electrical permit fee. In no instance shall the fee be less than
$25.
Violation penalties. This section shall read in its entirety as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
or more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and any fee or
fees, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
Stop-work orders. This section shall read in its entirety as follows:
Upon notice from the Code Official that electrical work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property or to the owner's agent or
to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under
which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping
work. Any person who shall continue any work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $100 or more than $1,000.
Reference Standards in Conjunction with 2008 Electrical Code.44
Code Inserts
IRC 2009 International Residential Code One- and Two-Family
Dwelling
IBC 2009 International Building Code
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 142-3 OIL CITY CODE § 142-3
1:222
IMC 2009 International Mechanical Code
IFPC 2009 International Fire Prevention Code
IPC 2009 International Plumbing Code
IPMC 2009 International Property Maintenance Code
Chapter 146
EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 142-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:223

ARTICLE I
Cost Recovery
[Adopted 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2736]
§ 146-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Emergency Services Cost Recovery
Ordinance."
§ 146-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations governing
reimbursement to the City for any costs and/or expenses incurred for
emergency services which are provided for fire suppression or other
services provided by the City. Reimbursement shall be sought by submitting
claims to the person, property owner, business, firm, organization,
corporation and/or his or its insurance carrier.
§ 146-3. Service fee for fire suppression.
A. The City of Oil City intends to, and does herein, provide a
reimbursement process for the Oil City Fire Department for any costs
and/or expenses incurred by the Department for fire-suppression
services by submitting claims to the property owner and/or his
insurance carrier.
B. It is the finding of the City that property owners generally maintain
insurance coverage within their own casualty insurance policies,
property owner policies and/or other applicable policies that would
provide reimbursement to the Fire Department for provided
suppression services, equipment and personnel to save and protect
their property from the perils insured against.
C. Any person, property owner, business, firm, corporation or organization
that is rendered services under this section shall provide the Oil City
Fire Department with the following information:
(1) Name, address, telephone contact number of the property owner
and any tenants.
(2) Name, address, policy number and agent of the insurance carrier
(if applicable).
D. The Fire Chief or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to
obtain all necessary and pertinent insurance information concerning
the property, and to take necessary and affirmative actions to apply for
and receive reimbursement from any insurance carriers where a
property owner is or may be insured so that the Fire Department may
be reimbursed for any cost and/or expense incurred for services,
supplies and/or equipment used for or provided to the property owner
by the Oil City Fire Department.
§ 146-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:225
§ 146-4. Service fee for automobile accidents.
E. This section shall be construed to accomplish its purpose to compensate
and/or reimburse the City from insurance proceeds for the costs and/or
expenses incurred while providing services from the Fire Department
according to the following fee schedule:
(1) Residential fires: $500.
(2) Public or religious property: $500.
(3) Commercial property: $1,000.
(4) Industrial property: $1,000.
(5) Vehicle fires: $300.
A. The City of Oil City intends to, and does herein, provide for
reimbursement to the Oil City Fire Department for any emergency
medical and fire service costs and/or expenses incurred by the
Department at motor vehicle accident scenes by providing patient care,
assessing the accident scene for potential fire risk, and/or providing
scene lighting and hazard control by submitting claims to the vehicle
owner and/or his insurance carrier.
B. It is the finding of the City that the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
mandates under Title 75, The Vehicle Code, Section 1786, Required
financial responsibility, that all vehicle owners must maintain insurance
coverage.45 Vehicle owners' policies and/or other applicable policies
may provide reimbursement to the Fire Department for provided
services at accident scenes.
C. Any person or vehicle owner who is rendered service under this section
shall provide the Oil City Fire Department with the following
information:
(1) Name, address and telephone contact number of the vehicle owner
and any injured occupants.
(2) Name, address, policy number and agent of the insurance carrier.
D. The Fire Chief or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to
obtain all necessary and pertinent vehicle insurance information and to
take necessary and affirmative actions to apply for and receive
reimbursement from any insurance carriers where a vehicle owner,
driver or passenger is or may be insured, so that the Fire Department
may be reimbursed for any cost and/or expense incurred for services,
supplies and/or equipment used for or provided to the vehicle owner,
driver or passenger by the Oil City Fire Department.
45.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1786.
§ 146-3 OIL CITY CODE § 146-4
1:226
§ 146-5. Service fee for specialty rescue services.
E. This section shall be construed to accomplish its purpose to compensate
and/or reimburse the City from insurance proceeds for the costs and/or
expenses incurred while providing services from the Fire Department
according to the following fee schedule:
(1) Auto accident (per injured individual transported to a medical
receiving facility): $300.
(2) Auto accident (with hydraulic extrication tools used or technical
rescue): $450.
(3) Auto accident (no injuries, with scene cleanup): $100.
A. The City of Oil City intends to, and does herein, provide for
reimbursement to the Oil City Fire Department for any costs and/or
expenses incurred by the Department for any specialty rescue incidents
by submitting claims to the person, property owner, business, firm,
corporation, organization and/or his or its insurance carrier or by direct
contract with a person, property owner, business, firm, corporation or
organization.
B. Specialty rescue incidents would include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Confined space rescue.
(2) Trench rescue.
(3) Collapse rescue.
(4) High-angle (rope) rescue.
(5) Underwater search and recovery (for vehicles, lost items or
belongings).
C. It is the finding of the City that persons, property owners, businesses,
firms, corporations and/or organizations generally maintain insurance
coverage within their own casualty insurance policies or other
applicable policies that would provide reimbursement to the Fire
Department for provided specialty rescue services, equipment and
personnel.
D. Any property owner, business, firm, corporation or organization that is
rendered service under this section shall provide the Oil City Fire
Department with the following information:
(1) Name and address of the party responsible for the incident.
(2) Name, address, policy number and agent of the insurance carrier
(if applicable).
§ 146-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-5
1:227
§ 146-6. Service fee for hazardous material response, mitigation
and abatement.
E. The Fire Chief or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to
obtain all necessary and pertinent insurance information, and to take
necessary and affirmative actions to apply for and receive
reimbursement from any insurance carrier where a person, property
owner, business, firm, corporation or organization is or may be insured
so that the Fire Department may be reimbursed for any cost and/or
expense incurred for services, supplies and/or equipment used for or
provided to the person, property owner, business, firm, corporation or
organization by the Oil City Fire Department.
F. This section shall be construed to accomplish its purpose to compensate
and/or reimburse the City from insurance proceeds for the costs and/or
expenses incurred while providing services from the Fire Department
according to the following fee schedule:
(1) Confined space rescue: $1,500.
(2) Trench rescue: $1,500.
(3) Collapse rescue: $1,500.
(4) High-angle (rope) rescue: $1,500.
(5) Underwater search and recovery: $500.
G. Facilities with areas designated as "permit-required confined spaces"
under OSHA 1910.146 must, as listed in standard 1910.146(d)(9),
develop and implement procedures for summoning rescue and
emergency services, for rescuing entrants from permit spaces, for
providing necessary emergency services to rescued employees, and for
preventing unauthorized personnel from attempting a rescue. Any such
facility utilizing the services of the Oil City Fire Department as its
designated "confined space rescue team" shall pay an annual service
fee of $1,000. Additionally, the contracted facility must schedule an
annual on-site visit by the Oil City Fire Department, at which time it
shall identify all permit-required confined spaces. The contracted
facility shall also be required to coordinate biannual training sessions at
the facility with the Oil City Fire Department and be responsible to pay
for all departmental costs, including overtime and training materials,
necessary for the exercise.
H. Facilities with areas designated as "permit-required confined spaces"
under OSHA 1910.146, who are not utilizing the services of the Oil City
Fire Department as their designated rescue team but request the
Department to perform a confined space rescue, shall be invoiced a
service fee of $2,500 per incident, plus the costs of any equipment
damaged or rendered unusable as a result of the incident.
§ 146-5 OIL CITY CODE § 146-6
1:228
A. The City of Oil City intends to, and does herein, provide for
reimbursement for any and all City departments for any costs and/or
expenses incurred by these departments for hazardous materials
incidents by submitting claims to the person, property owner,
partnership, business, firm, corporation, organization and/or his or its
insurance carrier.
B. For the purposes of this section, "hazardous materials" shall be defined
as any substance or materials in a quantity or form which, in the
determination of the Fire Chief, City Emergency Management
Coordinator, Venango County Emergency Management Director or
their authorized representatives, pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be
limited to, such substances as explosives, flammable liquids, solids and
gasses, radioactive materials, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents,
corrosives, petroleum products, oxidizers, organic pesticides, other
regulated materials, and hazardous waste or materials listed in the
hazardous substances list of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and/or the United States Department of Health and Human
Services "Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances."
C. The Public Safety Director, Fire Chief or his designee is authorized to
cleanup, abate or effect the cleanup or abatement of any hazardous
materials or substances deposited upon or into properties or facilities
within the municipal boundaries of the City of Oil City or having a direct
or identifiable effect on persons or property within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Oil City, including but not limited to traffic
control, evacuation, relocation, substance monitoring,
decontamination, establishment of medical care services, and all other
costs incurred in the mitigation of the emergency situation; and any
person, property owner, partnership, business, firm, corporation, or
organization who intentionally, accidentally or negligently caused such
deposit shall be liable for all fees and costs incurred by the City of Oil
City.
D. Any person, property owner, partnership, business, firm, corporation or
organization that is rendered service under this section shall provide
the Oil City Fire Department with the following information:
(1) Name, address and contact telephone number of the responsible
party.
(2) Name, address, policy number and agent of the insurance carrier
(if applicable).
E. In the event of a hazardous materials incident requiring the response of
the Oil City Fire Department, Oil City Police Department, Oil City
Department of Public Works and/or others to control said incident, the
transporter (carrier, trucking company, etc.), person, property owner,
partnership, business, firm, corporation or organization shall be liable
§ 146-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-6
1:229
to the City of Oil City for payment of all costs and expenses of the
City and its Departments incurred in and about the use of employees,
apparatus, equipment and materials in the control and/or neutralization
of said incident.
F. Following the conclusion of a hazardous materials incident, if special
hazmat actions were required, then the Fire Chief shall prepare a
detailed listing of all known City expenses and forward an invoice to the
responsible party for payment. The invoice shall demand full payment
within 30 days of billing. Any additional expense related to that incident
that becomes known to the Fire Chief following the transmittal of the
initial bill to the responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on
a subsequent bill to the responsible party. Any amounts due that remain
unpaid 30 days after the date of billing shall have imposed a late charge
thereon at the maximum rate permitted by law until said account shall
be paid in full.
G. For the purposes of this section, costs incurred by the City of Oil City
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of
City of Oil City personnel, including workers' compensation benefits,
fringe benefits; cost and operation of equipment; costs of special fireextinguishing
agents used; the cost of special protective clothing,
materials and supplies; and the cost of any contracted labor, equipment
and materials.
H. This section shall be construed to accomplish its purpose to compensate
and/or reimburse the City for the costs and/or expenses incurred by
City departments according to the following fee schedule:
(1) Vehicle leaking fuel cleanup less than 50 gallons: $50.
(2) Equipment usage fee.
(a) One hundred fifty dollars per hour, or fraction thereof, for each
pumper required, in the opinion of the officer in command to
stand by at the hazardous materials incident. For each hour, or
fraction thereof, that the pumps are activated, an additional
sum of $50 per hour shall be charged.
(b) One hundred dollars per hour, or fraction thereof, for each
special operations unit required, in the opinion of the officer in
command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous
materials incident.
(c) One hundred fifty dollars per hour, or fraction thereof, for each
aerial truck required, in the opinion of the officer in command,
to be utilized in responding to the hazardous materials
incident. For each hour, or fraction thereof, that the pumps are
activated or the boom is elevated, an additional sum of $50 per
hour shall be charged.
§ 146-6 OIL CITY CODE § 146-6
1:230
§ 146-7. Service fee for unlock services.
(d) Seventy-five dollars per hour, or fraction thereof, for each
police vehicle required, in the opinion of the officer in
command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous
materials incident.
(e) One hundred dollars per hour, or fraction thereof, for each
additional City Fire Department or City support vehicle
required, including but not limited to command vehicles, air
units, dump trucks, backhoes, payloaders, etc., in the opinion
of the officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the
hazardous materials incident.
(3) Replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated beyond
reuse or repair (such as uniforms, clothing, communications
equipment, turnout gear, self-contained breathing apparatus, etc.).
(4) All personnel-related expenses incurred by the City, including but
not limited to wages, overtime, salaries, fringe benefits and
insurance for full-time and part-time firefighters and police officers,
regular and overtime pay and related fringe benefit costs for hourly
employees. These personnel-related expenses shall commence
when City of Oil City personnel have begun responding to the
incident and shall continue until all City personnel have concluded
hazardous-materials-incident-related responsibilities, and the
incident is deemed terminated.
(5) The cost of extinguishing agents, supplies and water from
municipal water systems.
(6) Expenses of decontaminating and cleaning equipment.
(7) Technical consulting services specifically required as a result of the
incident, including but not limited to technical experts or
specialists not otherwise available from the City.
(8) Charges to the City imposed by any local, state or federal
government entities related to the hazardous materials incident.
(9) Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the incident.
(10) Costs of cleanup, storage or disposal of the released hazardous
material.
(11) Medical and hospital expenses incurred as a result of the incident.
(12) Legal, engineering, accounting, billing, collection and other
administrative expenses incurred as a result of the incident,
including but not limited to efforts to recover expenses pursuant to
this article.
§ 146-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-7
1:231
§ 146-8. Service fee for staff training, inspections and fire drills.
A. Any owner, resident, tenant or occupant that is provided the service of
unlocking or attempting to unlock their apartment, dwelling, residence
or other commercial or industrial structure by the Oil City Fire
Department shall be invoiced on a per-incident basis. In cases where
the unlock service is provided to a publicly owned housing unit, the
invoice will be sent to the Authority having ownership. In cases of
owner-occupied or owner-rental properties, the owner will be invoiced
for the service.
B. Any person, tenant, occupant or property owner who is rendered
service under this section shall provide the Oil City Fire Department
with the following information:
(1) Name, address, telephone contact number of the resident, tenant
or occupant.
(2) Name, address, telephone contact number of the property owner
(rental properties).
C. This section is intended to compensate and/or reimburse the City
somewhat for the costs and/or expenses incurred for providing
unlocking services from the Oil City Fire Department according to the
following fee schedule:
(1) Unlock service: $20 per incident.
D. The City of Oil City or the Oil City Fire Department shall not be
responsible for any damage incurred attempting to provide this service,
and the owner, tenant, occupant or resident shall execute a release
stipulating to this fact.
A. The City of Oil City intends to, and does herein, provide for
reimbursement to the Oil City Fire Department for any costs and/or
expenses incurred by the Department for any training, inspections or
fire drills mandated by federal, state or insurance regulations.
B. It is the finding of the City that some property owners, businesses,
firms, corporations or organizations may be required by law to have
staff members trained in emergency evacuation, use of portable fire
extinguishers or other fire-prevention-related actions. Additionally
these entities may be required to have their facilities inspected and/or
have observed fire drills conducted to meet local, state or federal fire
regulations.
C. Any person, property owner, business, firm, corporation or organization
that requests and is rendered services under this section shall provide
the Oil City Fire Department with the following information:
(1) Billing name, address and telephone contact number of the person,
property owner, business, firm, corporation or organization.
§ 146-7 OIL CITY CODE § 146-8
1:232
§ 146-9. Delay in response.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to authorize the Oil City Fire
Department or any City department to refuse or delay any emergency
service to any City person, firm, business, organization or corporation due
to lack of insurance coverage or ability to pay for said services.
D. This section is intended to compensate and/or reimburse the City
somewhat for the costs and/or expenses incurred for providing services
from the Oil City Fire Department according to the following fee
schedule:
(1) Staff training: $50 per training session, plus any educational
materials.
(2) Inspections: $50 per inspection.
(3) Reinspections: $25 per reinspection.
(4) Fire drills: $50 per drill.
§ 146-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-9
1:233
Chapter 150
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
§ 150-1. Adoption of standards.46
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as
the "International Energy Conservation Code," 2009 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council Inc., be and hereby is adopted as the
International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Oil City, County of
Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said Energy Code are
with this referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this chapter, with additions and insertions as prescribed in § 150-3 of this
chapter.
§ 150-2. Title.
This code shall be known as the "International Energy Conservation Code
of the City of Oil City," and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as
"the code."
§ 150-3. Additions and insertions.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
107.1 General. The standards and portions thereof, which are referred
to in this code and listed in Chapter 9, shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the extent of such reference.
107.2 Conflicting requirements. When a section of this code and a
section of a reference standard from Chapter 9 specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the provisions of this code
shall apply.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-9 OIL CITY CODE § 150-3
1:234
Chapter 154
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Gas, oil and water lines — See Ch. 179.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 255.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 278.
§ 154-1. Permit required for excavation in street.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or firms, association or
associations, corporation or corporations or department of the City to make
or cause to be made any excavation of any nature whatsoever in any street,
avenue, alley or lane within the City limits without first securing a permit
granting authority therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person or persons, firm or firms, association or
associations, corporation or corporations or City department, other than the
Department of Public Works, applying for and to whom a permit may be
issued.[Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
EXCAVATION or EXCAVATIONS — The digging of any trench or excavating
through or under the roadway or sidewalk or the cutting into or opening
and removal of any pavement surfaces of any street, avenue, alley or lane
within the City limits.
§ 154-3. Application for permit.
A. An application for the issuance of a permit shall be filed in the office of
the Department of Public Works, upon forms furnished by the City for
that purpose, and shall be signed by the applicant. Said applicant shall
set forth the location and purpose of the proposed excavation, the dates
between which said excavation is to be open, the length, width and
depth of the trench, the area of the roadway surfaces to be removed and
the names of all persons interested in or to be benefited by the work to
be done. The applicant shall agree to protect and defend and indemnify
and save harmless the City, officers or agents thereof from all claims,
suits, actions and proceedings of every nature and description which
may be brought against the City, officers or agents thereof for or on
account of any injuries or damages to persons or public or private
property due to any materials or appliances used in the work, or by or
on account of improper materials or workmanship, or for or on account
of any accident or any other act, negligence or omissions of said
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-3
1:235
§ 154-4. Issuance of permit. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No.
2456]
Upon an application for the issuance of a permit being approved by the
Department of Public Works, the applicant shall pay the City Treasurer the
certain sums hereinafter named, whereupon there shall be issued to the
applicant a permit granting authority to make the excavations named in
said application. This permit shall at all times be in the possession of a
competent person actually on the work and shall be shown upon request
to any police officer or properly authorized officer or employee of the
Department of Public Works upon demand.
§ 154-5. Permit fees.
Every applicant shall pay the following sums for making excavations as
herein provided:
applicant or his agents, servants or employees, and the City shall not in
any way be liable therefor. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
B. The applicant shall agree that the City shall at all times have the right
and authority to correct any and all omissions in the conduct of the
work and to have the power to take possession of and to do all of the
work and charge the expense thereof to the applicant. The expense so
charged shall be promptly paid by said applicant.
C. The applicant shall also agree to safeguard and maintain in good order
the excavation until such time as the City may temporarily or
permanently restore the street surface and to assume all cost and
expense due to defective backfilling for the period of one year after the
date of completion of the excavation, provided that said date does not
lie between November 15 and May 1; otherwise to date from the latter
date.
D. The applicant shall further agree to abide by all the terms and
conditions of the ordinances under which the permit is granted,
whether specifically mentioned in the application or not.
E. The applicant shall pay the required fee, as hereinafter provided, and
shall furnish a judgment bond satisfactory to the Director of the
Department of Administration and the Director of the Department of
Public Works as a guaranty of the fulfillment of all the applicant's
obligations under the permit. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No.
2456]
F. No permit shall be granted to any applicant unless said applicant shall
have paid to said City any and all moneys then due to said City for prior
openings made or for any loss, damage or expense in any manner
occasioned by or arising from the opening of streets, alleys or highways
of said City under prior permits.
§ 154-3 OIL CITY CODE § 154-5
1:236
§ 154-6. Supplementary application for additional excavation.
In no case shall any applicant open or remove a greater area of surface
and at no other location than specified in the original application; provided,
however, that if at the time of actually doing the work it should be necessary
to open or remove a greater area of surface than originally applied for,
the applicant shall first notify and secure, by telephone or otherwise, the
consent of the Department to do so, upon the express condition that said
applicant shall and will, before 12:00 noon of the following business day, file
a supplementary application for the making of an additional excavation.
§ 154-7. Emergency excavations.
In case of an emergency arising out of office hours, at night, Sundays
or legal holidays, when immediate excavation may be necessary for the
protection of life or public or private property, the same shall be reported to
the Police Department, which shall grant permission to make the necessary
excavation, upon the express condition that an application be made in the
regular manner on or before 12:00 noon of the next following business day.
§ 154-8. Excavations not subject to fee.
No charge shall be made for an excavation on the sidewalk where the
same is made in connection with a permit granted for an excavation in
the roadway nor for excavations made under permits issued for the
construction or repair of sidewalks, curbing or gutters, or where permits
have been granted for the erection of poles or to the owner of the abutting
property.
A. For excavating any roadway, the sum of $10 per square yard or fraction
thereof for the first 50 square yards and $7 for each additional square
yard in excess of 50 square yards; and the sum of $10 per square yard
per inch of depth of bituminous replacement for the first 50 square
yards and $7 per square yard per inch of depth of bituminous
replacement in excess of 50 square yards; the minimum amount to be
paid hereunder shall be the sum of $20. [Amended 5-25-1931 by Ord.
No. 1281; 6-11-1934 by Ord. No. 1364; 8-15-1974 by Ord. No.
2311]
B. The basis of measurement of street surface openings shall be the actual
number of square yards of paving or surfacing necessary to completely
repair the street surface at such opening. A fraction of 1/2 of a square
yard shall be considered as a full 1/2 square yard, and payment shall be
made on this basis. All openings shall be measured by the Street
Commissioner, his agents or assistants, and such measurements shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:237
§ 154-9. Disposition of fees. [Amended 10-10-1932 by Ord. No.
1308]
All moneys received by the City of Oil City for the issuance of permits shall
be placed in the general fund to be used in such manner and for such
purposes as may be directed and designated by the proper officers of the
City of Oil City.
§ 154-10. Guarding of excavations.
Said applicant, during the progress of the work, shall provide and maintain
such fences, barriers, "street closed" and "danger" signs, red lights and
watchmen as may be necessary to prevent avoidable accidents to the public
and adjoining tenants. The convenience of the public and temporary
approaches to and crossings of intersecting streets shall be provided for and
kept in good condition where practicable. The sidewalks or portions of the
street adjoining the work or its vicinity shall not be littered or obstructed
more than necessary, and the drainage gutters and inlets to the storm
sewers shall at all times be kept clean and unobstructed.
§ 154-11. Manner of excavating and refilling.
A. Excavation shall be by open cut from the surface, and no tunneling or
drifting will be permitted except by permission and when so noted on
the permit. The amount of trench opened and also the amount unfilled
shall be at all times subject to the decision of the Department. No
trench or excavation shall be undercut or have a greater width at the
bottom than at the top. In case of slips or slides of the sides of the
excavation, the same shall be trimmed to solid earth and the top surface
cut back to the limit of the same before any backfilling is commenced.
When necessary or required by the Department, the sides of a trench
shall be sheathed and braced and rendered secure until the
construction has been laid therein and the trench refilled. Care shall be
taken not to move or disturb other subsurface structures, and in
crossing these or running parallel with or near them, they shall be
securely hung, braced and supported in place until the work is
completed. The applicant shall maintain their respective services and
shall repair all damage done to any of said structures. In rock
excavation, all drilling and blasting shall be conducted with the greatest
possible care and all possible precautions taken to guard against
accidents.
B. All excavations shall be carefully refilled promptly after the completion
of the structures with such of the excavated materials as may be
suitable. All materials used for backfill shall be in proper condition, all
frozen or wet and soggy earth must be removed and replaced with
filling of proper consistency. Coarse, lumpy or cloddy earth must be
pulverized before being returned to the trench. From November 15 to
April 1, all excavations in paved streets shall be refilled with crushed
stone, thoroughly compacted, if in the opinion of the Department
§ 154-9 OIL CITY CODE § 154-11
1:238
weather conditions render the same necessary, or the Superintendent
may, in his discretion, refuse to issue any permit during said period, or
he may issue said permits under such special restrictions or conditions
as he may deem necessary. No rock fragments larger than nine inches
in any dimension shall be placed in the trench. The space between the
pieces of rock shall be filled with earth and tamped. Earth filling shall
be placed in layers not exceeding six inches and thoroughly tamped
with iron rammers not over 36 square inches of face and not less
than 20 pounds in weight or with an approved mechanical tamper. All
backfilling shall be done in the ratio of one man shoveling to two men
tamping or ramming. Puddling or water-tamping may be done only
by special permission or direction of the Department. In case of any
deficiency of proper material for backfilling, the same shall be supplied
by the applicant.
C. All materials used in the base and surfacing of any street or roadway,
and which may be reused, shall be removed in accordance with such
instructions as may be issued from time to time and carefully laid aside
for future use. Such materials shall be kept separate from other
excavated materials, and the applicant shall be held responsible for the
preservation of such materials. In all unimproved streets, the surface of
the trenches, after being filled and settled, shall be finished in a most
workmanlike manner without needless delay and shall in every respect
be equal in quality, character and materials to the street surface
existing previous to making the excavation.
D. In case of an excavation in a paved street or public highway, the
backfilling shall be carried up to a point about 18 inches below the
surface of the road and the filling left in an oval or convex shape. From
this point upward to the bottom of the material of the improved road,
the trench shall be widened nine inches on each side, but the surface of
the road shall not be disturbed for a width greater than the width of the
trench below the enlarged section. Into this enlarged section of trench
shall be placed concrete composed of one part cement, two parts sand
and four parts gravel, broken stone or slag. This concrete arch shall be
not less than six inches thick at the crown. Should the width of the
trench be more than 30 inches, the concrete arch shall be reinforced
with expanded metal or other approved type of reinforcement. The
applicant shall notify the Department of Public Works when this
concrete arch has been completed, and as soon as practicable after the
concrete has developed sufficient set the Department shall restore the
pavement surface with like material to that existing in the adjacent
pavement. The applicant shall maintain red lights, barricades and any
other protection necessary until the Department of Public Works shall
have completed the repairs; provided, however, that if for any reason it
may be impracticable for the Department to make such repairs with
reasonable promptness after the opening is ready, the applicant shall be
permitted to make temporary repairs in such manner as may be
directed by the Department so as to make the pavement safe and usable
by the public, and thereupon the obligation of the applicant to maintain
§ 154-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-11
1:239
§ 154-12. Observation of excavations by police. [Amended
12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to carefully note
all excavations in the streets and sidewalks of the City and the patrolmen to
make special report of the same through the Chief or Captain of Police to
the Department of Public Works. When the work is done without permit, the
officer shall insist that the same be stopped, pending the securing of such.
In all cases of the opening of streets, whether party exhibits permit or not,
patrolmen shall report.
§ 154-13. Notice of intention to pave or repave street; effect.
[Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
Upon the passage of a resolution by the City Council to the effect that
it is the intention of the Council to pave or repave any street or alley
or part thereof within one year from the passage of such resolution, the
City Engineer shall notify all public service corporations maintaining or
likely to maintain underground structures in said street of the passage of
said resolution, and such corporations shall thereupon make any additions,
repairs or alterations in their underground structures which they think
may be required within a period of five years. The City Engineer shall
also ascertain whether properties abutting said street, whether vacant or
otherwise, are provided with water and sewer services to the curbline. In
case any properties are not provided with water service, the City Engineer
shall notify the Director of the Department of Public Works, and the latter
shall install services to the curbline. In case any such properties are not
provided with sewer connections, the City Engineer shall notify the owner
of such property, and it shall be the duty of said owner to construct a sewer
connection from the main to the curbline within 30 days. Upon failure of any
owner to construct such sewer connection within 30 days from notification
so to do, the Department of Public Works shall construct the same. The first
cost of such sewer construction shall be paid from the general fund, and the
actual cost of each of said sewer connections, plus 15% to cover overhead,
shall be charged to the property owner and added to the latter's assessment
for the improvement of the street. Such sewer connection charges shall,
however, be shown separately on the assessment schedule and shall not be
payable upon the installment plan, as the paving assessment proper, but
shall be paid in full with the first payment on the paving assessment, and
the City Treasurer shall credit the amounts paid for sewer connections to
the general fund.
§ 154-14. Excavations in recently improved streets.
Except in case of emergency, no permit for excavating in any street covered
by a resolution providing for its improvement, as set forth in § 154-13, shall
be issued within the period commencing three months after the passage
barricades, etc., shall cease. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No.
2456]
§ 154-11 OIL CITY CODE § 154-14
1:240
of said resolution and ending five years after the completion of the
improvement. The City Engineer shall, within one month after the passage
of any such resolution, cause to be posted along the line of the proposed
improvement handbills setting forth the passage of the resolution and the
provisions of this section. The emergency exceptions to the provisions
of this section shall be restricted to cases where immediate excavation
is necessary for the protection of life or public or private property, as
provided in § 154-7 hereof, and to such other cases as may seem of sufficient
importance as to secure a favorable vote of 4/5 of the members of the City
Council.
§ 154-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 160
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm system fees — See Ch. 88.
Building construction fees — See Ch. 110.
Emergency services fees — See Ch. 146, Art. I.
Excavation fees — See § 154-5.
Fire prevention fees — See Ch. 166.
Oil and gas well filing fees — See § 212-3E.
Peddling and soliciting permit fees — See
§ 225-8.
Sewer fees and charges — See Ch. 255.
Water fees and charges — See Ch. 303.
§ 160-1. Schedule adopted.
The annexed Exhibit A, the codified Permit and License Fee Schedule, and
the charges and fees imposed thereby, are hereby approved and adopted.47
§ 160-2. Repealer.
All sections or provisions of ordinances inconsistent with the fees, rates and
charges established in Exhibit A are hereby repealed.
§ 160-3. Exhibit A: Permit, License and Hearing Fee Schedule.
[Amended 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2712; 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2756;
9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2783]
47.Editor's Note: See § 160-3, Exhibit A: Permit, License and Hearing Fee Schedule, of this
chapter.
§ 154-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:241
A. The following fees shall apply to permits, licenses or hearings:
Type Fee
Master plumber's license $50
Water tap fees
Tapping fee:
As of January 1, 2011 $500 per equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU*), for all users
As of January 1, 2012 $700 per EDU
As of January 1, 2013 $900 per EDU
As of January 1, 2014 $1,100 per EDU
As of January 1, 2015 $1,300 per EDU
As of January 1, 2016 $1,500 per EDU
Connection fee $1,500 per connection for 3/4-inch
or one-inch taps (for City to tap
main and install a service line with
corp stop, curb stop and valve)
For taps larger than one inch, the
fee will be determined by the City
based on estimated costs, and the
City will install a tap, short service
line and gate valve near the water
main.
Facilities fee Actual cost of work by City, if City
agrees to install additional facilities
beyond its responsibility
Sewer tap fee
Capacity $400
Collection $100
Street opening permit $10 per square yard
Shade tree permit $10
Oil well permit (per well)
Initial $5
Renewal $2
Zoning appeal hearings $200, plus advertising costs
Code enforcement appeals $200, plus advertising costs
Curb cuts permits $50
Park pavilion rentals
Large $200
Large - half $100
§ 160-3 OIL CITY CODE § 160-3
1:242
Chapter 166
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 88.
§ 166-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as
the "International Fire Code," including Appendix Chapters B, C, D and
E, 2000 Edition, as published by the International Code Council Inc., be
and hereby is adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Oil City
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous materials and devices and
from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
or premises in the City of Oil City and providing for the issuance of permits
for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2000
Edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of
Type Fee
Horseshoe $50
Hexagon $50
Fire hydrant connection (water) $100, plus water usage
Subdivision requests
Minor (less than 10 lots) $100
Major (10 lots or more) $500
NOTES:
* An EDU is defined as a single residential unit, be it a home or
an apartment, or a commercial, public or industrial usage equal
to or less than the average number of residential gallons used in
the previous calendar year, which is computed by dividing the total
annual residential usage in gallons by the number of residential
users for that same year. A fire line of any size shall be considered
one EDU.
B. It should be noted that the above list does not contain all fees that
might be applicable to a particular activity. For example, the various
fees related to Building Code permits can be found in Chapter 110
(Building Construction), sewer fees/charges in Chapter 255, and water
fees/charges in Chapter 303.
§ 160-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:243
the City of Oil City, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes
as prescribed in § 166-3 of this chapter.
§ 166-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2622 of the City of Oil City, entitled "The Fire Prevention
Code of the City of Oil City,"48 and all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 166-3. Amendments, deletions and alterations.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations as set forth herein shall be known as the
"Fire Prevention Code of the City of Oil City," and are herein referred to as
such or as "this code."
102.1 Construction and design provisions. The construction and
design provisions of this code shall apply to:
1. Structures, facilities and conditions arising after the adoption of this
code.
2. Existing structures, facilities and conditions not legally in existence at
the time of adoption of this code.
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when identified in specific
sections of this code.
4. Existing structures, facilities and conditions which, in the opinion of the
Code Official, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.
105.6 Required operational permits. The Code Official is authorized to
issue operational permits for the operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1
through 105.6.46.
105.6.4 Carnivals and fairs. An operational permit is required to conduct
a carnival or fair.
105.6.31 Open burning. An operational permit is required for kindling
or maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road or
other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit
shall be adhered to.
105.6.36 Pyrotechnic special effects material. An operational permit is
required for use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material.
105.1.1 Payment of fees.
A. A reinspection fee of $50 shall be assessed after due notice has been
served in accordance with the terms and provisions of Section 109.2.3
and the violation, illegal action or unsafe condition continue.
48.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2622, adopted 1-12-1998, appeared as former Ch. 103, Fire
Prevention.
§ 166-1 OIL CITY CODE § 166-3
1:244
109.3 Violation penalties. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
or more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and any fee or
fees or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
Chapter 45, Codes, insert:
IBC 2000 International Building Code
EC 2000 Electric Code
IFGC 2000 International Fuel Gas Code
IMC 2000 International Mechanical Code
IPC 2000 International Plumbing Code
IPMC 2000 International Property Maintenance Code
IRC 2000 International Residential Code One- and Two-
Family Dwelling
108.1 Application for appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal
a decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted and the
provisions of this code do not fully apply. The application shall be on a form
obtained from the Code Official within 20 days after the notice was served.
§ 166-4. Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in Section 3301.3 of the International Fire Code, 2000
Edition, in which the storage and use of explosive materials is prohibited,
are hereby established as follows: the City limits of the City of Oil City.
Chapter 170
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 274.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 166-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-4
1:245

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 170-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,49 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Oil City Council does hereby order as follows.
49.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:247

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 170-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 170-3. Applicability.
§ 170-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 170-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Oil City unless a permit has been
obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Oil City or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:249
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 170-5 OIL CITY CODE § 170-5
1:250
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 170-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Building Code Official within the City is hereby appointed to administer
and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain
Administrator."
§ 170-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the City of Oil City.
§ 170-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a building permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive-loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:251
§ 170-9. Application procedures and requirements.
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the building permit and report such fact to the Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the latest IBC and IRC adopted by the City of Oil City.
A. Application for a building permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Oil City. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of any flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
§ 170-8 OIL CITY CODE § 170-9
1:252
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed building permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the latest IBC or the latest IRC as adopted by the City of
Oil City.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
§ 170-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9
1:253
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a floodway area (see § 170-18A) will not
increase the base flood elevation when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 170-18B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 170-23F, Storage, and § 170-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 170-23F and 170-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 170-24
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development, if applicable.
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 170-9 OIL CITY CODE § 170-10
1:254
§ 170-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 170-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment, but it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to make sure all necessary approvals and permits are obtained.
§ 170-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a building permit by the Floodplain Administrator,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by
the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 170-13. Placards.
In addition to the building permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a placard, which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 170-14. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-14
1:255
§ 170-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 170-16. Appeals.
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the City of Oil City of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time.
§ 170-14 OIL CITY CODE § 170-16
1:256
A. Any person aggrieved by any final order, decree, decision,
determination or ruling of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the City's
Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the
City Clerk's office within 30 days after the final order, decree, decision,
determination or ruling of the Floodplain Administrator. All appeals
shall be conducted according to the Pennsylvania Local Agency Law.50
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the City's Zoning Hearing Board shall set a
time and place, within 30 days, for the purpose of considering the
appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be
considered shall be given to all parties.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to affect the rights of
any aggrieved person to proceed in courts of law or equity to suppress
nuisances or to enforce common law or statutory rights.
50.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 170-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:257

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 170-17. Identification.
§ 170-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas in the City of Oil City
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs),
dated January 16, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the City of Oil City and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS, which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(1) Within any floodway area, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall not be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no
floodway has been delineated.
(1) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other existing and
§ 170-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18
1:259
§ 170-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the FEMA
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. Additionally, as soon as practicable,
but not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data.
§ 170-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City Engineer, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Oil City
Planning Commission. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no onepercent
annual chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
§ 170-18 OIL CITY CODE § 170-20
1:260
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 170-21. General.
§ 170-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities have
been notified by the municipality and until all required permits or
approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion
of any new construction, development or other activity resulting in
changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a conditional letter
of map revision (CLOMR) is required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zone A and Zone AE outside the
designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least
18 inches above the BFE.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
§ 170-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22
1:261
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 170-18C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the International Building Codes (IBC) and in the
International Residential Codes (IRC) adopted by the City of Oil
City shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least 18 inches above the BFE or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 170-18C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the International Building Codes (IBC) and in the
International Residential Codes (IRC) adopted by the City of Oil
City shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements),
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
§ 170-22 OIL CITY CODE § 170-22
1:262
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
§ 170-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22
1:263
§ 170-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is approved for use by the Floodplain Administrator, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. Refer
to the City's Stormwater Management Ordinance (Chapter 274 of the
Code) for additional requirements.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC shall be utilized.
§ 170-22 OIL CITY CODE § 170-23
1:264
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gaslines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new paved streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 170-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:265
§ 170-24. Development which may endanger human life.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter.
(1) International Building Codes (IBC) adopted by the City of Oil City.
(2) International Residential Building Codes (IRC) adopted by the City
of Oil City.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises, or which will involve the
production, storage or use of any amount of radioactive substances,
shall be subject to the provisions of this section in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
§ 170-23 OIL CITY CODE § 170-24
1:266
§ 170-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulfur and sulfur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
E. Any such nonresidential structure, or part thereof, that will be built
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992),
or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 170-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25
1:267
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 170-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 170-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A and AE must either:
A. No manufactured homes shall be placed in any identified floodplain
area, except for replacement of an existing manufactured home where
allowed.
B. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the International
Residential Building Code (as adopted by the City of Oil City) or the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's
"Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition,
draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and 34 Pa. Code Chapters
401 to 405.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the IBC
and the IRC adopted by the City of Oil City, where appropriate and/or
applicable, to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring
cannot be provided or were not established for the units' proposed
installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
§ 170-25 OIL CITY CODE § 170-27
1:268
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 170-26.
§ 170-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27
1:269

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 170-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals (public and private).
(2) Nursing homes (public and private).
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 170-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28
1:271

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 170-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 170-30 shall apply.
§ 170-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. The Building Code requirements adopted by the City of Oil City shall
apply.51
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Building Construction, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 170-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30
1:273

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 170-31. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Oil City may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
§ 170-32. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by Oil City in accordance
with the procedures contained in § 170-16 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to development regulated by prohibited
activities (Article VI) or development which may endanger human
life (§ 170-24).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, Oil City shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, Oil City shall notify the applicant
in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, Oil City shall consider, at a
minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will.
§ 170-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32
1:275
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Oil City. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 170-32 OIL CITY CODE § 170-32
1:276
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 170-33. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 170-34. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zone AE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year or the elevation determined by
other means for other zones.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on three or more sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining, dredging, drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 170-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34
1:277
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source. Identified floodplain areas include Zones
A and AE shown on the FIRM produced by the FEMA.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 170-34 OIL CITY CODE § 170-34
1:278
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles
which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of
a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs
include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this chapter,52 and
includes any subsequent improvements thereto. Any construction started
after July 5, 1977, and before the effective start date of this chapter is
subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
52.Editor's Note: The effective date of this chapter is 1-16-2014.
§ 170-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34
1:279
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 5,
1977, whichever is later, and as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 5, 1977,
whichever is later, and as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 170-34 OIL CITY CODE § 170-34
1:280
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the UCC adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with state floodplain
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a
structure for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage
or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must
comply with all chapter requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific chapter requirement will cause removal
of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the
State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary
of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption
from chapter requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
B.
§ 170-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34
1:281
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 170-34 OIL CITY CODE § 170-34
1:282
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 170-35. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on January 16, 2014, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by the City of Oil City, Venango
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 170-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35
1:283
Chapter 174
FUEL GAS CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction codes — See Ch. 110.
§ 174-1. Adoption of standards.53
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as the
"International Fuel Gas Code," 2009 Edition, including Appendix A, B, C and
D, as published by the International Code Council Inc., be and hereby is
adopted as the International Fuel Gas Code of the City of Oil City, County of
Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said International Fuel
Gas Code are with this referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this chapter, with additions and insertions as prescribed in
§ 174-3 of this chapter.
§ 174-2. Title.
This code shall be known as the "International Fuel Gas Code of the City of
Oil City" and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "the code."
§ 174-3. Additions and insertions.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
102.8 Reference codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 7, and such
codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extent of each reference. Where differences occur
between provision of this code and the referenced standards, the provision
of this code shall apply.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of
the listing and manufacturer's installations shall apply.
Reference Standards54
Code Inserts:
IBC 2009 International Building Code
IPC 2009 International Plumbing Code
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-35 OIL CITY CODE § 174-3
1:284
IMC 2009 International Mechanical Code
NEC 2008 National Electrical Code
IRC 2009 International Residential Code One- and Two-Family
Dwelling
Chapter 179
GAS, OIL AND WATER LINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 154.
§ 174-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-3
1:285

ARTICLE I
Installation in Streets
[Adopted 9-18-1891 by Ord. No. 355 (Ch. 111, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 179-1. Use of streets permitted.
Any person, company or corporation shall have the privilege of using the
streets, alleys and highways of Oil City for the laying of gas and oil lines.
§ 179-2. Regulations.
A. Said person, company or corporation laying gas or oil lines shall be
required to follow the following regulations:
(1) A notice shall be filed in the Controller's office as required by
Ordinance No. 308.55
(2) The streets, alleys and highways which shall be entered upon shall
be left in as good condition by said person, company or corporation
as they were before the entry.
(3) At no point or place shall any street, alley or highway be left open
or broken up overnight for a longer distance than 50 consecutive
feet, and the portions that are torn up shall be clearly indicated by
proper danger signals.
(4) If, in laying said pipes or conduits, they should come in contact with
any other pipes or conduits laid by or by the consent of the City,
such pipes or conduits shall be left in as good condition as they
previously were.
B. Said person, company or corporation, before its entry upon said streets,
alleys or highways for the purpose of the aforesaid, shall be required to
give bonds, with good and sufficient securities to be approved by the
City Manager and City Solicitor in the sum of $5,000, conditioned that
the regulations above prescribed shall be faithfully and honestly
observed on the part of said person, company or corporation.
[Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
C. Said person, company or corporation shall be required to lay its pipes
or conduits under the direction or subject to the supervision of the City
Engineer or other competent person to be designated by Council and to
be paid for his services by said person, company or corporation.
D. Said pipes or conduits shall be required to be laid at least two feet to
five feet distant from water pipes or conduits and sewers which have
already been laid by and with the consent of the City, except where it
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance was superseded by Ord. No. 1192, which is included in the
Code as Ch. 154, Excavations.
§ 179-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-2
1:287
§ 179-3. Moving of pipes or conduits.
When it shall be necessary to move said pipes or conduits for the purpose
of grading said streets, alleys or highways, or for laying sewers, waterlines
or conduits by the City, said pipes or conduits shall be moved by the owner
or owners at their own expense, and if not moved within five days after
receiving notice thereto from the City Controller, they may be moved by the
City at the expense of the owner or owners.
§ 179-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
may be necessary to cross the line of any other pipes, conduits or
sewers so laid.
E. Said person, company or corporation shall be required on demand by
the City at any time to furnish a diagram showing the exact location and
depth of pipes or conduits laid by them.
§ 179-2 OIL CITY CODE § 179-4
1:288
ARTICLE II
Extending Lines to Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-2-1904 by Ord. No. 557 (Ch. 111, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 179-5. Extension before paving or grading.
All water, gas and sewer lines or pipes situated in any street or alley of
the City of Oil City shall be extended to the sidewalk for each and every
building lot on said street or alley before said street or alley shall be paved
or graded.
§ 179-6. Notice to extend lines; performance of work; costs.
[Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to ascertain what water, gas and
sewer lines or pipes are situated in any such street or alley and to notify the
Director of the Department of Public Works and the owners of any gaslines
and all lot owners to make or cause to be made to each and every building
lot on said street the extensions provided for in § 179-1 of this chapter, and
if said owners of said gaslines and the owners of said lots do not cause
said extensions to be made within 30 days after the giving of such notice, it
shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause the same to be done by the
contractor for the paving of said street as a part of said contract, and the
cost of doing said work shall be added to said contract price and assessed
upon the several lots to which such extensions are made at the time the
paving is assessed as a part of the cost of said improvement and against the
owners of said gaslines, and if said assessments so made shall not be paid
within 30 days thereafter, the same shall be collected either by suit or by the
entry of a municipal lien therefor, together with the assessment for paving,
and by proceedings thereon.
§ 179-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-6
1:289

ARTICLE III
Obtaining Line and Grade
[Adopted 3-29-1907 by Ord. No. 618 (Ch. 111, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 179-7. Installations in streets to follow lines.
All gas-, water- and other lines hereafter laid or constructed along or on
any lane, street or alley of the City of Oil City shall be laid or constructed
according to line as indicated by stakes set for that purpose by the City
Engineer.
§ 179-8. Installations across streets to follow lines and grades.
All private sewers hereafter laid or constructed across, along or on any lane,
street or alley of the City of Oil City shall be laid or constructed according
to line and grade as indicated by stakes set for that purpose by the City
Engineer.
§ 179-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 179-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-9
1:291
Chapter 183
HANDBILLS AND POSTERS
§ 183-1. Prohibited posters and signs; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to paste, paint, brand or
stamp or, in any manner whatever, place upon or attach to any building,
fence, bridge, gate, outbuilding or other object upon property belonging to
the City of Oil City, within the municipal limits, any written, printed, painted
or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster, provided that nothing
herein shall be so construed as to prevent the posting of any notice required
by law or order of court to be posted nor to prevent the posting or placing of
any notice particularly concerning or pertaining to the ground or premises
upon which the same is so posted or placed.
§ 183-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 189
INSURANCE
§ 179-9 OIL CITY CODE § 183-2
1:292
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 1-25-1993 by Ord. No. 2556 (Ch. 113, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 189-1. Designation of City official.
The City Treasurer or such official's designee is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 189-2. Definitions. [Added 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 2587]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DELINQUENCY — A tax assessment, penalty or user charge becomes
delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed
against the property by the City of Oil City under any applicable law.
§ 189-3. Municipal certificate required for payment. [Amended
5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 2587]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
City of Oil City (hereinafter sometimes designated the "municipality") where
the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies
exceeds $7,500 unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by
the Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act
98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act
98 of 199256 and the provisions of this article.
§ 189-4. Use of proceeds.
A. Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, the Treasurer
issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, or
pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(ii) of Act 98 of 1992,57 that all delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges have been paid after
proper notification and certification by the Treasurer, then the issuing
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that
if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or structure, the following procedures
must be followed:
56.See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:293
(1) The named insured shall determine which of the following two
options she/he shall proceed with to meet the escrowing
requirements of Section 508(c) of Act 98 of 1992:
(a) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds
to the Treasurer of the City of Oil City in the aggregate $2,000
for each $15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or
less, the amount transferred to the City shall be $2,000.
[Amended 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 2587]
(b) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the City from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
(2) The transfer or proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(3) In the event that the transfer of the proceeds in Subsection A(1)(a)
above has occurred, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the Treasurer shall return the
amount of the funds transferred to the City in excess of the
estimate to the named insured, if the City has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
B. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the City shall do the
following:
(1) The Treasurer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be
used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which may be
incurred by the City. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the City
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Treasurer with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the Treasurer shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the City and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed;
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the City and the required proof of such
§ 189-4 OIL CITY CODE § 189-4
1:294
§ 189-5. Rules and regulations; fees.
The Council of the City of Oil City may by resolution adopt procedures
and regulations to implement Act 98 of 199258 and this article and may
by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including, but
not limited to, issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 189-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
completion received by the Treasurer, and if the City has not
incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall
be returned to the named insured. If the City has incurred costs
for repairs, removal or securing the building or other structure, the
costs shall be paid from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the
City shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the City
pursuant to this section and not returned to the named insured,
such interest shall belong to the City. To the extent that proceeds
are returned to the named insured, interest earned on such
proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that
the proceeds are returned.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the City
to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the City or its named representative and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
58.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
§ 189-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-6
1:295
Chapter 200
MECHANICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 110.
§ 200-1. Adoption of standards.59
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as the
"International Mechanical Code," 2009 Edition, including Appendix A, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., be and hereby is adopted
as the International Mechanical Code of the City of Oil City, County of
Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical
Code are with this referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
as prescribed in § 200-3 of this chapter.
§ 200-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2620 of the City of Oil City, entitled the "Mechanical Code
of the City of Oil City,"60 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 200-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Chapter 1 Administration and Enforcement.
101.0 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Mechanical Code of
the City of Oil City," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in
Section 106.5.2 have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit
be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the
mechanical system, has been paid.
106.5.1 Work prior to permit. In the event work is commenced on any
project prior to the issuance of a mechanical permit, the fees for the
acquisition of a permit shall be doubled.
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated
in the following schedule.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2620, adopted 1-12-1998, appeared as former Ch. 117,
Mechanical Code, of the Code.
§ 189-6 OIL CITY CODE § 200-3
1:296
Fee Schedule: $10 for $0 to $1,000; $25 for $1,001 to $5,000; $30 for
$5,001 to $6,000; $35 for $6,001 to $7,000; $40 for $7,001 to $8,000;
$45 for $8,001 to $9,000; $50 for $9,001 to $10,000; $55 for $10,001 to
$11,000; $60 for $11,001 to $12,000; $65 for $12,001 to $13,000; $70
for $13,001 to $14,000; $75 for $14,001 to $15,000; $80 for $15,001 to
$16,000; $85 for $16,001 to $17,000; $90 for $17,001 to $18,000; $95
for $18,001 to $19,000; $100 for $19,001 to $20,000; and over $20,000,
$100 plus $6 for each additional $1,000 or part thereof. When the project
includes work normally covered by a plumbing, electrical, mechanical or
energy permit, the fees for those permits shall not be separately charged,
but rather the value of such work shall be included in the total project
costs.
Plan Examination: In addition to the fees listed above, the following fees
shall be charged when applicable. The fee for each plan examination shall
be computed at 40% of the mechanical permit fee. In no instance shall the
fee be less than $25.
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to
pay a fine not less than $300 or more than $1,000, together with the cost of
prosecution and any fee or fees, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
30 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 15, Referenced Standards61
Codes insert:
IBC - 2009 International Building Code
IFC - 2009 International Fire Code
IFGC - 2009 International Fuel Gas Code
IPC - 2009 International Plumbing Code
108.5 Stop-work orders. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Upon notice from the Code Official that mechanical work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe
manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to the
owner's agent or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state
the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the Code Official shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue
any work on the system after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100 or more than $1,000.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:297
109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a
decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better
form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form
obtained from the Code Official within 20 days after the notice was sent.
Chapter 208
NUISANCE PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers — See Ch. 92, Art. I. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 130.
§ 200-3 OIL CITY CODE § 200-3
1:298
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Houses
[Adopted 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2771]
§ 208-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Oil City Disorderly House
Ordinance."
§ 208-2. Authority.62
This article is enacted pursuant to Section 2414 of the Third Class City
Code, 53 P.S. § 37414.
§ 208-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the City of Oil City by eliminating the proliferation of residences harboring
occupants who disturb the peace and tranquility of their neighborhoods.
The processes currently available do not adequately control unlawful or
nuisance activity or its detrimental effects on citizens and neighborhoods
where such activity occurs. These regulations and prohibitions are intended
to protect the physical, mental and social well-being of the residents of the
City of Oil City.
§ 208-4. Findings.
The Council finds that there is a need to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City of Oil City by eliminating the
proliferation of residences harboring occupants who disturb the peace and
tranquility of their neighborhoods, and the chronic unlawful or nuisance
activity of various kinds on and near disorderly properties diminishes the
quality of life in neighborhoods where this activity occurs. Specifically, the
Council finds that maintaining or permitting a disorderly house:
A. Frequently promotes and causes criminal misconduct in the
surrounding neighborhood that disturbs the peace, that affects public
health, safety and welfare, and creates a nuisance in that residents
neighboring a disorderly house are deprived of the enjoyment of their
homes, disturbed in their sleep, and otherwise prevented from the quiet
enjoyment of their residential premises;
B. Affects the property values of residences in the City;
C. Affects the public welfare by reflecting negatively on the quality of life
in residential areas of the City;
D. Disturbs the peace and good order of the City; and
E. Creates a public nuisance.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-5
1:299
§ 208-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, camping site or other structure or
place occupied either temporarily or permanently by human beings. The
term shall also include both the enclosed area within a building as well as
the exterior premises of the building within the boundary lines of any real
property on which the building is located.
CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the City of Oil City or his/her designee.
DISORDERLY ACTIVITIES — Situations created within the vicinity of any
building by a building's owner, occupants or tenants, or the invitees of
an owner, tenant or occupant, which would have a tendency to disturb
unreasonably the community, the neighborhood or an ordinary individual
occupying property in or near the disorderly activity, including but not
limited to loud music; boisterous parties; excessively loud or unnecessary
noises or repeated noise disturbances emanating from within the building
or its surroundings which are audible outside and surrounding the building;
fights within the building or in its vicinity involving occupants of the
building or their invitees; occupants of the building or their invitees being
intoxicated outdoors in the vicinity of the building; and other similar
activities in the building or in the vicinity of the building.
DISORDERLY EVENT — A complaint of a disorderly activity to which the
Police Department responds and determines to be substantiated.
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building at which the Police Department has
substantiated a disorderly event.
OWNER — The person or persons having the right of legal title to or the
beneficial or possessory interest in a building or parcel of land.
§ 208-6. Documentation of complaints.
The Police Department shall document all responses to complaints of
disorderly activities and classify each as either a substantiated disorderly
event or unfounded complaint.
§ 208-7. Offense and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, resident, manager, proprietor
or occupant of any building to knowingly collect or permit to be
collected therein persons who are engaging in any disorderly activities,
unlawful acts, or to knowingly make, cause, permit or suffer to be made
therein any disorderly activities to the annoyance or disturbance of any
person or neighborhood. Any person who is not the owner of a
disorderly house who violates any provision of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation: a fine of $100 or 30 days' imprisonment, or both.
§ 208-5 OIL CITY CODE § 208-7
1:300
§ 208-8. Delivery of notices.
Any notice mailed or delivered to any owner as provided in this article shall
be effective as to the owner identified in the notice, notwithstanding such
owner's refusal to accept delivery of the notice and notwithstanding any
failure of any other owner to actually receive notice.
(2) Second violation: a fine of $300 or 60 days' imprisonment, or both.
(3) Third and each subsequent violation: a fine of $600 or 90 days'
imprisonment, or both.
B. Whenever the Police Department responds to a disorderly event, the
owner of the disorderly house shall be notified as provided below:
(1) First disorderly event. No later than five calendar days after the
first disorderly event at a building, the Police Department shall
deliver by hand or first class mail a copy of this article as a courtesy
and a notice, advising the owner that the Police Department has
responded to a disorderly event at his or her building.
(2) Second disorderly event. No later than five calendar days after the
second disorderly event at a building, the Police Department shall
deliver by hand or first class mail a copy of this article as a courtesy
and a notice advising the owner that the Police Department has
responded to a second disorderly event at his or her building. The
owner of the disorderly house shall be subject to a fine of $300.
(3) Third or subsequent disorderly event. No later than five calendar
days after the third or subsequent disorderly event at a building,
the Police Department shall deliver by hand or first class mail a
copy of this article as a courtesy and a notice advising the owner
that the Police Department has responded to a third or subsequent
disorderly event at his or her building. The owner of the disorderly
house shall be subject to a fine of $600.
§ 208-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-8
1:301
Chapter 212
OIL AND GAS WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gas, oil and water lines — See Ch. 179. Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 212-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Oil and Gas Well Ordinance of the City
of Oil City."
§ 212-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the scope and meaning hereinafter defined. All other technical or gas
and oil industry words or phrases used hereinafter and not specifically
defined shall have the meaning customarily attributable to them by prudent
operators in the oil and gas industry.
CITY — The City of Oil City.
LEASE — Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other
oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts
and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the
minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him
but which, due to a free royalty ownership, is developed and operated on a
separate tract.
NEW WELL — Any oil or gas well which has not been drilled to an existing
oil- or gas-bearing rock formation prior to the adoption of this chapter.
NONOPERATING WELL — Any well which is not currently being operated
for the production of gas or oil.
OPERATING WELL — Any well that is currently being operated for the
production of oil or gas.
PERMIT — A regulatory device used by the City to monitor the operation
and production of oil and gas wells within the City limits.
PERSON — Includes both the singular and plural and shall mean and
include any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
club, society, cooperative, trust, municipal corporation or political
subdivision, whatsoever.
REWORKING — Any operation which changes the physical characteristics
of an existing operating or nonoperating oil or gas well, including drilling
deeper, shooting or hydrofracturing.
WASTE — Any product or by-product of the oil and/or gas drilling,
reworking or production process which, by its nature, can be harmful or
§ 208-8 OIL CITY CODE § 212-2
1:302
irritating to the social and/or physical environment. Examples of "waste"
include, but are not limited to, surface loss of oil, gas, sludge, basic
sediment and brine.
§ 212-3. Permits required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate an oil or gas
well within the City of Oil City without first filing for and obtaining a
permit from the City Building Inspector.
B. Any person who wishes to retain the right to operate an existing well in
the City under this section must make application for a permit within
one year from the effective date of the adoption of this chapter. Any
person who wishes to operate a new well, an existing operating well or
an existing nonoperating well in the City must first obtain a permit
under this section prior to placing such wells into operation. The permit
application shall contain the following data and be subject to the
following:
(1) The application shall be made upon a general application form to
be supplied by the City.
(2) A copy of a map which shows the location of all known wells which
the person filing for the permit wishes to operate and which shall
designate the City lot number(s) upon which the well(s) are
located. The map shall also contain the exact location of any
storage and separating tanks which are presently on the site.
(3) A permit filing or renewal fee as outlined in Subsection E.
(4) A separate permit application shall be required for each well.
C. Upon receiving the appropriate filing information and data as detailed
hereinabove, the City Building Inspector shall inspect the premises
containing the well(s) to verify the accuracy of the application data. The
Building Inspector shall issue the permit within 30 days after receiving
the application data, provided that the application meets all terms and
conditions imposed by this chapter.
D. The permit, once approved, shall be effective for a period of one year
from the date of issuance. In order for a well to remain operating, the
permit must be renewed prior to the expiration date. The permit is not
transferable, and upon the sale, rental or lease of any oil or gas well(s),
the new operator, owner or party in interest shall make application for a
permit in accordance with Subsection B within 30 days of any
transaction and before any operation of the affected well(s).
E. A permit filing fee shall be charged for processing permit applications
from persons who seek to retain oil and/or gas well(s). The fees shall be
as follows:
(1) Initial filing fee per well: $5.
§ 212-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-3
1:303
§ 212-4. Equipment.
§ 212-5. Reworking of existing wells.
Any person who seeks to undertake reworking operations on an existing,
operating or nonoperating well shall, prior to any reworking, notify the
City Building Inspector of the intention to do so. Said reworking site shall
be maintained in such a manner so as to protect the general public from
hazards associated with the reworking process and so as to minimize any
potential environmental degradation.
§ 212-6. Permits for new wells.
(2) Renewal filing fee per well: $2.
A. All new wells must have storage and separating tanks installed
underground or, if above ground, must be properly screened from
public view, as per Chapter 310, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Oil
City. The City Building Inspector shall be notified prior to the placement
of any of the above equipment so that he may view the proposed
location of said equipment. The City Building Inspector may require the
relocation of the equipment to assure and maintain the public's safety
and welfare.63
B. All existing leases, whether presently operating or scheduled for
operation, shall replace any damaged (beyond repair), obsolete or
nonfunctional storage and separating tanks in accordance with
Subsection A.
A. All new oil and gas wells drilled within the City of Oil City shall meet the
following requirements with regard to location:
(1) In areas designated in Chapter 310, Zoning, of the City of Oil City
as residential, i.e., R-1, R-2 and R-3, no new well(s) shall be drilled
and operated at any location which is nearer than 300 feet to an
adjacent surface property line or public street right-of-way without
the written approval of the adjacent surface property owner(s).
(2) In areas designated in Chapter 310, Zoning, of the City of Oil City
as either commercial or industrial, i.e., C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1 or I-2,
no new well shall be drilled and operated at any location which is
nearer than 100 feet to any adjacent surface property line or public
street right-of-way, without the written approval of the adjacent
surface property owner(s).
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a new oil or gas well within
the City of Oil City without first filing for and obtaining a permit from
the City Building Inspector. The permit application for new oil or gas
wells shall contain the following data and be subject to the following:
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-3 OIL CITY CODE § 212-6
1:304
§ 212-7. Waste.
All waste produced at an operating well lease shall be disposed of in a
proper manner. At no time shall any waste be transmitted onto or into the
streets or alleys of the City of Oil City, nor shall any waste be dumped
directly or indirectly into any sanitary or storm sewer owned, operated or
maintained by the City of Oil City.
§ 212-8. Production operation.
(1) The application shall be made upon a general application form to
be supplied by the City.
(2) A copy of a map which shows the location of all new well(s) to be
drilled on a lease and which shall designate the City lot number(s)
upon which the well(s) will be drilled. The map shall also contain
the proposed location of any new storage and separating tanks on
the lease or the exact location of any existing storage and
separating tanks that may already exist on the site.
(3) A permit filing or renewal fee as outlined in § 212-3E.
C. Upon the receipt of the appropriate filing information and data as
detailed above, the City Building Inspector shall inspect the premises
containing the proposed new well(s) to verify the accuracy of the
application data. The City Building Inspector shall issue the permit for
the new well(s) within 30 days after receiving the application data,
provided that the application meets all terms and conditions imposed by
this chapter.
D. The new well permit, once approved, shall be effective for a period of
one year from the date of issuance. Once the permit is issued for the
new well(s), the well(s) shall be termed "operating" as per the meaning
of the term under this chapter. Limitations on and renewal of operating
oil and gas well permits are delineated in § 212-3. Failure to abide by
the regulations for operating wells as outlined in this chapter or to
renew the permits for the same shall render the well(s) "nonoperating"
as per the definition.
A. All pumping equipment shall be either:
(1) Constantly supervised during the production operation; or
(2) Completely surrounded by fencing not less than four feet in height
so as to restrict all persons who may congregate in such hazardous
areas.
B. Operators of all oil and gas production equipment in the City shall limit
their daily hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. so as to
minimize disturbance to the general public.
§ 212-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-8
1:305
§ 212-9. Other laws and regulations.
All persons maintaining and operating oil and gas well(s) must also meet
any additional federal, state and local laws which pertain to the operation
of oil and gas wells.
§ 212-10. Appeals.
Any applicant or person affected by a decision of the City Building Inspector
may, within 10 days of such decision, appeal to the Board of Appeals,
consisting of the five members of City Council, for review. Such review shall
be conducted during a specially scheduled meeting. The Board of Appeals
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the City Building Inspector.
§ 212-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay the costs of prosecution and a fine not
exceeding $300 and, in default of the payment of such costs and fine, be
committed to the Venango County jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 216
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction codes — See Ch. 110. Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 216-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of the general
public and to assist in the prevention and control of air pollution from
the use of outdoor wood-fired boilers and similar wood-burning devices
or appliances. Recognizing that these devices or equipment are becoming
more prevalent throughout the country and in our region, the City of Oil
City is enacting this chapter to ensure the health and safety of both the
people that are operating and benefiting from the use of these outdoor
boilers and those that may be exposed to the detrimental effects of this type
of device or equipment.
C. Any person engaged in the operation of oil and gas production shall be
required to keep his tanks and pumping equipment painted as to
maintain the site in a neat and orderly manner, particularly with regard
to on-site storage of production equipment.
§ 212-8 OIL CITY CODE § 216-2
1:306
§ 216-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter or in communications, notices or orders relative
thereto, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed
to them below:
CITY — The City of Oil City.
CLEAN WOOD — Seasoned wood that has no paint, stains or other types of
coatings, and wood that has not been treated with any chemical, including
but not limited to copper chromium arsenate, creosote or
pentachlorophenol.
CODE OFFICE — The Oil City Code Office, located at City Hall, 21 Seneca
Street, Oil City, Pennsylvania.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER or OWB — A fuel-burning device:[Amended
2-10-2011 by Ord. No. 2787]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, authority, bureau, agency,
political subdivision of the commonwealth, law enforcement agency,
firefighting agency, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
REFUSE — Any animal, vegetable or mineral, solid, liquid or gaseous waste.
It includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, garbage, ashes, construction
waste, industrial waste, commercial waste, demolition waste, agricultural
waste, abandoned vehicles and any unwanted or discarded material. It does
not include hazardous waste.
SEASONED WOOD — Wood that has been dried for at least six months.
WOOD FUEL — All wood intended to be used as fuel, including but not
limited to trees, cordwood, logs, lumber, sawdust, wood pellets, slabs,
bark, chips, waste pallets and wood from manufacturing processes (buttoffs,
shavings, turnings, sander dust), as well as other solid fuels that are
approved for used by the manufacturer of the OWB. This definition does not
include materials that are chemically treated with any preservative, paint
or oil.
§ 216-3. Requirements.
A. Designed to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels;
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or for
installation in structures not normally intended for habitation by
humans or domestic animals, including structures such as garages and
sheds; and
B.
Which heats building space and/or water through the distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water
or a mixture of water and antifreeze.
C.
§ 216-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-3
1:307
A. Existing units. Any person that wishes to continue using an OWB
installed prior to the effective date of this chapter must apply for a
permit from the Oil City Code Office within three months of that
effective date. Said permit application shall include:
(1) Submission of a written application on a form provided by the Code
Office;
(2) Payment of the permit application fee; this fee shall be waived if the
applicant for the permit submits the permit application within the
three-month period stipulated above;
(3) An informal plan depicting the location of the OWB in relation to
the facility that it serves and all other occupied or unoccupied
structures within 300 feet of the existing OWB; and
(4) Information related to the existing height of the smokestack.
B. New units.
(1) No person shall install or cause to be installed an OWB after the
effective date of this chapter without first obtaining a permit from
the Code Office. The permit process shall include submission of a
written application on a form provided by the Code Office; a
suitable plan meeting the requirements set forth below; and
payment of the permit application fee established by the City.
(2) The proposed OWB shall be: a) listed to an appropriate safety
standard, such as Underwriters Laboratory (UL), American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Canadian Standards
Association (CAN/CSA); and b) meet the EPA's Phase 2 (white hang
tag) program standards for air emissions.
(3) Plans for the location and installation of any outdoor wood boiler to
be installed after the effective date of this chapter shall be drawn at
a scale of one inch equals 20 feet for plot plans and a smaller scale
to be approved by the Code Office for details of boiler components,
and shall include depiction of:
(a) The legal boundaries of the lot to be served;
(b) The location of all dwelling(s) and building(s) existing and
proposed on the lot to be served by the outdoor wood boiler
and identification of those to be served by the boiler;
(c) The locations of all known easements and rights-of-way on the
lot to be served;
(d) The location of all components of the outdoor wood boiler,
including underground electric lines, fluid lines or ductwork;
(e) The proposed wood-burner stack height;
§ 216-3 OIL CITY CODE § 216-3
1:308
§ 216-4. Installation and use.
The requirements set forth in this section are intended to set forth the
minimum criteria that the Code Office believes is required to protect public
health, safety and the environment. Nothing in this chapter is intended to
limit the powers of the Code Office, and it expressly reserves its right to
take further action with respect to any individual case pursuant to any other
applicable federal, state or local law or regulation.
(f) The location of all roads, passways and rights-of-way within
100 feet of the proposed outdoor wood boiler; and
(g) The location of all dwelling(s) and building(s) existing within
300 feet of the proposed outdoor wood boiler, whether or not
on the lot to be served by the outdoor wood-burning boiler.
(4) Installation must be completed within six months of the issuance of
the permit.
A. All new and existing outdoor wood boilers shall be installed and
operated according to the manufacturer's specifications. If, in the Code
Official's opinion, the OWB has been installed or is being operated in a
manner that is not in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications, he may suspend or revoke the permit until which time he
is satisfied that all necessary corrective action(s) have been taken by
the permit holder.
B. Any person interested in installing a new outdoor wood boiler shall
obtain from the retailer or other party selling or offering for sale the
new outdoor wood boilers any public education or other pertinent
information in the form of pamphlets, brochures or fact sheets on the
following topics:
(1) Proper installation, operation and maintenance of the outdoor
wood boiler;
(2) Proper fuel selection and use;
(3) Health effects from wood smoke; and
(4) Proper sizing of outdoor wood boiler.
C. No person that is required to obtain a permit under this chapter shall
cause or allow any of the following materials to be burned in an OWB:
(1) Any wood that does not meet the definition of clean wood or wood
fuel;
(2) Refuse;
(3) Treated wood;
(4) Plastic products;
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:309
(5) Rubber products;
(6) Waste petroleum products;
(7) Paints and paint solvents;
(8) Coal;
(9) Glossy or colored paper;
(10) Particle board; or
(11) Any other material not intended by a manufacturer for use as fuel
in a solid-fuel-burning device.
D. No person shall install or cause to be installed any outdoor wood boiler
after the effective date of this chapter: 1) within 25 feet of the house it
is serving or at the minimum recommended by the manufacturer,
whichever is greater; or 2) within 200 feet of any other occupied
structure. This requirement will not apply to outdoor wood boilers
installed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
E. Smokestack height.
(1) Existing units. All existing units shall be required to maintain a
smokestack height which is a minimum of 10 feet or maximum of 35
feet. Any existing units that are found not to be in compliance with
this requirement shall have 90 days to modify the smokestack
height to bring the unit into compliance.
(2) New units. No person shall install or cause to be installed any
outdoor wood boiler after the effective date of this chapter that
does not have a smokestack height which is a minimum of 10 feet
or maximum of 35 feet, except in cases where the Code Office uses
its discretionary powers to provide an exception to these
requirements. In any case, if there is any residence or dwelling
within 300 feet of the OWB, the smokestack shall be required to
extend at least two feet beyond the highest point of that residence
or dwelling while still maintaining the maximum height delineated
above.
F. The operation of any new or existing outdoor wood-burning boiler may
not occur between the dates of May 31 and September 1 of each
calendar year.
G. The storage of firewood or other wood fuel shall be in accordance with
any other laws and regulations adopted by the City.
H. At no time after the permit is granted shall an existing or new OWB unit
be modified or reconstructed so as to create a device that provides
safety standards or air emissions that are more adverse to the general
public than the unit that was originally permitted. The City shall have
§ 216-4 OIL CITY CODE § 216-4
1:310
§ 216-5. Enforcement and appeals.
Chapter 221
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 221-1. Spitting prohibited in certain public places. [Amended
12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate or deposit or place
any sputum, spittle, saliva, phlegm, mucus or tobacco juice upon any part
of any sidewalk in the City of Oil City or upon any part of the floors or
inside furnishings or equipment of theaters, churches, concert halls or other
public buildings or in any place upon the outside of such buildings.
§ 221-2. Disposal of fruit or vegetable matter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, deposit or place upon any
part of any sidewalk in the City of Oil City or upon any part of the floors
of theaters, churches or concert halls located within said City any fruit or
vegetable matter of any sort or description, or the peel or rind or any part
thereof.
§ 221-3. Enforcement.
It is hereby made the duty of every officer of the Police and Health
Departments of the City of Oil City to apprehend and arrest any person
violating the terms and provisions of this chapter.
the right to rescind the permit until corrective action is taken by the
owner to eliminate the problem or problems.
A. Permit suspension or revocation. The Code Officer may suspend or
revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for any violation of
this chapter, or any other applicable federal, state or local law or
regulation pertaining to OWBs. Such revocation or suspension may be
appealed to the Oil City Code Appeals Board, which will render a final
decision on the revocation and suspension after hearing evidence from
both the Code Office and permit holder.
B. Noncriminal disposition. This chapter may be enforced by any Oil City
police officer or agent of the Code Office.
C. Fines and costs. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $300 together with
the costs of prosecution and any fee or fees. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
1:311
§ 221-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 225
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 225-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor (canvasser), transient
merchant (vendor) or temporary merchant (vendor), as defined in § 225-2 of
this chapter, to engage in such business within the City of Oil City without
first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — One who sells tangible commodities from house to house, store
to store or on the streets or in any public place. Sales are not made from
one established location, and delivery of the commodity is at the time of the
sale.
SOLICITOR (CANVASSER) — One who takes orders for future deliveries
or who sells intangible services or solicits subscriptions in public places or
from house to house or store to store.
SPECIAL EVENTS SPONSOR — A nonprofit organization that sponsors a
community-oriented special event which shall last no longer than a twoweek
period and which allows vendors to sell commodities under its
auspices during said special event.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT (VENDOR) — One who sells commodities from
a private premises but remains at one place for a temporary period of not
more than four weeks but less than six total months in any calendar year.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT (VENDOR) — One who sells commodities from a
private premises but remains at one place for temporary periods of less than
four weeks.
§ 225-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
A. To farmers selling their own produce.
§ 221-4 OIL CITY CODE § 225-3
1:312
§ 225-4. Application for license.
An application for a license as required by § 225-1 shall be made to the
City Manager upon forms provided by the City of Oil City. Such application
shall be sworn to and filed with the City Manager at least 10 days prior to
the time at which the license applied for shall become effective; provided,
however, that the City Manager may for good cause shown allow the filing
of an application less than 10 days prior to the effective date of the permit
applied for.
B. To the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, when the proceeds thereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose.
C. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
D. To sales by commercial sales agents to dealers in the usual course of
business.
E. To bona fide branch stores or locations lawfully operated by retail
merchants already having a permanent place of business in the City of
Oil City or at temporary locations by such merchants whose permanent
places of business have been destroyed or rendered untenable.
F. To sale by the owners of household goods, on their premises, commonly
known as "garage sales" or "yard sales," so long as such sales are not
held for more than eight days in any one calendar year.
A. Peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants and temporary merchants.
(1) The application for the above groups shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name, address or headquarters of the entity or person
applying for the permit.
(b) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses
of the applicant's principal officers and managers.
(c) The nature and character of the proposed business of the
applicant.
(d) The representations which are to be made and advertised
concerning the applicant's business.
(e) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting
the business.
(f) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in
direct charge of conducting the business, and the names and
addresses of all persons connected or to be connected with the
proposed business.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-4
1:313
§ 225-5. Investigation of application and applicant.
The City Manager shall examine or cause to be examined by City personnel
all applications filed hereunder and shall make, or cause to be made, such
further investigation of the application and applicant as the City Manager
shall deem necessary.
(g) The time when such business will be conducted, giving the
dates for the beginning and ending of such conduct of
business.
(h) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
City Manager in order for him to determine the kind and
character of the business to be conducted.
(2) If while any application is pending or during the term of any permit
granted there is any change in fact, policy or method that would
alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall
notify the City Manager, in writing, thereof within 24 hours after
such change.
B. Special events sponsors.
(1) The application for the special events sponsors shall contain the
following information:
(a) The name, address or headquarters of the sponsor applying for
the permit.
(b) The names of the officers or managers of such sponsor.
(c) The name of the special event, the dates of the event and a
calendar of the schedule of the activities that will be held.
(d) A brief history of the event (if not in its initial year) as well as
an explanation of the community nature of the event.
(e) A list of all activities during the course of the event which will
potentially involve the use of vendors selling any commodities.
(f) A list of the vendors under the sponsorship of the applicant
that have or will be given permission to sell commodities
during one or more activities to be held during the event,
including the address of the vendors and a contact person with
a telephone number and the types of commodity to be sold (i.e.,
food, beverage, clothing, novelties, etc.).
(2) All such vendors listed in such a special events sponsor application
(if approved) shall be allowed lawfully to operate under the
auspices of a license granted thereto without having to secure a
separate and individual license hereunder. The maximum period for
a special events sponsor license shall be two weeks.
§ 225-4 OIL CITY CODE § 225-6
1:314
§ 225-6. Issuance of license.
§ 225-7. Revocation of license.
Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the City Manager has knowledge
that any person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall
immediately revoke the license by giving the license holder immediate
written notice thereof.
§ 225-8. License fees.
The following nonrefundable license fees shall be payable in advance of
conducting any business within the City of Oil City, and each license issued
shall be exclusive of the other licenses herein.
§ 225-9. Identification.
Each peddler, solicitor, transient merchant and temporary merchant shall
display proof of licensing under this chapter at all times.
A. The City Manager shall issue the license provided for in § 225-1 hereof
whenever he shall find the following facts to exist:
(1) That all of the statements made in the application are true.
(2) That the control and supervision of the conduct of the business will
be under responsible and reliable persons.
(3) That the applicant has not engaged in any previous fraudulent
transactions or enterprises.
(4) That neither the business nor the conduct of the business will be a
fraud on the public.
B. The City Manager shall notify the applicant by mail or personal delivery
of his decision, and if the application is denied, the City Manager shall
prepare a written statement of his findings of fact.
A. Peddler: $20 per year.
B. Solicitor (canvasser): $20 per year.
C. Transient merchant (vendor): $20 per month.
D. Temporary merchant (vendor): $20 per month or $70 per six months
(six-month license must be secured in advance of business initiation).
E. Special events sponsor: $20 per two weeks.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:315
§ 225-10. Transferability of licenses.
Any license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable and shall
be returned to the City Manager within two days of its date of expiration,
together with all facsimile copies thereof.
§ 225-11. Hours and days of operation.
No person licensed under this chapter shall engage or conduct his business
at any time on Sunday or upon any other day of the week before 9:00 a.m.
or after 8:00 p.m., unless prior written approval is granted by the City of Oil
City.
§ 225-12. Loudspeakers.
No person licensed hereunder shall utilize any loudspeaker, horn or any
other device for announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 225-13. Use of streets, alleys and sidewalks.
No person licensed under this chapter shall occupy any fixed location upon
any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the City of Oil City for the purpose
of conducting his business, with or without any stand or counter, unless a
special events sponsor shall be granted prior written approval by the City of
Oil City.
§ 225-14. Taxes.
All peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants and temporary merchants
remain subject to the requirements of the City of Oil City Mercantile Tax
and Business Privilege Tax Ordinances64 and to pay the tax or taxes required
thereunder.
§ 225-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each and every offense and, in default of the payment of
such costs and fine, be committed to the jail for a period not exceeding 30
days for each and every offense. Each day during which a violation of this
chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 230
PLUMBING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction codes — See Ch. 110.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Taxation, Arts. III and IV.
§ 225-10 OIL CITY CODE § 225-15
1:316
§ 230-1. Adoption of standards.65
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Oil City, being marked and designated as the
"International Plumbing Code," 2009 Edition, including Appendixes B, D,
E, F and G, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Oil City, County of
Venango, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code, 2009
Edition, are with this chapter referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in the chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as prescribed in § 230-3 of this chapter.
§ 230-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 2619 of the City of Oil City, entitled the "Plumbing Code of
the City of Oil City,"66 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 230-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing Code of
the City of Oil City," hereinafter referred to as "this code."
106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in
Section 106.6.2 have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be
released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the plumbing
system, has been paid.
106.6.1 Work prior to permit. In the event work is commenced on
any project prior to the issuance of a plumbing permit, the fees for the
acquisition of a permit shall be doubled.
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for plumbing work shall be as indicated
in the following schedule:
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
66.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2619, adopted 1-12-1998, appeared as former Ch. 132,
Plumbing.
§ 225-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:317
Permit issuance. The fee for each permit and required inspections shall
be $10 for $0 to $1,000; $25 for $1,001 to $5,000; $30 for $5,001 to
$6,000; $35 for $6,001 to $7,000; $40 for $7,001 to $8,000; $45 for $8,001
to $9,000; $50 for $9,001 to $10,000; $55 for $10,001 to $11,000; $60
for $11,001 to $12,000; $65 for $12,001 to $13,000; $70 for $13,001 to
$14,000; $75 for $14,001 to $15,000; $80 for $15,001 to $16,000; $85
for $16,001 to $17,000; $90 for $17,001 to $18,000; $95 for $18,001 to
$19,000; $100 for $19,001 to $20,000; and over $20,000, $100 plus $6
for each additional $1,000 or part thereof. When the project includes work
normally covered by a plumbing, electrical, mechanical or energy permit,
the fees for those permits shall not be separately charged, but rather the
value of such work shall be included in the total project costs.
Plan examination. The fee for each plan examination shall be computed
at 40% of the plumbing permit fee. In no instance shall the fee be less than
$25.
Sewer tap-in fee. $100.
Water tap-in fee. $500 for three-fourths-inch and one-inch lines. Lines
larger than one inch shall be calculated by the City Engineer.
108.4 Violation penalties. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
or more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and any fee or
fees, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
108.5 Stop-work orders. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Upon notice from the Code Official that plumbing work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property or to the owner's agent or
to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under
which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code
Official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the
work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
Chapter 14 Reference Standards67
Code Inserts
IRC - 2009 International Residential Code One- and Two-Family
Dwelling
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-3 OIL CITY CODE § 230-3
1:318
IBC - 2009 International Building Code
IFGC - 2009 International Fuel Gas Code
IMC - 2009 International Mechanical Code
IECC - 2009 International Energy Conservation Code
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal
a decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better
form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form
obtained from the Code Official within 20 days after the notice was served.
305.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 30 inches below finished grade at
the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of
30 inches below grade.
904.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof, except that, where a
roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent
extensions shall run at least seven feet (2,134 mm) above the roof.
Chapter 233
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 154. Handbills and posters — See Ch. 183.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:319

ARTICLE I
Regulation and Inspection
[Adopted 1-9-1899 by Ord. No. 445 (Ch. 135, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 233-1. Districts of City.
For the purposes of this article, the City of Oil City shall be divided into
districts as follows:
§ 233-2. Height of wires in District No. 1.
In all of said highways in District No. 1, all line wires and all guy wires and,
where not dangerous to the occupants of the buildings served, all service
wires shall be at least 35 feet above the surface of the street at every point,
except the trolley and span wires of street railway companies.
§ 233-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLE — Each and every pole of any telegraph, telephone, electric light
or street railway company erected for the purpose of supporting wires
intended for the conveyance of electricity or for the purpose of guying or
otherwise supporting such poles, and the term shall refer to no other pole.
§ 233-4. Marking of poles required.
Every pole in said City of Oil City shall, on or before the first day of May in
each year and before the license hereafter mentioned is granted, be plainly
marked with the initials of the corporation controlling said pole and with
a serial number, said letters and numbers being at least two inches high
and placed eight feet above the surface of the street, said numbers to be
maintained on each of said poles as long as it occupies substantially the
same location.
A. District No. 1 shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the northwest
corner of Petroleum and Main Streets; thence running in a straight line
to the west end of Duncomb Street; thence along the north side of
Duncomb Street to the tracks of the Western New York and
Pennsylvania Railroad; thence with said tracks southward to Centre
Street; thence with the north side of said street to Spring Street; thence
with the east side of Spring Street to Colbert Avenue; thence crossing
the Allegheny River to Short Street; thence with the east side of Short
Street to Second Street; thence with the south side of Second Street to
Petroleum Street; thence with the west side of Petroleum Street to the
place of beginning.
B. District No. 2 shall contain all of Oil City not included in District No. 1.
§ 233-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-5
1:321
§ 233-5. Use of poles by City.
The City shall have the right at any and all times to use the poles of any
company or companies for the purpose of stringing their wires and have
access to such poles for repairs, etc.
§ 233-6. Both sides of highway not to be used. [Amended 9-8-1986
by Ord. No. 2452]
Both sides of any part of any highway shall not be occupied by poles owned
or used by one company. This section shall not apply, however, to the poles
of street railway companies.
§ 233-7. Painting of poles. [Amended 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970;
8-23-1921 by Ord. No. 1001]
Before September 1, 1899, every pole now erected and, also within six
months of its erection, every new pole shall be painted, and said paint shall
at all times thereafter be maintained in good condition. Said paint shall
be black for the first six feet above the ground, and the remainder shall
be green or such other color as may be authorized by the Director of the
Department of Public Works; except that poles already painted some other
color shall not be required to conform to the foregoing colors until they
need repainting.
§ 233-8. Steps on poles. [Amended 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970;
8-23-1921 by Ord. No. 1001]
All poles in District No. 1, except the trolley poles of street railways, shall
be provided with steps, and spurs shall not be used in climbing the same.
No steps shall hereafter be placed on any poles in the City lower than seven
feet four inches from the ground, but poles which are provided with steps
above that height shall be equipped with pole step sockets in which to insert
portable pole steps. Pole steps shall always be placed on a line with the
street in which the pole is located.
§ 233-9. Attaching advertisements to poles.
No notices or advertisements shall be nailed, tacked or otherwise fastened
to any pole in Oil City without the written consent of the owner, which
consent shall be exhibited upon the demand of any policeman; and either
the person so affixing such notice or the party causing it to be done shall
be subject to the penalty provided for the violation of the provisions of this
article.
§ 233-10. Placement of poles.
All poles hereafter set or reset shall be placed as follows:
A. On all streets having grass plots: in the center of the grass plots.
§ 233-5 OIL CITY CODE § 233-10
1:322
§ 233-11. Restoration of highway; removal of poles.
Hereafter, in setting or resetting poles in any highway in Oil City, the
party or parties causing said work to be done shall restore the portion
of said highway broken up or disturbed to as good condition as existed
previous thereto and maintain the same in such good condition for one
year thereafter. In case any such pole is abandoned, all of such pole shall
be removed from the highway by the company owning the pole, and said
highway is to be placed in as good condition as that part of the highway in
the immediate vicinity. Said work is to be done under the supervision of the
City Engineer.
§ 233-12. Licensing of poles required.
Without license as provided by this or other ordinance of the City of Oil City,
no poles shall be erected or maintained by telegraph, telephone, electric
light or street railway companies in any street, alley or highway of Oil City
after June 1, 1899.
§ 233-13. Pole license fee. [Amended 5-28-1908 by Ord. No. 642;
4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970; 8-23-1921 by Ord. No. 1001]
The license fee for each and every pole shall be $0.50 per annum, which
shall be collected as similar license fees are by law collected.
§ 233-14. Annual application for pole licenses.
It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles, on or before the first
day of June 1899, and on or before the first day of June of each and
every year thereafter, to make application to the Mayor of Oil City for a
license to maintain the poles theretofore erected for the ensuing year, which
application shall be upon blanks or forms furnished by the City and shall
state the name of the company, firm or person owning such poles, the serial
number and location of each pole, the purpose for which it is used and
B. On all other streets, the center of the pole shall coincide with the center
of the curb, except where area walls prevent the same.
C. In case of special obstruction, as area walls, etc., they shall be placed as
the Council may in each case by resolution determine.
D. All poles shall be so spaced as to interfere as little as possible with the
convenient use of the highways and with the adjoining properties.
E. No pole shall be set or reset without notice being filed with the City
Controller one day in advance of such setting or resetting. Whenever
any pole is in such location as to interfere with any public improvement
or with reasonable access to the abutting property, said pole shall, upon
written notice from the City Engineer, be removed to a new location, at
the expense of the party owning the pole. [Amended 2-14-1921 by
Ord. No. 995; 8-23-1921 by Ord. No. 1001]
§ 233-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-14
1:323
whether or not such poles or any of them are used to carry the wires of any
other company or companies and, if so, the names of such companies, and
any other information called for by said blanks or forms. Upon the making of
such application and the payment of the license fees hereinbefore provided,
the Mayor shall issue a license to said applicant, which shall authorize the
maintenance of the poles designated in said application for the period of
one year only from the first day of June, the date of the application.
§ 233-15. License fee for new poles. [Amended 5-28-1908 by Ord.
No. 642; 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970; 8-23-1921 by Ord. No. 1001]
Hereafter, no pole shall be newly erected in any street, alley or highway of
Oil City unless a license is first obtained from the Mayor, upon application
in the same manner as provided in § 233-14 for poles already erected, and
containing the same items of information, and the license fee for every such
new pole shall be $0.75, and no other license fee for such pole shall be
required until the first day of June following its erection.
§ 233-16. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of
§§ 233-10, 233-13, 233-14 and 233-15 of this article and of the City Engineer
to enforce the provisions of the remainder thereof.
§ 233-17. Annual inspection of poles.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to make an inspection during the
month of May of each and every year of all the poles erected on the streets,
alleys and highways of the City of Oil City for the purposes heretofore
mentioned and make a report in writing of the result of his inspection to the
Council, and should any such pole be found unsafe and dangerous to the
safety of the public, it shall be the duty of the Director of the Department
of Public Works to notify the owner of such pole to remove or replace the
same, and unless said owner complies with said notice within 10 days, then
said Director shall remove said pole at the expense of the owner.
§ 233-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 233-19. One line of poles per highway; exception. [Added
4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970]
Hereafter, only one line of poles shall be erected on any highway unless, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, the use of joint poles by the corporations
requiring wires on said highway is impracticable. Applications for license
for new poles shall be on forms prescribed by the City Engineer and shall be
§ 233-14 OIL CITY CODE § 233-19
1:324
first presented to him. No license shall be granted until the City Engineer's
approval shall have been endorsed on the application. Such approval shall
not be given if it is practicable for the company making the application to
use poles already on the same highway belonging to another corporation,
nor if a joint line of poles would be practicable by replacing the existing
poles with higher ones. The first corporation to apply for a license for a pole
on a highway where there are no existing poles shall be required to erect
poles of such height as to accommodate the wires of all corporations likely
to want lines on said highway within a period of 15 years, so far as the same
can be foreseen.
§ 233-20. Replacement of poles. [Added 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970]
No pole shall be replaced without the approval of the City Engineer.
Whenever an old pole line is to be reconstructed, or when the improvement
of a highway or portion of the same shall necessitate the moving of a
majority of the poles of any corporation occupying said highway or portion
thereof, the City Engineer shall require the joint use of poles so far as
practicable.
§ 233-21. Height of electric wires and guy wires. [Added 4-10-1920
by Ord. No. 970]
All electric wires except the trolley and span wires of street railway
companies shall, where crossing a roadway or footway, be carried at an
elevation of at least 21 feet above the crown of the roadway and at least 15
feet above the footway. All guy wires crossing a roadway or footway shall
clear the roadway by at least 18 feet and the footway by at least 12 feet
and shall be kept at least eight feet from the ground, wherever possible. All
guy wires attached to poles carrying electric light or power wires shall be
insulated by the insertion of two strain insulators.
§ 233-22. Electric wires temporarily or permanently out of service.
[Added 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970; amended 8-23-1921 by Ord. No.
1001]
All electric light or power wires temporarily out of service shall be cut dead
if left on poles. All wires permanently out of service shall be at once entirely
removed from the poles.
§ 233-23. Service to lots not approved by Planning Commission.
[Added 4-10-1920 by Ord. No. 970]
No telephone or electric light company shall suspend wires within the limits
of any public highway in order to give service to any purchaser or owner
of a lot on a plan of building lots which has not been approved by the City
Planning Commission.
§ 233-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-23
1:325

ARTICLE II
Erection of Poles Restricted
[Adopted 3-6-1915 by Ord. No. 846 (Ch. 135, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 233-24. Use of poles restricted in certain districts.
Hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any telegraph or telephone company or
company operating low-tension wires for telegraph or telephone purposes
to erect, maintain, set or reset any pole or poles for the purpose of
suspending such wires or cables, or to suspend such wires or cables within
the first and second districts of said City of Oil City, as defined by Ord.
No. 808 of said City,68 except such distributing poles as are provided for in
Section 2 of said ordinance.69
§ 233-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
68.Editor's Note: The districts delineated in Ord. No. 808 are as follows: "Section 1. The first
district within which all telephone and telegraph wires in the City of Oil City shall be
placed underground, in the conduits owned by the Petroleum Telephone Company, is
designated as follows: Seneca Street and Elm Street, from the Erie Railroad on the south
to Duncomb Street on the north; Sycamore Street, from Oil Creek to Spring Street; Center
Street, from Oil Creek to Spring Street; Spring Street, from Center Street to its
intersection with Spruce Street; Main Street, from Oil Creek to its intersection with North
Petroleum Street; and all alleys and cross streets not specifically mentioned within the
district bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the Erie Railroad and the
easterly bank of Oil Creek, running thence by the easterly bank of said creek to a point
where the south line of Duncomb Street extended would meet said easterly bank; thence
eastwardly along said south line of Duncomb Street to the track of the Pennsylvania
Railroad Company; thence southwardly along said Pennsylvania Railroad tracks to the
southeast corner of land of the Enterprise Milling Company; thence eastwardly, in a
straight line, to the intersection of the west line of Plumer Road with the east line of
Spruce Street; thence east to the east line of Plumer Road; thence southwardly, along said
east line of Plumer Road, to the east line of Spring Street; thence southwardly along the
east line of Spring Street to its intersection with the south line of Graff Street; thence
westwardly in a direct line to the place of beginning. Section 3. The second district within
which all telephone and telegraph wires in said City shall be placed underground in the
conduits of the Petroleum Telephone Company is designated as follows: First Alley, from
State Street to Petroleum Street; Orchard Alley, from Petroleum Street to the east line of
Lower Division Street; North Street, from the east line of Lower Division Street to Wyllis
Street; Hazel Alley, from First Alley to Fourth Street; State Street, from Front Street to
Second Street; First Street, from State Street to Short Street; Short Street, from First
Street to East Second Street; East Second Street, from Short Street to Pine Street; Pine
Street, from Second Alley to Fourth Alley."
69.Editor's Note: The distribution poles provided for in Section 2 of Ord. No 808 are such
distribution poles as shall be placed when absolutely necessary, the location for which
shall be determined by the Council and the City Engineer.
§ 233-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-25
1:327
Chapter 238
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction codes — See Ch. 110.
§ 233-25 OIL CITY CODE § 233-25
1:328
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2778]
§ 238-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document being marked and designated as International Property
Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of the City of Oil City for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed
in § 238-3 of this article.
§ 238-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance Number 2740 of the City of Oil City entitled, "The Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Oil City" and all other ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 238-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following chapters are hereby revised as follows:
CHAPTER 1. ADMINISTRATION
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Oil City," hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
103.5 Inspection fees. Code compliance inspections conducted for the
purpose of assessment of real estate for sale or transfer, survey purposes or
for informational purposes not requiring the enforcement provisions of this
code shall be charged an inspection fee. The fee shall be at the rate of $50
per hour with a minimum charge of 1/2 hour for all time expended in the
actual inspection and shall include all time expended by clerical support
staff.
106.4 Violation penalties. This section shall be renamed "Violation
Penalties and Reinspection Fees" and revised to read in its entirety as
follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
nor more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and any fee or
fees, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:329
A fifty-dollar reinspection fee shall be assessed after due notice has been
served in accordance with the terms and provisions of Section 107 and the
violation, illegal action or unsafe condition continues.
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. This section shall be revised to read
in its entirety as follows:
If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy,
and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Official is authorized
to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure
closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner
to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the Code
Official shall cause the premises to be closed through any available public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located, and there shall be a lien placed upon such real estate. The City
may also proceed for the recovery and collection of the claim by civil action
against the owner, as such remedy is provided by general law.
110.3 Failure to comply. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the Code Official may cause the structure to be razed
and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract
or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such razing and
removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located, and a lien shall be placed upon such real estate. The City may
also proceed for the recovery and collection of the claim by civil action
against the owner, as such remedy is provided by general law.
CHAPTER 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(1) 304.1(A). Junk storage and anti-clutter. This section shall be added
to read as follows: [Added 6-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2831]
1. Definitions.
ENCLOSED PORCH, DECK, PATIO OR BALCONY —
A platform located at and attached to or abutting against the entrance to
a residential building, completely covered by a roof and enclosed by fully
intact glass and/or fully intact screens. Screens are framed wire mesh or
framed plastic mesh used to prevent intrusion by insects, but permitting
air flow.
FRONT YARD —
That part of the property whereby the front of the house or other
residential building faces the public street and encompasses that open
space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and nearest
point of the main residential building.
§ 238-3 OIL CITY CODE § 238-3
1:330
OPEN STORAGE —
Such storage or accumulation that is visible from any public street, alley
or sidewalk or from any adjacent property.
OWNER —
Any individual, corporation, partnership or any other groups as a unit
having a legal or equitable interest in a property, including the guardian
or the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of
the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property
by a court, provided that any ownership right created by an installment
sales agreement or land contract shall be recorded with the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for Venango County.
PERSON —
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or entity of any
other kind, including any tenant or lessee of any real property.
YARD —
Any open unoccupied space, other than a courtyard, unobstructed from
the ground to the sky, on a lot upon which a residential building is
situated.
2. Prohibited Acts. No person within or upon any property designated
for use as or used for residential purposes situated within the municipal
limits of the City of Oil City shall store, collect, park, leave, deposit,
maintain, reserve, put aside for future use, permit or allow to remain
on any porch, balcony, roof, patio, yard or curtilage of any residential
building or structure, other than in a completely enclosed building or
structure, any of the following:
A. Junk, rubbish, clutter, litter, debris, disabled automobiles, other motor
vehicles or motorized equipment, implements or machinery or any
component parts or accessories thereof, household appliances or any
component parts or accessories thereof.
B. Lumber or other building materials or equipment, except for those
materials or equipment related to projects for which a current valid
building permit has been issued. Building materials shall include, but
are not necessarily limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks,
plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts,
shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other
materials or equipment generally used in construction.
C. Upholstered furniture, mattresses, materials and other similar
products or second-hand items or goods not normally intended,
designed, built or manufactured for outdoor use unless such is located
entirely within an enclosed porch, balcony, deck or patio attached to the
primary residential building.
3. Exclusions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the storage
or placement upon any property of the following materials:
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:331
A. Firewood intended for consumption in a wood-burning stove, furnace,
or indoor fireplace or outdoor patio fireplace located within or without
a building located upon the subject premises, provided that all such
firewood shall, at all times, be stacked and stored in an appropriate
place, but in no event upon the front porch of any house or other
residential structure.
B. Lawn, yard, garden or playground tools, ornaments, equipment or
implements.
C. Lawn or patio furniture.
D. Standing fences.
E. Hoses or sprinklers used for watering lawns or gardens.
F. Materials used in connection with commercial activities conducted
upon the premises where such storage, placement and accumulation of
materials have been expressly authorized by the City of Oil City.
G. Construction materials and equipment used for the construction,
renovation or razing of a building located upon the premises for which a
current building or razing permit has been issued.
4. Enforcement.
A. Enforcement and Inspection Officer. The enforcement and inspection
officer for purposes of this section shall be the duly appointed Code
Enforcement Officer of the City of Oil City. The Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby designated as the City official to whom all complaints
of noncompliance with the provisions of this section shall be directed.
The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to conduct any and all
reasonable or necessary inspections whether such inspection arises
from (1) a citizen complaint filed with the City or (2) noncompliance
with the provisions of this section as observed by the officer during
the course of any general inspection undertaken of the neighborhood.
The Code Enforcement Officer further is authorized to issue, and cause
to be served or mailed, written notices to any residential property
owner whose property is deemed by the officer to violate the provisions
of this section. Any such written notice shall specifically identify all
violations arising under this section and the steps necessary to bring
the property into full compliance herewith. Such notices shall provide
the owner of any offending property with 15 days from acceptance of
service or certified receipt of any mailed notice to bring his property into
compliance with this section. Prior to the issuance of any citation and
prosecution for a violation of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall conduct a second inspection to determine if the offending property
has been brought into full compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 238-3 OIL CITY CODE § 238-3
1:332
B. Citizen Complaints. Any person may file a complaint with the City's
Code Enforcement Officer alleging that a violation of this section has
occurred or is occurring. The Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly
investigate all complaints. Following the conducting of an inspection and
upon determining that a violation of this section has occurred, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice of violation and compliance to
the accused violator, and said notice shall either be personally served
by the officer or mailed to the violator by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
C. Notice of Violation and Compliance. The written notice prepared
by the City's Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the following
information:
1. The name of the titled owner and occupant or tenant, if the occupant
or tenant is different from the titled owner to whom the notice shall be
addressed.
2. The address and location of the violating property.
3. A statement setting forth all specific violations of this section.
4. A demand that corrective action be taken by the property owner
within 15 days following service or other receipt of the written notice.
5. A statement that failure to comply with the notice shall (a) result in
the issuance of a citation and, upon finding of guilt, the imposition of
a fine against the violating property owner and (b) result in the City's
remedy and removal of the violating conditions on the subject property
with the costs thereof, together with a penalty, subject to collection by
the City in an action in assumpsit or the entry of said costs and penalty
as a lien against the offending property.
6. Enclosure of a copy of this section.
D. Continued Violation Following Violator's Service or Receipt of Written
Notice. If any reported violation of this section continues after service
upon or certified mail receipt by the violating property owner and/
or tenant of the violating property of the written notice, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall then promptly refer the matter for citation
issuance.
5. Penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
district magistrate, be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 106.4.
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:333
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection A, if any owner fails
or refuses to remedy the condition within 15 days following service or
other receipt of the written notice, the City, upon the Code Enforcement
Officer's confirmation of default by the owner, may cause the condition
to be remedied or removed and collect the cost thereof, together with a
penalty of 10% of such cost, from the owner by an action in assumpsit.
The cost of removal and the penalty may be entered as a lien against
such property in accordance with existing provisions of law. In the
exercise of the powers herein conferred, the City may institute
proceedings in courts of equity.
1. 304.7.1. Roof construction, repair and replacement; temporary
materials. This section shall be added to read as follows: [Added
6-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2831]
Subject to the emergency measures permitted under Section 109, no
roofing or roofing components under construction, repair or replacement
shall be covered or sealed with or by any temporary materials for a period
exceeding 90 days. Temporary materials shall include tarpaulins, shrink
wrap, plastic sheeting or any other material incapable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects for roof structures or otherwise
incapable of preventing weather penetration and deterioration.
304.14 Insect screens. This section shall be revised to read in its entirety
as follows:
During the period from April 1 to December 1, every door, window and
other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes, serving
any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in
food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
Exception. Screen doors shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect-repellent fans, are employed.
CHAPTER 4. LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY
LIMITATIONS
404.4 Bedroom and living room requirements. This section shall be
revised to read in its entirety as follows:
Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of Sections 404.4.1
through 404.5.2.
404.4.1 Area for sleeping purposes. This section shall be revised to
read in its entirety as follows:
§ 238-3 OIL CITY CODE § 238-3
1:334
Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70 square
feet (6.5 m2) of floor area, every living room shall contain at least 120
square feet (11.2 m2) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more
than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor
area for each occupant thereof.
404.5 Overcrowding. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted
by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5.
Table 404.5
Minimum Area
Requirements
Minimum Area in Square Feet
Space
1 to 2
occupants
3 to 5
occupants
6 or more
occupants
Living rooma, b No
requirements
120 150
Dining rooma, b No
requirements
80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply
with Section
404.4
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2
a. See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b. See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
404.5.1 Sleeping area. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section
404.4.
404.5.2 Combined spaces. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required
for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a
combination living room/dining room.
CHAPTER 6. MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
602.3 Heat supply. This section shall be revised to read in its entirety as
follows:
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:335
Every owner and operator of any building who rents or leases or lets one or
more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupant thereof, shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain the
room temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating system
is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of
The International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F. (-1°
C.) a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be maintained.
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCE STANDARDS
This chapter shall be amended to delete the various code references and
include the following code references in their place:
The provisions of Chapters 2 to 29 and 31 to 35 of the 2009 International
Building Code
The 2009 ICC Electrical Code
The 2008 Edition of the NFPA National Electrical Code, including
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D and E
The 2009 International Mechanical Code
The 2009 International Fuel Gas Code
The 2009 International Fire Code
Appendixes B, C, D, E
The 2009 International Plumbing Code
The 2009 International Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities
The 2009 International Residential Code
Sections AE501 to AE503 and AE601 to AE605 of Appendix E of the
2009 International Residential Code
The 2009 International Energy Conservation Code
The 2009 International Existing Building Code
The 2009 International Urban-Wildland Interface Code
Appendix E of the 2009 International Building Code
Appendix H of the 2009 International Building Code
Appendix G of the 2009 International Residential Code
§ 238-3 OIL CITY CODE § 238-4
1:336
§ 238-4. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 238-2 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:337
Chapter 242
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
§ 242-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of procuring accurate information in reference to the
ownership of all real estate liable to municipal taxation or assessments in
the City of Oil City, a registration thereof is hereby established as provided
for in Article 16 of An Act Providing for the Incorporation and Government
of Cities of the Third Class, approved May 23, 1889.70
§ 242-2. Preparation of books of plans of the City. [Amended
12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 2456]
The City Engineer of Oil City shall cause to be made books of plans of Oil
City or such supplemental books to those already in existence as may be
necessary, showing the situation and dimensions of each property therein,
with the City number and Engineer's file number of the owner or owners
thereof, with blank spaces for the names of future owners and dates of
future transfers of title, and for such purpose, said Engineer may cause
search to be made in any of the public records of the country wherein
the necessary information may be obtainable and may also cause search
to be made in any other place for any muniments or evidences of title not
reported to him as hereinafter provided and requisite for the completion of
said plans. Said books of plans shall be carefully preserved in the Bureau of
Engineering of Oil City and shall be so kept by additions from time to time
as to show the ownership of each lot or piece of real estate, or subdivision
thereof, within the City limits, with the successive transmissions of title
from the date of the commencement of such plans. Certified copies under
the hand of said Engineer of any of the entries in said books of plans shall be
furnished by said Engineer to any person desiring the same on prepayment
of $0.50 for each certified copy of the entries concerning any one piece or
parcel of ground, said money to be for the use of the City.
§ 242-3. Duties of owners of real estate.
It shall be the duty of all owners of unregistered real estate within the
City limits, within one month from the date of approval of this chapter
and, of every subsequent purchaser, devisee or person acquiring title by
partition or otherwise to any real estate therein, within one month after
acquiring such title, to furnish said Engineer at his office descriptions
of their respective properties and, at the same time, to present their
conveyances to be stamped by said Engineer without charge as evidence of
the registration thereof.
70.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 37704, Real Estate Registry.
§ 238-4 OIL CITY CODE § 242-4
1:338
§ 242-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 246
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned or vacant property — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance code — See Ch. 238,
Art. I.
Rent withholding — See Ch. 250.
Taxation — See Ch. 285.
§ 242-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-4
1:339

ARTICLE I
Rental Occupancy Reports
[Adopted 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2734]
§ 246-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings indicated herein:
CITY — The City of Oil City.
OWNER — The person(s) in whose name(s) the property on which the rental
unit is located and is recorded in the office of the Venango County Recorder
of Deeds, as reflected on the tax duplicate issued by the Venango County
Assessment Office.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, trust, estate,
association or other legal entity capable of holding title to real estate.
PROPERTY — A parcel of real estate located in the City of Oil City to which
a Venango County tax parcel identification number has been assigned by
the Venango County Assessment Office.
RENT or RENTED — Consideration charged for the right to occupy or use
the property of another party, whether the consideration is valued in money,
goods, labor or service.
RENTAL UNIT — Any space used for human occupancy located within a
building used for residential use and occupancy that is rented for human
occupancy under either a written or oral lease or other rental agreement,
regardless of the terms of the rental or lease, but excluding units within a
motel or hotel rented by the day for transient occupancy.
§ 246-2. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable collection of
earned income, residence and per-capita taxes levied within the City.
§ 246-3. Reporting requirement.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every rental unit located within the
City to prepare and file an annual report with the City Code Office, which
shall contain the complete name and address of each person 18 years of
age and older who is currently residing in each rental unit owned by the
person required to file the report. The owner shall also provide the lease
commencement and expiration dates of any tenant at the request of the City
Code Office.
§ 246-4. Supplementation of report.
The report shall be supplemented by the owner of the registered rental
unit within 15 days of becoming aware of the arrival of tenants or lessees
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-4
1:341
not previously reported or of the departure of lessees or tenants previously
reported.
§ 246-5. Filing deadlines.
The report, which shall be filed in a form and manner designated by the City,
shall be filed not later than 60 days following the effective date of this article
and annually thereafter within the thirty-day period following September 30
of each calendar year.
§ 246-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article by failing
or refusing to timely file the required report within 10 days of the due date
thereof shall, upon being found liable in a summary proceeding brought by
the City before a Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction, be subject
to a fine for each such violation of not more than $600 plus all the costs
of prosecution and, upon default in timely payment of the fine and costs of
prosecution, shall be subject to a period of imprisonment in the Venango
County Prison not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation shall
continue following the initial notice by the City Code Office to such person
that such person is in violation of this article shall constitute a single and
separate offense, punishable by a separate fine.
§ 246-4 OIL CITY CODE § 246-6
1:342
ARTICLE II
Rental Housing Permits
[Adopted 6-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2765]
§ 246-7. Purpose and intent.
The City of Oil City recognizes the need for an inspection program for
residential rental properties located within the City in order to ensure
all rental properties meet minimum standards for the protection of the
health and safety of the residents living in such properties and to provide
an efficient system for compelling both absentee and local owners and
operators of these properties to correct violations and maintain, in proper
condition, rental properties within the City. The City recognizes that the
most efficient system to meet these objectives is the creation of a program
requiring the inspection of residential rental properties within the City as
defined in this article, so that a verification of compliance with the most
current, adopted version of the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Oil City, as amended, can be made by City officials.
§ 246-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging for
compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family
unit.
CODE — The current adopted version of the International Property
Maintenance Code as enacted by the City of Oil City.71
DORMITORY — A building used as group living quarters for a student body
or religious order as an accessory use to a college, university, boarding
school, convent, monastery or similar institutional use.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and which may include additional facilities and services,
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing only one
dwelling unit.
A.
B. TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, flats and
garden apartments.
C.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Property Maintenance, Art. I.
§ 246-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-8
1:343
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and
recreational facilities.
OWNER — Any individual, corporation, partnership or any other groups
as a unit having a legal or equitable interest in a property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by
a court, provided that any ownership right created by an installment sales
agreement or land contract shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds
office in and for Venango County.[Amended 3-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2818]
OPERATOR — An adult individual designated by the owner of a rental
property as the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving
notices or demands and to perform the obligations of the owner.
§ 246-9. Rental housing permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, let or
rent to another for occupancy any residential single-family dwelling, twofamily
dwelling, multifamily dwelling, boardinghouse, dormitory or hotel, as
defined above, unless a rental housing permit has been issued by the Code
Official.
§ 246-10. Form of application.
Applications for permits shall be made to the Code Official on forms
furnished by said office, which applications shall include:
A. The name and address of the owner and of the operator if he is not the
owner.
B. The location of the structure by street and number.
C. The number of units or rooms or dwelling units available for occupancy
and the number of persons who may be accommodated.
D. Such other related information as the Code Official may require.
E. All information provided on the application form shall be accurate and
complete. No person shall provide inaccurate information for the
registration of a rental property or fail to provide the information
required for such registration. The registration form shall be signed by
the property owner(s) or the designated responsible operator here
applicable. When the owner is not a natural person, the owner
information shall be that of the president, general manager or other
chief executive of the organization. When more than one person has an
ownership interest, the required information shall be provided for each
owner.
§ 246-8 OIL CITY CODE § 246-11
1:344
§ 246-11. Time for application.
With respect to existing housing units requiring rental housing permits as
stipulated by § 246-9 hereof, all applications for permits shall be made on or
before July 31, 2009.
§ 246-12. Issue of permits.
§ 246-13. Inspections.
A. The Code Official shall initially issue a conditional rental housing permit
to the applicant upon application, which shall allow the applicant to
continue to operate, let or rent the unit(s) for which the conditional
permit has been granted.
B. The application for and issuance of the conditional rental housing
permit shall constitute consent for inspection of the subject rental
premises by the Code Official.
C. The Code Official shall thereafter conduct inspections of the structure
to determine compliance with the Oil City Property Maintenance Code,
and as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter.
D. The results of the inspection shall cause one or more of the following
actions to take place:
(1) If the rental premises complies with all the provisions of the Oil
City Property Maintenance Code, the Code Official shall issue a
rental housing permit.
(2) If the rental premises do not comply with the provisions of the Oil
City Property Maintenance Code, the Code Official shall proceed to
enforce all of the provisions of said Oil City Property Maintenance
Code.
(3) In addition to the enforcement of all other remedies as set forth in
the Oil City Property Maintenance Code, noncompliance with
orders and notices of the Code Official shall result in the revocation
of the conditional and/or housing rental permit, and in such event,
the subject premises may not thereafter be rented to other persons,
except that current tenants may continue to occupy such premises
until their lease term expires or until termination of tenancy;
provided, further, that such premises have not been determined by
the Code Official to be unfit for human occupancy; in which case,
the Code Official shall require the current tenants to move from the
premises.
A. Inspections may be made to obtain and maintain compliance with the
standards of this article based upon one of the following:
(1) A complaint received by the City of Oil City or any law enforcement
agency indicating that there is a violation of the standards or the
§ 246-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-13
1:345
§ 246-14. Signature to permit.
The Code Official's signature shall be attached to every permit, or the Code
Official may authorize a subordinate to affix such signature thereto.
§ 246-15. Fee schedule.
provisions of any ordinance adopted by the City, county or any state
law;
(2) An observation by any law enforcement officer or any member of
the Oil City Fire Department of a violation of the standards or the
provisions of any ordinance adopted by the City or any state law;
(3) A report or observation of a dwelling unit that is unoccupied and
unsecured or a dwelling that is damaged by fire;
(4) The failure to register or comply in any manner with the provisions
as required by this article;
(5) The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued
by the Code Office;
(6) An emergency observed or reasonably believed to exist;
(7) A request for an inspection by the property owner; or
(8) Requirements of law where a dwelling is to be demolished by the
City or where ownership is to be transferred to the City.
B. Access to property for inspection shall be made in accordance with
state and federal laws.
A. There shall be no permit fee charged to any applicant for the issuance
of a conditional or rental housing permit or for the inspection of the
rental unit.
B. If a compliance inspection is scheduled and the owner, operator or
responsible manager fails to appear, then an inspection fee of $50 shall
be assessed against the owner, and no inspection shall be completed
until the inspection fee is paid in full. If payment in full is not made
within 60 days of the date of the invoice for the inspection fee, the
conditional permit or rental permit shall be rescinded until full payment
is made, and any person who shall lease, rent, occupy or otherwise
allow a rental unit within the City to be occupied after rescission of the
conditional permit or rental permit as provided herein shall be subject
to the penalties of § 246-19 hereof.
C. If the unit is found to be in violation of the Oil City Property
Maintenance Code, a written notice of the violation(s) shall be issued to
the owner, operator or responsible manager of the unit, and the Code
Official shall give sufficient time to make repairs and bring the unit up
to minimum standards of the code. Once the time has passed for
§ 246-13 OIL CITY CODE § 246-15
1:346
§ 246-16. Display and use.
The conditional or rental housing permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the owner's or operator's office or public hall in multiple-family
dwellings, boardinghouses, dormitories and hotels. In all structures, the
permit shall be accessible by the owner or operator to produce upon
request. The intent of this section will also be served if the owner or
operator is able to produce such permit within 24 hours of request. The
issuance of a conditional or rental housing permit to an owner or operator
of rental property shall constitute consent for inspection. The permit is and
shall remain the property of the Department of Code Administration of the
City of Oil City.
§ 246-17. Owners' rights.
The terms and provisions of this article are not intended to bar, preclude
or affect the right of the owner to pursue judicial relief against a tenant for
damage caused to a property or for which a tenant is legally responsible.
§ 246-18. Administrative guidelines.
The Code Official shall establish administrative guidelines for the
implementation of this article. Such administrative guidelines need not
be advertised, but copies thereof shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's
office for inspection by the public. The administrative guidelines and the
amendments or modifications thereto shall be approved by the City Solicitor
in accordance with the City Code.
§ 246-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of $300 together
with the costs of prosecution and any fee or fees. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense.
conducting the necessary repairs, the Code Official or his agent shall
conduct a follow-up inspection of the premises to determine if the
repairs have been completed.
D. If a second or subsequent reinspection is needed for any regulated
rental unit because previously identified code violation(s) in the unit
continued to exist or a license was previously revoked and
reinstatement applied for, a fee of $50 shall be charged for each
reinspection or reinstatement.
§ 246-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-19
1:347
Chapter 250
RENT WITHHOLDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building codes — See Ch. 110. Property maintenance — See Ch. 258, Art. I.
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — Any building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION — Any dwelling which by
reason of serious deficiencies or inadequacy in plumbing, water supply,
light, heat, ventilation, floor area, fire safety and rodent or pest control
facilities or by reason of damage, deterioration or disrepair to the dwelling
is unsanitary or unsafe and constitutes a serious hazard to the health, safety
or general welfare of the occupants of the dwelling or to the public.
§ 250-2. Rent withholding procedure.
A. When the Code Official of the City of Oil City certifies a dwelling unfit
for human habitation, the duty of any such tenant of such dwelling to
pay and the right of the landlord to collect rent shall be suspended
without affecting any other terms or conditions of the landlord-tenant
relationship until the dwelling is certified as fit for human habitation by
the Code Official of the City of Oil City or the tenancy is terminated for
any other reason than nonpayment of rent.
B. During any period when the duty to pay rent is suspended and the
tenant continues to occupy the dwelling, the rent withheld shall be
deposited by the tenant in an escrow account, as hereinafter
designated, and shall be paid to the landlord when the dwelling is
certified as fit for human habitation at any time within six months from
the date on which the dwelling was certified as unfit for human
habitation.
C. If at the end of six months after the certification of a dwelling as unfit
for human habitation, hereunder, such dwelling has not been certified
as fit for human habitation, any monies deposited in escrow on account
of continued occupancy shall be payable to the tenant, except that any
funds deposited in escrow may be used for the purpose of making such
dwelling fit for human habitation and for the payment of utility services
for which the landlord is obligated but which he refuses to pay. No
tenant shall be evicted for nonpayment of rent while the rent is
deposited in escrow and the tenant is not in default.
§ 246-19 OIL CITY CODE § 250-3
1:348
§ 250-3. Rules and regulations.
There shall be established by the Code Official rules and regulations72 for
the implementation of the rent withholding. Such rules and regulations
need not be advertised, but copies thereof shall be kept on file in the City
Clerk's office for inspection by the public. Proposed rules and regulations
shall be approved by the City Solicitor in accordance with the Oil City Code.
§ 250-4. Escrow agent.
The Mayor and City Controller are hereby authorized and directed to enter
into an agreement on behalf of the City with a qualified corporation, firm
or entity to act as escrow agent for the deposit of funds as hereinbefore
provided.
Chapter 255
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Oil City General Authority — See Ch. 11, Art.
II.
Excavations — See Ch. 154.
Water — See Ch. 303.
72.Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are included as Exhibits A through H attached to
this chapter.
§ 250-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:349

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
[Adopted 9-27-1957 by Ord. No. 1973 (Ch. 152, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 255-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Oil City, Venango County, Pennsylvania, and also the
group of elected officials acting, from time to time, as the governing body of
the City.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — An individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Real estate which
adjoins, abuts on or is adjacent to the sewer system.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities operated by the City for the collection and
disposal of sanitary sewage.
§ 255-2. Connections to available sewers required.
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall, if not already connected, at their
own expense connect such building with the sewer system within 30
days after the effective date of this article.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which a building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the erection of
such building and at their own expense, connect the same with the
sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 30 days
after notice to do so from the City or its representative.
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:351
§ 255-3. Prohibited disposal of sewage.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct, use or maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
other receptacle on such property for receiving sewage after the expiration
of the particular period specified in § 255-2 hereof or at any time to erect,
construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for
the discharge of sanitary sewage except into the sewer system. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make a connection to the sewer system from any
cesspool, privy, vault, cistern or other depository.
§ 255-4. Abatement of nuisances.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system in
violation of this article shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the City is hereby
authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 255-5. Compliance with ordinances and rules in making
connections.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system except in compliance with
the ordinances and resolutions as well as such rules and regulations as may,
from time to time, be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by the
City or may be otherwise provided by law.
§ 255-6. Regulation of industrial waste.
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into the sewer system
any industrial waste which would impair, impede, prejudicially affect,
interfere with or endanger the sewer system or any part thereof or the
functioning of the processes of sewage treatment. No connection shall be
made to the sewer system for the purpose of discharging industrial waste
therein until the City or its representative shall have first determined that
such industrial waste to be discharged into the sewer system is, or has
been rendered by pretreatment or otherwise, reasonably harmless to the
sewer system and will not impair, impede, prejudicially affect, interfere
with or endanger the sewer system or any part thereof or the functioning
of the processes of sewage treatment and does not create any hazard to
human or animal life or to the waters receiving the treated effluent. The
representative of the City shall have access at all reasonable times to
all plants and buildings from which industrial waste is being discharged
into the sewer system for the purpose of determining whether any of the
provisions of the ordinances of City Council and the rules and regulations
provided for herein are being violated. In the event of any violation of
this section, the City shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in this
article, have the right to compel the discontinuance of the discharge of such
industrial waste into the sewer system.
§ 255-3 OIL CITY CODE § 255-7
1:352
§ 255-7. Notice to make connection.
After the expiration of the particular period specified in § 255-2, if any
owner of an occupied building on property accessible to the sewer system
shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer system as
required by said § 255-2, the City shall cause to be served on the owner of
such property so failing to connect to said sewer system, and also upon the
occupants of the building in question, a copy of this article and a written or
printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and such notice shall
further state that its requirements shall be complied with within 30 days
from the date thereof.
§ 255-8. Additional rules and regulations authorized.
The City reserves the right to and may from time to time adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules and
regulations shall be and become a part of this article.
§ 255-9. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this article are declared to be for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City. Any person who shall violate any of
the terms, provisions or requirements of this article or of the rules and
regulations which may be adopted by Council, or who shall refuse, neglect
or fail to comply with any notice given to such person by a duly authorized
representative of the City in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions
of this article or of such rules and regulations, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $300
with costs and, upon default of payment of the penalty and costs, undergo
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days. Each ninety-day period
during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense
and punishable as such.
§ 255-10. Connections made by City; costs.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the
provisions and requirements of this article or of any rules and regulations
herein provided for, or of any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to
the provisions hereof, then the Plumbing Inspector or the Fire Marshal of
the City is hereby empowered and directed to supply all labor and material
required of said negligent or delinquent owner, and the cost and expense
thereof, together with ten-percent penalty thereon, shall be certified to the
City Solicitor, who shall enter the same as a lien against the property in the
Court of Common Pleas of Venango County and proceed to collect the same
in like manner as other municipal claims are by law collectible, or an action
of assumpsit may be brought to recover the same in the name of the City
from said owner or owners.
§ 255-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:353

ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 9-27-1957 by Ord. No. 1974 (Ch. 152, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 255-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
CITY — The City of Oil City, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting, from time to time, as the
governing body of the City.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — An equivalent dwelling unit shall
be defined, based on customer classification, as follows:[Added
12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2827; amended 5-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2837;
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2853]
An EDU with regard to residential direct City customers shall be
defined as any room, group of rooms or enclosure, occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters for a family or other group
of persons living together or by persons living alone, such as a singlefamily
home, an apartment unit, or half of a duplex structure.
A.
An EDU with regard to nonresidential direct City customers shall be
defined as each 4,596 cubic feet or less of water consumed per year
therein. EDUs associated with each nonresidential customer shall be
computed annually based on the actual metered usage for the customer
during the previous year.
B.
Each nonresidential EDU, even though in a building or complex of
buildings, shall be considered a separate EDU even though it may be
located in the same building with a residential unit or units or other
commercial units. Each nonresidential EDU, even though in a building
constructed as "flex space" with other nonresidential EDUs, shall be
considered a separate EDU.
C.
In the case of nonresidential direct City customers desiring to connect
to the City's sewer system and for which no water consumption data
is available, water usage for the purpose of determining equivalent
dwelling units shall be estimated from actual water usage from a
substantially similar facility or data made available in DEP's
Wastewater Facilities Manual and/or technical publications such as
"Wastewater Engineering" by Metcalf and Eddy.
D.
An EDU with regard to tributary customer shall be defined as 8,797
cubic feet or less of wastewater contributed to the Oil City sewer
system per year. The number of EDUs associated with each tributary
customer shall be computed annually based on the actual metered
wastewater contribution for the customer during the previous year and
E.
§ 255-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-11
1:355
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
PERSON — An individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SEWER MANAGER — Any person who may, from time to time, be placed in
general charge of the sewer system; the City Engineer shall act as "Sewer
Manager" until another person is designated as such by City Council.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities operated by the City for the collection and
disposal of sanitary sewage.
TRIBUTARY CUSTOMERS — Tributary or bulk customers are those
customers which operate their own sanitary sewer system outside of the
City limits and connect to the City's wastewater system at distinct
locations.[Added 12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2827; amended 5-28-2015
by Ord. No. 2837; 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 2853]
WATERWORKS — All facilities for the collection and distribution of water to
persons in the City and shall also include the owner and/or operator, from
time to time, of all such water facilities.
§ 255-12. Imposition of sewer rents.
There is hereby imposed upon each property served by the sewer system
and having the use thereof a monthly sewer rent or charge, payable as
hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer
system, based on the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 255-13. Rates for sanitary sewage. [Amended 4-23-1963 by Ord.
No. 2096; 12-28-1981 by Ord. No. 2401; 3-21-1985 by Ord. No.
2434; 12-30-1987 by Ord. No. 2471; 12-22-1988 by Ord. No. 2485;
6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 2497; 12-20-1990 by Ord. No. 2526;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 2555; 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 2564;
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 2617; 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2678;
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2689; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2721;
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2733; 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 2739; 6-29-2009
by Ord. No. 2769; 12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 282773; 5-28-2015 by Ord.
shall account for the total flow metered by all point of connection flow
meters for the tributary customer, plus the number of unmetered EDUs
located in the township and connected to the sewer system, but whose
flow is not conveyed through a point of connection meter.
§ 255-11 OIL CITY CODE § 255-13
1:356
No. 2837; 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 284574; 12-15-2016 by Ord. No.
285375]
§ 255-14. Rates for industrial wastes.
A. All persons or other entities within the City of Oil City connected to the
public sewer system shall pay to the City a monthly rental for sanitary
sewage service based on the quantity of water furnished as evidenced
by monthly meter readings of water meters installed for the purpose of
measuring water furnished by the City of Oil City and/or any such other
meters or measuring devices approved by the City of Oil City as may be
installed and which shall accomplish the same effect. This monthly
rental shall include a minimum monthly charge of $9.50 per equivalent
dwelling unit (EDU), plus an additional usage charge of $3.45 for each
100 cubic feet of water consumption read or reported.
B. All tributary customers connected to the City's public sewer system
shall pay to the City a monthly rental for sanitary sewage service based
on the amount of wastewater received by the City of Oil City as
evidenced by monthly meter readings of flow meters installed for the
purpose of measuring wastewater received by the City of Oil City. This
monthly rental shall include a minimum monthly charge of $10.35 per
equivalent dwelling unit (EDU), plus an additional usage charge of
$1.85 for each 100 cubic feet of wastewater production read or
reported.
A. In the event that the City consents to accept industrial wastes into the
sewer system under a permit, as hereinafter provided, the monthly
sewer rent for such sewage services shall be the same as the charge for
volume as set forth in § 255-13. In addition thereto, further charges
shall be made for all such industrial wastes discharged into the sewer
system having total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand
in excess of the following concentrations: suspended solids, 300 parts
per million; BOD, 250 parts per million.
B. The total charge for industrial wastes having concentrations in excess
of the foregoing shall be determined in accordance with the following
formula:
Total charge = Q + [0.0004 Q (BOD in ppm - 250)] + [0.0002 Q (SS in
ppm - 300)]
Where:
Q = Metered quantity charge
73.Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2014 billing period.
74.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2017 billing period.
75.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2018 billing period.
§ 255-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-14
1:357
§ 255-15. Permit for industrial wastes.
The discharge of industrial wastes into the sewer system without the
consent of the City is hereby prohibited. Any industrial establishment
desiring to discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system shall make
application to the City for a permit therefor. The applicant for such permit
shall furnish the City with such information as is required for the purpose
of determining whether the proposed discharge of industrial wastes will
conform with the requirements of the ordinances of City Council and the
rules and regulations provided for herein. The granting of such permit may
be made contingent upon the applicant providing and maintaining, at the
expense of the applicant, apparatus for regulating the rate of discharge
and/or treating such wastes prior to discharge and for the proper sampling
thereof, from time to time, as the City may deem necessary.
§ 255-16. Measuring volume for purposes of sanitary sewage rates
and industrial waste rates.
BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand
ss = Suspended solids
ppm = Parts per million
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the waterworks
discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer
system, the volume of water used, as determined from meter
readings of the City, shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(2) In cases where persons have sources of water supply in addition to
or other than from the waterworks, and discharge sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system, those persons shall
provide a meter on such additional or other source of supply. The
total amount of water consumed as shown by the meter readings
under Subsection A(1) and (2) will be used in computing the sewer
rental.
(3) In cases where persons use water from the waterworks and/or from
an independent supply such that all or any part of the water so used
is not discharged into the water system, the quantity of water used
to determine the sewer rental shall be computed by one of the
following methods:
(a) Method No. 1. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings therefrom shall be used in
computing the sewer rental.
(b) Method No. 2. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system. The readings
therefrom will then be deducted from the total water meter
§ 255-14 OIL CITY CODE § 255-16
1:358
§ 255-17. Time of payment.
Bills for the payment of rentals for service pursuant to this article shall be
rendered at the same time and intervals as charges for water consumed in
and furnished by the waterworks to the same property and shall be due and
payable upon presentation.
readings, and the remainder will be used in computing the
sewer rental.
(c) Method No. 3. Where in the opinion of the Sewer Manager, it is
not practical to install measuring devices to continuously
determine the quantity of water not discharged to the sewer
system, the Sewer Manager will determine, in such manner
and by such method as he may prescribe, the percentage of
metered water discharged into the sewer system, and the
quantity of water used to compute the sewer rental shall be the
percentage so determined of the quantity measured by the
water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount
shall be submitted to the Council, after notice of the estimate,
whose decision on the matter shall be final for the then current
calendar year.
B. Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices not provided by
the waterworks but required to be used under the provisions of this
article shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and shall
be under the control of the City and may be tested, inspected or
repaired by employees of the City whenever the Council deems
necessary. The owner of the property upon which such measuring
device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and
safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at the property
owner's expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Where such meter by reason of lack of
space or arrangement of pipeline shall be installed within the street
line, such meter shall be furnished by the property owner and shall be
installed by the City at the property owner's expense; the City shall be
responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto
shall be made at the property owner's expense. Bills for such repairs, if
made by the City, shall be due and payable at the same time and
collected in the same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such
bills from and after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the
property upon which or for the benefit of which such measuring device
is installed.
C. Meter reading. The City shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or measuring devices, and they shall be made available to
employees of the City for meter reading at any reasonable time.
§ 255-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-18
1:359
§ 255-18. Rentals, liens and penalties. [Amended 1-23-1961 by Ord.
No. 2062; 4-23-1963 by Ord. No. 2096; 12-27-1976 by Ord. No.
2343; 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 2393]
§ 255-19. Segregation of sewer rents.
All moneys received by the City from the collection of the sewer rentals
and all penalties thereon, as herein provided for, shall be segregated and
kept separate and apart from all other funds of the City and shall be used
only for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the City in the operation,
maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other expenses
in relation to the sewer system and for such payments as the City may be
required to make under any lease or agreement it may enter into for and
of or in connection with the sewer system with Oil City General Authority
in accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,77 as
amended.
§ 255-20. Rules and regulations.
The City reserves the right to and may from time to time adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules
and regulations shall be and become a part of this article and enforceable
as part of this article. Said rules and regulations, when adopted by Council,
shall be printed in book or pamphlet form and published at length according
A. All bills or invoices shall be dated and shall be due and payable upon
presentation thereof. A penalty of 14% shall be added to the net sum
due and payable if payment is not made within 20 days from the date of
such invoice or bill. Each bill or invoice shall designate the date on and
after which the penalty and amount thereof shall be added. [Amended
12-15-2011 by Ord. No. 281076]
B. Sewer rentals or charges shall be a lien on the properties charged with
the payment thereof from the date the charge first becomes due and
payable and, if not paid within 30 days from the date of each bill, may
be collected by an action of assumpsit in the name of the City against
the owner of the property charged or the user of the service or by
distress of personal property on the premises or by a lien filed in the
nature of a municipal lien, which shall be collected in the same manner
provided by law for the collection of such liens.
C. All persons occupying property connected to the sewer system shall
give the City their proper address. Failure to receive bills shall not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit for extension of a
period during which bills are payable at their face amount.
76.Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that the rates would become effective beginning with
the 1-1-2012 billing period.
77.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 255-18 OIL CITY CODE § 255-20
1:360
to law and when so published shall be and become a part of the article and
enforceable as a part of this article.
§ 255-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-20
1:361
Chapter 259
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 98.
§ 259-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall be construed as
follows:
SKATEBOARD — A narrow board mounted on roller-skate wheels or the like
and propelled by muscular power or by coasting.
THOROUGHFARE — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
§ 259-2. Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride or coast upon any
skateboard:
§ 259-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall have his/her
skateboard confiscated and impounded for not more than 15 days. Any
person violating the provisions of this chapter for the third time within the
space of a year shall have the skateboard permanently confiscated.
A. On a public street or sidewalk in an area zoned as C-1 (General
Commercial District) or C-2 (Central Business District) as designated in
Chapter 310 of the Code of the City of Oil City, generally known as the
"City of Oil City Zoning Ordinance."
B. In a reckless manner, i.e., in a manner that disobeys common signs
regulating vehicular traffic or in a manner that is considered careless
and dangerous to the operator of the skateboard and/or the general
public (vehicular and pedestrian).
C. During hours of darkness, defined as between 1/2 hour after sunset and
1/2 hour before sunrise.
§ 255-20 OIL CITY CODE § 259-3
1:362
Chapter 268
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238, Art. I.
§ 259-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-3
1:363

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 249878 (Ch. 108 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 268-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide a comprehensive collection and
disposal system of all nonhazardous domestic garbage, refuse, rubbish and
household rubbish from the residential units of the City and certain Cityowned
facilities. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments
are not provided for under this article and must negotiate individually with
a contractor for collection of their garbage and rubbish.
§ 268-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
CONTRACTOR — The person, firm or corporation that has entered into a
contract with the City of Oil City for the collection and disposal of domestic
garbage, refuse, rubbish and household rubbish from the residential units
of the City and certain City-owned facilities.
GARBAGE — All refuse and animal and vegetable matter which has been
used for food for man, and all refuse and animal and vegetable matter which
was intended to be so used, and includes condemned foods.
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Household goods, household refuse, furniture,
springs, mattresses, tin cans, bottles, crockery, broken glass, rags, grass
clippings, excess fruit from trees on residential property (but not from
trees on farms or orchards), and other similar debris, hedge cuttings and
shrubbery trimmings bundled, boxed or otherwise contained, furnace pipe,
stoves, water boilers, trunks, wood not over 48 inches in length, all rubbish,
trash, debris, waste, little scrap packings, clothing, cardboard, household
appliances, tree trimmings, trees and tree limbs under 48 inches in length,
and whole Christmas trees; these items to be picked up from the curbline of
residential property only. Arrangements will also be made for the collection
of automobile tires in the City. Excluded will be broken concrete and other
refuse from repairs, alterations and new construction of buildings and
sidewalks, tree limbs and trunks over 48 inches in length and debris from
commercial or industrial establishments.[Amended 6-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 2820; 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2846]
RUBBISH — All rags, broken glass, crockery, bottles, tin cans, paper,
including newspapers and magazines tied in bundles, grass cuttings, hedge
cuttings and household refuse, generally including incinerator ashes and
refuse from paper burners, all of which must be containerized, and the
weight of a single container shall not exceed 75 pounds. The term excludes
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 108, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse,
adopted 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 2453.
§ 268-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-2
1:365
the ashes from heating plants and coal stoves and refuse caused by repairs,
alterations and new construction of buildings and sidewalks.
§ 268-3. Containers.
Garbage receptacles shall be made of metal or plastic, with a tapered
bottom, must be watertight, equipped with tight-fitting covers and strong
handles. Containers shall be a maximum of 32 gallons and a minimum
of 20 gallons and must be of a design and manufactured specifically as
a garbage receptacle. Containers shall be provided by the occupant and
shall be maintained in good condition as is compatible with their intended
use. Upon notification by the City Manager or his agent, the containers
which are unsatisfactory shall be removed by the contractor as rubbish.
Containers are to be emptied and returned to an upright position with the
lids put back on by the collectors. Nothing in this section is intended to
prohibit the use by the occupant of plastic garbage bags of such design
and manufacture for the containerization of garbage and rubbish. However
containerized, whether in cans or plastic bag, each garbage receptacle is
not to be filled so as to exceed a weight of 75 pounds.
§ 268-4. Number of containers and frequency of collection.
Each household unit shall be limited to a maximum of three thirty-twogallon
containers for deposit of garbage and rubbish to be picked up on a
weekly schedule, plus a weekly cleanup pickup of household rubbish which
is unlimited in amount. Upon the establishment of a curbside recycling
program in the City, as mandated by Act 101,79 the maximum limit of
garbage containers referenced above will be reduced to two containers.
§ 268-5. Point of collection.
A. Pickup of all garbage, refuse and household rubbish shall be from the
curbline on the street upon which the property affronts. For those who
desire pickup from the premises, the contractor shall not be required to
walk more than 150 feet from the property line to the container or
containers. The contractor shall pick up the containers from only one
ground-level outside location for each household unit, except where
outside locations are nonexistent. All such garbage, refuse and
household rubbish shall be placed at the appropriate location on the
day the collection is scheduled for any premises or not earlier than 6:00
p.m. of the night before collection is scheduled.
B. The contractor shall not be responsible to pick up any materials placed
for collection in violation of any terms of this article. In the case of such
a violation, the contractor shall place a printed card on the materials or
items involved in said violation which will give the violator the reason
for his refusal to collect those materials or items. It will be the sole
responsibility of the violator to remove such materials or items from the
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 268-2 OIL CITY CODE § 268-5
1:366
§ 268-6. Collection schedules.
§ 268-7. Hours of operation.
§ 268-8. Removal of dead animals.
The contractor shall remove all dead animals and parts thereof from the
City streets after due notification by the City except dead horses and cows.
§ 268-9. Preparation of rubbish and garbage.
All rubbish and garbage, before being placed into receptacles for collection,
shall have drained from it, as far as practical, all free liquid. Garbage
shall be wrapped in paper or plastic bags or otherwise contained. The
separation of combustible and noncombustible rubbish and garbage will not
be required.
§ 268-10. Collection fees; late penalty.
collection point within 24 hours of violation notification and to properly
dispose of said materials or items according to all local, state or federal
laws and regulations.
A. The contractor shall prepare a schedule of pickup for each household
unit on a weekly basis at least 45 days prior to the start of the service.
The City maintains the right to review and approve the schedule.
B. The weekly general cleanup shall be in addition to the weekly garbage
pickup and shall consist of household rubbish that each household unit
shall have placed next to the curbline. The contractor must schedule
the weekly cleanup date to coincide with the weekly pickup day.
A. Unless otherwise ordered by the City Manager or his agent, collection
of garbage rubbish and household rubbish shall be picked up Monday
through Friday of each week and shall not commence before 6:00 a.m.
and shall be completed by 5:00 p.m. on a single day of collection. No
route collections shall be made on Saturdays, Sundays or the following
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. No changes in the schedule shall
be permitted without the approval of the City Manager or his agent, and
such change shall be published in the local paper by the City.
B. By reason that a street may be inaccessible due to excavation, heavy
snow or similar conditions, the contractor, after making every effort to
collect as many units as possible, may schedule the area made
inaccessible for collection the next day or as soon as the cause of the
street blockage is remedied. In such event the contractor must
promptly advise the City of such street inaccessibility and also of the
date of rescheduled collection.
§ 268-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-10
1:367
§ 268-11. Delinquent accounts; responsibilities of lessors.
If any account shall be delinquent for more than 60 days after the same
shall become due and payable, it shall be lawful for the proper City officers
or officials to file a lien or liens against the property for any and all
delinquent accounts in the same manner provided by law in the case of
unpaid City taxes on real estate and to proceed to collect the same from
the owners, including all costs associated with the filing of said liens. In the
case of tenant-occupied or -leased properties, delinquent accounts are the
responsibility of the property owner, and it shall be the sole responsibility
of the property owner to keep informed about the current status of his/her
tenants or lessees regarding payments hereunder.
§ 268-12. Interference with receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or the collector
or an agent or employee of the collector to interfere in any way with any
receptacle for the storage of garbage or rubbish or the contents thereof or
to remove such receptacle or the contents thereof from the location where
it is placed by the owner thereof.
§ 268-13. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Each household unit shall pay to the City a fee of $19.20 per month for
the standard collection of garbage and rubbish for the year
commencing July 1, 2016. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 2598;
10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2684; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2700;
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2737; 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2820;
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2846]
B. Each household unit wishing to procure backyard collection may do so
upon the payment of an additional monthly fee of $7.50 to the collector.
The collector shall be responsible for billing and collecting this
additional charge, which charge shall remain in effect from July 1, 2007
through June 30, 2010. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 2598;
10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 2684; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2700;
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2737]
C. All bills or invoices shall be dated and shall be due and payable upon
presentation thereof. A penalty of 10% shall be added to the net sum
due and payable if payment is not made within 20 days from the date of
such invoice or bill. Each bill or invoice shall designate the date on and
after which the penalty shall be added.
A. Dispose of, deposit or place, or cause or permit to be disposed of,
deposited or placed any garbage or rubbish upon or in any public
street, alley, lane, place, catch basin or receptacle leading into any
sewer, or in or upon any vacant lot within the limits of the City of Oil
City.
§ 268-10 OIL CITY CODE § 268-13
1:368
§ 268-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Dispose of garbage in any manner otherwise than as provided in this
article or to keep garbage in containers other than those prescribed
herein.
C. Fail or neglect to separate and prepare for collection all garbage and
rubbish as required by this article.
D. Obstruct, delay or interfere with the collectors of garbage in the
performance of their duties.
E. Dispose of, deposit or place any garbage within the City of Oil City
subject to collection hereunder unless he/she is a resident of the City
and is current with the collection fees imposed herein.
§ 268-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:369

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 8-27-1990 by Ord. No. 2520 (Ch. 148 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 268-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers
consisting of steel or aluminum.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than four dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers and nursing
homes.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes, but is not limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residue, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
§ 268-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-15
1:371
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Oil City.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are glossy advertising inserts often included with
newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences, commercial or
institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty high value plastic containers consisting of
both polyester and high-density polyethylene (resin type) material.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated recyclable materials,
including materials listed in Section 1501 of Act 101,80 and materials
identified by the municipality to be recycled.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single-family or multifamily
dwelling having up to four dwelling units per structure for which the
municipality provides municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection for beneficial use.
§ 268-16. Establishment of program; regulations; statutory
authority.
A. The City of Oil City hereby establishes a recycling program for the
mandatory separation and collection of recyclable materials and the
separation, collection and composting of leaf waste from all residences
and all commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located
in the City of Oil City for which waste collection is provided by the City
or any other collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be
made at least once per month by the City of Oil City, its designated
agent, or any other solid waste collectors operating in the City of Oil
City and authorized to collect recyclable materials from residences or
from commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. The
recycling program shall also contain a sustained public information and
education program.
B. Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this
article.81 The Council of the City of Oil City is empowered to make
changes to this program as may be desirable or required by federal and/
or state laws or regulations. Regulations may be made through
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
81.Editor's Note: Said regulations are attached to this chapter.
§ 268-15 OIL CITY CODE § 268-16
1:372
§ 268-17. Separation and collection.
approval of the City Council and public notice and notification of all
affected parties.
C. This article is ordained pursuant to the Third Class City Code.82
A. Separation of recyclables by residential single-family dwelling units;
storage and collection.
(1) All persons who are residents of the City of Oil City shall separate
all of those recyclable materials designated by the City from all
other municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and
other residential establishments; store such materials for
collection; and shall place the same for collection in accordance
with the guidelines established hereunder.
(2) Metal, glass and plastic containers and newspaper shall be kept
separate from other refuse and shall be collected by the City or
under subcontract by its designated agent. Individual household
units shall separate and prepare for collection these materials in
the following manner:
(a) Newspapers shall be tied both across and lengthwise in easyto-
manage bundles or placed in paper bags and kept dry.
(b) Glass, metal and plastic containers shall be placed in a Cityissued
recycling container or a similar weather-resistant
receptacle at the curbside to be collected at times designated
by the City.
(c) Newspapers, plastic, metal and glass containers, as defined in
this article, shall not be placed in the same garbage can as or
otherwise mixed with other forms of solid wastes for collection,
removal or disposal.
B. Separation, storage and collection of recyclables by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments and community activities.
(1) As specified under Section 1501(c)(1)(iii) of Pennsylvania's
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act
101 of 1988,83 commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments must implement recycling programs. This also
pertains to community activities located within the City of Oil City.
(2) Materials that must be separated are high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper and leaf waste. These materials must
be stored until collection. Collection of recyclable materials must
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(c)(1)(iii).
§ 268-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-17
1:373
be arranged by each commercial, institutional and municipal
establishment.
(3) Commercial, institutional and municipal establishments must
provide for recycling of the required materials and must document
the weight of the recycled materials annually to the City of Oil City.
An annual report of the weight or volume of materials that were
recycled in the preceding calendar year must be received by the
City on or before January 31 of each following year.
C. Separation, storage and collection of recyclables by multifamily
housing properties.
(1) Multifamily housing properties must implement recycling
programs. Materials to be separated include metal, glass and
plastic containers and newspapers.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing property shall establish a collection system for recyclable
materials at each property. The collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and sorting the materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to
the occupants concerning use and availability of the collection
system. Owners, landlords and their agents who comply with the
provisions of this section shall not be liable for the noncompliance
of their tenants.
(3) Documentation of the weight or volume of recovered materials
must be documented as specified in § 268-17B.
D. Separation, collection and composting of leaf waste. [Amended
10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 2591]
(1) All persons who reside in residential dwellings and all persons who
are responsible for the administration of multifamily dwellings and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments who gather
leaves shall source-separate all leaves in the manner therefore or
hereafter prescribed by the City.
(2) Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves or prevent
any person from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch or other
agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or landscape
purposes.
(3) Residents may dispose of their leaves either by collecting them in
biodegradable paper bags and having them placed at a curbside
location for collection by the City or its authorized representative
or by arranging for the collection, transportation and disposal of
the leaves themselves at the City's leaf composting site or at any
other appropriate locations. At no time and under no circumstance
shall the property owner place any leaves in the street gutter.
Responsibility for the disposal of leaf waste from private property,
§ 268-17 OIL CITY CODE § 268-17
1:374
§ 268-18. Lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited.
§ 268-19. Collection regulations.
§ 268-20. Collection fees; penalties for late payment; delinquent
accounts.
including the area between the sidewalk and the curb (if
applicable), shall rest solely with the property owner. Persons
violating this section may be subject to the provisions of § 268-23
of this article.
A. From the time of placement of recyclables at the curb for collection in
accordance with the terms thereof, items shall be and become the
property of the City of Oil City or its authorized agent. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the City of Oil
City to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or
more location shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided. Nothing in this article shall be
deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable materials by
the generator unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside
for collection.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains metal, glass and plastic containers and
newspapers combined with other forms of solid waste.
C. The City Council or its agent is empowered to designate the day(s) of
the month on which recyclables shall be collected, removed and
disposed of from a particular area.
A. Each household shall pay to the City a fee of $8.70 per month for the
collection of recyclables and leaf waste for the period commencing July
1, 2016. [Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 2598; 10-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 2684; 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2697; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2700; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2737; 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2820;
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2846]
B. All bills or invoices shall be dated and shall be due and payable upon
presentation thereof. A penalty of 10% shall be added to the net sum
due and payable if payment is not made within 20 days from the date of
such invoice or bill. Each bill or invoice shall designate the date on and
after which the penalty shall be added.
C. If any account shall be delinquent for more than 60 days after the same
shall become due and payable, it shall be lawful for the proper City
officers or officials to file a lien or liens against the property for any and
§ 268-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-20
1:375
§ 268-21. Existing operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the City Council or
other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials to
make such a collection.
§ 268-22. Enforcement and administration.
§ 268-23. Violations and penalties.
all delinquent accounts in the same manner provided by law in the case
of unpaid City taxes on real estate and to proceed to collect the same
from the owners, including all costs associated with the filing of said
liens. In the case of tenant-occupied or -leased properties, delinquent
accounts are the responsibility of the property owner, and it shall be
the sole responsibility of the property owner to keep informed about
the current status of his/her tenants or leases regarding payments
hereunder.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to make
reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of
this article as deemed necessary, including but not limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for the amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
B. The municipality reserves the right not to collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable
materials.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article shall receive written warning of noncompliance for the first and
second offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 268-20 OIL CITY CODE § 268-23
1:376
§ 268-24. Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force at 12:01 a.m. September 24,
1990.
B. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be guilty of a summary
offense and be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution or, in default of payment of such costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each violation of any provision
of this article and each day the same is continued shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 268-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-24
1:377
Chapter 274
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Excavations — See Ch. 154.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 268-24 OIL CITY CODE § 268-24
1:378
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 274-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Oil City
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 274-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the City of Oil City finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpointsource
pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare
and the protection of the people of the City of Oil City and all the people
of the commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks thereby elevating sedimentation);
destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 274-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-3
1:379
§ 274-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the City of Oil City, Venango County, by minimizing the harms and
maximizing the benefits described in § 274-2 of this chapter through
provisions intended to:
§ 274-4. Statutory authority.
§ 274-5. Applicability.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best management
practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
A. Primary authority. The City of Oil City is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
B. Secondary authority. The City of Oil City also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.84
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 274-3 OIL CITY CODE § 274-5
1:380
§ 274-6. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 274-7. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality of resulting stormwater
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the City of Oil City, any regulated
activity within the City of Oil City, and all stormwater runoff entering
into the City of Oil City's separate storm sewer system or combined
sewer system from lands within the boundaries of the City of Oil City.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(7) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(8) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
D. See § 274-12 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
§ 274-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-7
1:381
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property
and water quality.
§ 274-8. Municipal liability disclaimer.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any condition
imposed by a municipal official hereunder shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon
the municipality for damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the municipality, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 274-7 OIL CITY CODE § 274-8
1:382
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 274-9. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 274-10. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of land through the
combined action of human activity and natural processes at a rate greater
than would occur under natural processes.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture, such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy-use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, or pasturing and
raising of livestock, and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious areas is not considered an agricultural
activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the
moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; changing
of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious;
land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a project
site within the municipality.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 274-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:383
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: nonstructural or structural. Nonstructural BMPs are measures
referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt
to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas
structural BMPs are measures that consist of a physical device or practice
that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, lowimpact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable pavement, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Watershed Management, Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, latest edition.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening and headward cutting of
small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by moderate to large
floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Venango Conservation District. The
Venango Conservation District has the authority under a delegation
agreement executed with the Department of Environmental Protection to
administer all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream and/
or stormwater runoff under a road or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the
design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DESIGNEE — An agent of this municipality and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
§ 274-10 OIL CITY CODE § 274-10
1:384
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific parcel of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
land being developed located to which all or a major portion of the overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to convey stormwater runoff and including streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
to allow the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage or
conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, pipe,
swale, channel or similar depression into which surface water flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting, road maintenance,
mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan which
is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality, which
satisfy Title 25 Pa. Code Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water
Quality Standards, Section 93.4b(b) relating to antidegradation.
EXISTING CONDITION(S) — The initial condition of a project site prior to
proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped
land and not forested, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless
the natural land cover is documented to generate lower curve numbers or
Rational "C" coefficient.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:385
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers
and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Included are lands
adjoining a river or stream that have been or may be inundated by a onehundred-
year flood. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 soils,
as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as
amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is
assumed – absent evidence to the contrary – that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — Vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin or diversion ridge. The space
is required as a safety margin against flow overtopping in a pond or basin.
GRADE — Slope of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent.
(TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic modeling
technique adapted to certain watersheds in Venango County for the Act
167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality, which exceeds
criteria necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Title 25 Pa. Code Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
§ 274-10 OIL CITY CODE § 274-10
1:386
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United
States Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list
of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The
soils in the area of interest may be identified from a soil survey report from
the local NRCS office or the County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface (or areas)
include, but are not limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking or driveway areas,
streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas proposed to initially be gravel or
crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., trench drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, steep-sided
hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Venango County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.85
C.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:387
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING'S FORMULA) — An equation for
calculation of velocity of flow in nonpressurized conduits based upon
conduit shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
taking into account the best available technology, cost-effectiveness and
other competing issues such as public safety and welfare, natural resources,
and geographic features.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — City of Oil City, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean
Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas
14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland (most
current). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but are not to be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals and pipes not
under pressure.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream or drain; "point
source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the municipality's
storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — The use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
§ 274-10 OIL CITY CODE § 274-10
1:388
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Oil
City.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.86
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic
conditions that are statistically possible in any area. The PMF is derived
from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the
basis of data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
PROTECTED WATERSHED — Watershed tributary to exceptional value
waters or high quality waters.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by the ordinance.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,87 Chapter
102 or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff
from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and the
goals of Act 167.
86.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code § 92.1 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code § 92a.2.
87.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:389
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a fourpercent
chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to help
protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities. Road maintenance activities that do not disturb the
subbase of a paved road (such as milling and overlays) are not considered
earth disturbance activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth during
or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
result of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported
by stormwater runoff during earthmoving activities.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring from
the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
§ 274-10 OIL CITY CODE § 274-10
1:390
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — Surfaces that consist of a variety of types of
pavement, pavers and other devices that provide infiltration while serving
as a structural surface.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains,
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a dam,
pond or basin, or other detention structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond
or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORAGE-INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir-routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See also
"return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation, snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOT SPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff from residential land use.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration facilities.
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:391
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Venango County Stormwater
Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in Venango County as
required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), and known as
the "Storm Water Management Act."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The plan
prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of
100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses waters of the
commonwealth.
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for
which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any
new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be
exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247).
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface water and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural
or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — Area drained by a river, watercourse or other surface
water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
§ 274-10 OIL CITY CODE § 274-10
1:392
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone
Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-10
1:393

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 274-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 274-12:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under §§ 274-14 and 274-15 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained
during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during
construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code
(including but not limited to Chapter 102 Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Storm Water Management Act and any more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
D. The municipality may, after consultation with PADEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of and
do not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
(1) Protect health, safety and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
§ 274-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-11
1:395
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a developed parcel, to the
maximum extent practicable and at the discretion of the Municipal
Engineer, the total impervious area on the parcel may be subject to
the requirements of this chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
(1) Applicant must provide an executed easement for proposed
concentrated flow across adjacent properties to a drainageway or
public right-of-way.
§ 274-11 OIL CITY CODE § 274-11
1:396
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum total width of 20 feet) shall be provided conforming to
the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within
the easement, may be required, except as approved by the appropriate
governing authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on, or discharged onto State highway rights-of-ways
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged where soil
conditions and geology permit to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
§ 274-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-11
1:397
§ 274-12. Exemptions/modifications.
O. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
P. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the municipality shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
Q. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
R. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the developer shall notify the
downstream municipality and provide a copy of the SWM plan, upon
request, for review and comment.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must utilize the following BMPs to the maximum extent
practicable to receive consideration for the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant's proposed development/additional impervious area may
not adversely impact the following:
§ 274-11 OIL CITY CODE § 274-12
1:398
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 274-12A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter according to the following table:
New Impervious Area1, 2
(square footage) Applicant Must Provide
0 to 1,000 —
1,000 to 2,500 Documentation of impervious area3
2,500 to 5,000 Volume controls and small project
SWM application3
> 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls and
SWM site plan
NOTES:
1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and
gravel in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
3 The Small Project Stormwater Management Application included
in Appendix E may be used for projects under 5,000 square foot of
proposed impervious surface. The Small Project SWM Application
allows documentation of new impervious surface, credits through
disconnection of impervious surfaces and tree planting, and sizing
of volume control BMPs that may be required.
E. Single-family residential activities are exempt from these requirements,
provided the construction:
(1) Complies with §§ 274-11G, 274-12A, B and C.
(2) Has building set back 75 feet from downstream property lines.
(3) Driveways:
(a) Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device or provide other sheet flow to
pervious areas.
§ 274-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-12
1:399
§ 274-13. Waivers.
(b) No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point.
(c) The length of flow on the pervious surface must exceed the
length of the paved surface flow.
(4) The first page of the Small Project Stormwater Management
Application included in Appendix E must be provided to document
the proposed impervious area.
(5) The municipality can require more information or require
mitigation of certain impacts through installation of stormwater
management BMPs if there is a threat to property, health or safety.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 274-12A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided that a
downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake or man-made
wetlands) or SWM BMP has been designed or modified to address the
potential stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.
G. The purpose this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The municipality may accept alternative stormwater
management controls under this section, provided that:
(1) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
for NPDES requirements pertaining to post-construction
stormwater management requirements.
(2) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including but not limited to §§ 274-11D and 274-12A, B
and C.
H. Agricultural activities are exempt from requirements of this chapter,
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. Review of a waiver request.
§ 274-12 OIL CITY CODE § 274-13
1:400
(1) All waiver requests must meet the provisions of § 274-13G and H.
Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as
necessary to:
(a) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(b) Protect health, safety and property.
(c) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and
exceptional value (EV) watersheds.
(2) Municipalities will then consider waivers in accordance with
§ 274-11D, except that waiver requests for relief from the design
requirements of § 274-21B and C will be processed by the
municipality at its sole discretion.
C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the municipality that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship
as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may
result in a superior result within the context of §§ 274-2 and 274-3 of
this chapter, the governing body of the municipality, upon obtaining the
comments and recommendations of the Municipal Engineer, may grant
a waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest is secured, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
the chapter that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that is
necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and how
the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
E. The municipality shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. The municipality may charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall
be used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver
request. The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the municipality
for reasonable and necessary fees that may be incurred by the
Municipal Engineer in any review of a waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the municipality may impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The municipality may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant:
§ 274-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-13
1:401
§ 274-14. Volume controls.
(1) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of this chapter.
(2) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
(4) That existing downgradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(5) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(6) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
(7) That potential icing conditions will not occur.
(8) That increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
(9) That erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will
not occur.
(10) That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(11) That increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not result.
(12) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver.
(13) That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to
the greatest extent allowed.
(14) That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected.
(15) That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(16) That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
(17) That the receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be
adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat,
channel stability and erosion and sedimentation.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter88 shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
88.Editor's Note: Appendix B is attached to this chapter.
§ 274-13 OIL CITY CODE § 274-14
1:402
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activities areas greater than one acre, or which require
detailed design of stormwater management facilities, the Design Storm
Method shall be followed. For regulated activity areas equal or less
than one acre that do not require hydrologic routing to design the
stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preference for either
method; therefore, the applicant may select either method on the basis
of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of
the analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other
factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions and shall be completed by a
qualified professional.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For proposed impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from proposed impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
§ 274-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-14
1:403
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration test
shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual. A
minimum forty-eight-hour notification of the municipality shall
be provided to allow witnessing of the testing.
(3) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either § 274-14B(1) or (2), the following procedure
shall be performed and documented by a qualified professional:
(a) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided
to justify the decision to not use infiltration BMPs:
[1] Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and
test locations).
[2] An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water occurring on the site. In addition to
providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative
shall identify depth to seasonal high-water tables and
depth to bedrock and provide a description of all
subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive
layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rate
of subsurface water movement.
[3] A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to
annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with
identification of any restrictions or limitations associated
with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
[4] The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer or geologist.
(b) The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed
development:
Pollutant Load Units
Required
Reduction
(%)
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
Pounds 85%
Total phosphorous (TP) Pounds 85%
Total nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50%
(c) The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the BMP Manual.
§ 274-14 OIL CITY CODE § 274-14
1:404
§ 274-15. Rate controls.
§ 274-16. Sensitive areas and stormwater hot spots.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. Lands contained within Venango County that have not had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty- and one-hundred-year storms.89
A. Sensitive areas, as defined below, and stormwater hot spots which
require special consideration with regard to stormwater management.
(1) Sensitive areas are defined as those areas within a delineated zone
of contribution to a drinking water source that has the potential to
endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the delineated oneyear
zone of contribution and direct upslope areas tributary to the
water supply wells. Municipalities may update the sensitive area
boundaries based on new research or studies.
(2) Stormwater hot spots are land development projects that have a
high potential to endanger local water quality and could potentially
threaten groundwater reservoirs. The Municipal Engineer will
determine what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case
basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant source list shall
be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes.
B. Performance standards.
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
89.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, which pertained to lands in the county with release
rates established under an Act 167 Plan and which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-16
1:405
(2) Stormwater hot spot developments may be required to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of
intent as required under the provision of the EPA industrial
stormwater NPDES permit requirements.
(3) Stormwater hot spot developments must use an acceptable
pretreatment BMP prior to volume control and/or rate control
BMPs. Acceptable pretreatment BMPs for these developments
include those based on filtering, settling or chemical reaction
processes such as coagulation.
(4) Stormwater hot spot developments and development in sensitive
areas must include riparian buffers as defined in Article VI.
§ 274-16 OIL CITY CODE § 274-16
1:406
ARTICLE IV
E&S Standards
§ 274-17. Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth
disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 9290 and 102, as required and applicable, as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Venango Conservation District
must be provided to the municipality.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Venango Conservation District,
shall be available at the project site at all times if required under
Chapter 102.
D. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall be designed, implemented and maintained, and shall
address the following, as applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
90.Editor’s Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 274-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-17
1:407
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase as to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
(3) The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the
BMP).
§ 274-17 OIL CITY CODE § 274-17
1:408
ARTICLE V
Protected Watershed Standards
§ 274-18. Protected watershed requirements.
A. For any regulated activity other than one single-family residence within
a protected watershed (high quality or exceptional value), the applicant
shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, as
required and applicable. It is noted that special protection watersheds
are areas where PADEP reviews PCSM plans for NPDES permitting.
B. Existing resources and site analysis plan shall be prepared to provide
the developer and the municipality with a comprehensive analysis of
existing conditions, both on the proposed development site and within
500 feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel boundaries may be
described on the basis of existing published data available from
governmental agencies and from aerial photographs. The municipality
shall review the plan to assess its accuracy, conformance with
municipal ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural
resources on the property. The following information shall be required:
(1) Complete current perimeter boundary survey of the property to be
subdivided or developed, prepared by a registered surveyor,
showing all courses, distances and area, and tie-ins to all adjacent
intersections.
(2) A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less detailed
than one inch equals 400 feet, with the site boundaries clearly
marked.
(3) Natural features, including:
(a) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet. (Ten-foot
intervals are permissible beyond the parcel boundaries,
interpolated from USGS published maps.) Contour lines shall
be based on information derived from a topographic survey for
the property, evidence of which shall be submitted, including
the date and source of the contours. Datum to which contour
elevations refer and references to known established bench
marks and elevations shall be included on the plan.
(b) Steep slopes in the following ranges: 15% to 25%; 25% and
greater. The location of these slopes shall be graphically
depicted by category on the plan. Slope shall be measured over
three or more two-foot contour intervals.
(c) Areas within the floodway, flood fringe, and approximated
floodplain.
(d) Watercourses, either continuous or intermittent, and named or
unnamed, and lakes, ponds or other water features as depicted
on the USGS Quadrangle Map, most current edition.
§ 274-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-18
1:409
(e) Wetlands and wetland margins.
(f) Riparian buffers.
(g) Soil types and their boundaries, as mapped by the USDA
Natural Resource Conservation Service, including a table
listing the soil characteristics pertaining to suitability for
construction and, in unsewered areas, for septic suitability.
Alluvial and hydric soils shall specifically be depicted on the
plan.
(h) Existing vegetation, denoted by type, including woodlands,
hedgerows, tree masses, tree lines, individual freestanding
trees over six inches in DBH, wetland vegetation, pasture or
croplands, orchards, permanent grass land, old fields, and any
other notable vegetative features on the site. Vegetative types
shall be described by plant community, relative age and
condition.
(i) Any identified Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI)
site conflicts.
(j) Geologic formations on the tract, including rock outcroppings,
cliffs, sinkholes and fault lines, based on available published
information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant.
(4) Existing man-made features, including:
(a) Location, dimensions and use of existing buildings and
driveways.
(b) Location, names, widths, center-line courses, paving widths,
identification numbers, and rights-of-way of existing streets
and alleys.
(c) Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian,
equestrian, bicycle, etc.).
(d) Location and size of existing sanitary sewage facilities.
(e) Location and size of drainage facilities.
(f) Location of water supply facilities, including wellhead
protection areas.
(g) Any easements, deed restrictions, rights-of-way, or any other
encumbrances upon the land, including location, size and
ownership.
(h) Site features or conditions such as hazardous waste, dumps,
underground tanks, active and abandoned wells, quarries,
landfills, sand mounds and artificial land conditions.
§ 274-18 OIL CITY CODE § 274-18
1:410
(5) Total acreage of the tract, the adjusted tract area, where
applicable, and the constrained land area with detailed supporting
calculations.
C. Stormwater management system concept plan. A written and graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater
management system shall be prepared and include:
(1) Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural
stormwater controls;
(2) Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as
grass channels, swales and storm drains;
(3) Location of floodplain/floodway limits;
(4) Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and
drainages; and
(5) Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications,
such as bridge or culvert crossings.
D. Consultation meeting. Prior to any stormwater management permit
application submission, the landowner or developer shall meet with the
municipality for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the postdevelopment
stormwater management system to be utilized in the
proposed project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time
of the preliminary plan or other early step in the development process.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development
stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project,
as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential
ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design
engineering is commenced.
E. All proposed regulated activities within a protected watershed shall
utilize, to the maximum extent possible, low-impact development
practices as contained in Appendix B.91
(1) SWM plan and report shall address the following:
(a) Design using nonstructural BMPs.
[1] Lot configuration and clustering.
[a] Reduced individual lot impacts by concentrated/
clustered uses and lots.
[b] Lots/development configured to avoid critical natural
areas.
[c] Lots/development configured to take advantage of
effective mitigative stormwater practices.
91.Editor's Note: Appendix B is attached to this chapter.
§ 274-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-18
1:411
[d] Lots/development configured to fit natural
topography.
[2] Minimum disturbance.
[a] Define disturbance zones (excavation/grading) for the
site and individual lots to protect maximum total site
area from disturbance.
[b] Barriers/flagging proposed to protect designated
nondisturbance areas.
[c] Considered mitigative practices for minimal
disturbance areas (e.g., soil restoration).
[d] Considered reforestation and revegetation
opportunities.
[3] Reduce impervious coverage.
[a] Reduced road width.
[b] Reduced driveway lengths and widths.
[c] Reduced parking ratios and sizes.
[d] Utilized porous surfaces for applicable features.
[4] Stormwater disconnected from impervious area.
[a] Disconnected drives/walkways/small impervious areas
to natural areas.
[b] Use rain barrels and/or cisterns for lot irrigation.
(b) Apply structural BMP selection process that meets runoff
quantity and quality needs.
[1] Manage close to source collection with conveyance
minimized.
[2] Consistent with site factors (e.g., soils, slope, available
space, amount of sensitive areas, pollutant removal
needs).
[3] Minimize footprint and integrate into already disturbed
areas/other building program components (e.g., recharge
beneath parking areas, vegetated roofs).
[4] Consider other benefits such as aesthetic, habitat,
recreational and educational benefits.
[5] BMPs selected based on maintenance needs that fit owner/
users.
[6] BMPs sustainable using a long-term maintenance plan.
§ 274-18 OIL CITY CODE § 274-18
1:412
ARTICLE VI
Riparian Buffer Standards
§ 274-19. Riparian buffer requirements.
Riparian buffers are required for regulated activity other than one singlefamily
residence and shall be established as follows:
A. The buffer shall be measured perpendicularly from the top of the
stream bank landward.
(1) High quality or exceptional value watersheds: a minimum of 150
feet;
(2) Impaired watersheds: a minimum of 150 feet;
(3) All other watersheds: a minimum of 50 feet; or
(4) As determined by a stream corridor study approved by PADEP and
the municipality.
B. The riparian buffer shall be located on both sides of all perennial and
intermittent streams. The perennial and intermittent streams and the
riparian buffer boundaries shall be shown on all applications for
building permits, subdivision or land development. Existing uses within
the buffer are permitted to continue but not be expanded. Placement of
new buildings or roadways within the riparian buffer shall be
prohibited, unless specifically permitted by PADEP. Where a wetland
exists within the buffer area, the buffer shall be extended landward to
provide a minimum buffer of 25 feet, as measured perpendicularly from
the wetland boundary.
C. The buffer shall be undisturbed forest consisting of appropriate native
species.
D. Where wetlands are located partially or entirely within a buffer, the
buffer shall be extended to encompass the wetland and shall be
widened by a distance sufficient to provide a twenty-five-foot forested
buffer measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.
E. The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer:
(1) Footpaths, trails and bike paths, provided that:
(a) Width is limited to five feet;
(b) Width may be increased provided a corresponding increase in
the buffer is provided; and
(c) Construction shall have minimal impact to the buffer.
(2) Stream crossings, provided the crossing is designed and
constructed in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the
buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its original
§ 274-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-19
1:413
condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of
construction.
(3) Utility lines, provided that the crossing is designed and constructed
in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the inner buffer, and
provided that there is no practical alternative to locating the utility
line within the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its
original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon
completion of construction.
(4) Maintenance and restoration of the riparian buffer.
(5) Projects conducted with the objective of improvement,
stabilization, restoration or enhancement of the stream bank,
stream channel, floodplain, watershed hydrology, riparian buffers,
or aquatic habitat and maintenance activities associated with such
projects. These projects include, but are not limited to, agricultural
and stormwater management best management practices. Such
projects must receive appropriate permits and approvals from
PADEP prior to starting the project.
(6) Minor private recreational uses for the property owner. Such uses
include benches, fire rings and similar uses. Such uses do not
include structures such as cabins, sheds, pavilions, garages,
dwellings or similar structures.
F. Disturbance of the riparian buffer shall be limited to the area necessary
to perform an allowable use.
G. Where possible and practical, disturbances shall be phased, with each
phase restored prior to beginning the next phase.
H. Allowable activities shall not cause stormwater flow to concentrate.
I. Any vegetation removed for an allowable activity shall be replaced
immediately upon completion of the activity. Where mature trees are
removed, such trees shall be replaced with the largest practical tree of
acceptable native species.
J. Erosion and sediment pollution control shall be installed and
maintained during construction. Evidence of an approved erosion and
sediment control plan and/or NPDES permit, if required, shall be
submitted prior to issuance of local permits.
K. If a permit from PADEP is required for the activity, evidence of an
approved permit shall be submitted prior to issuance of local permits.
L. Riparian buffers shall be maintained in a manner consistent with sound
forest management practices. In the absence of a site-specific
management plan, the following maintenance guidelines apply:
(1) Buffers shall be inspected periodically for evidence of excessive
sediment deposition, erosion or concentrated flow channels.
§ 274-19 OIL CITY CODE § 274-19
1:414
§ 274-20. Riparian buffer easement.
For all riparian buffers, an easement shall be provided. Easements shall be
in accordance with § 274-31 and recorded in accordance with § 274-48 of
this chapter.
Prompt action shall be taken to correct these problems and prevent
future occurrence.
(2) Trees presenting an unusual hazard of creating downstream
obstructions shall be removed. Such material shall be removed
from the floodplain or the riparian buffer (whichever is widest) or
cut into sections small enough so as to prevent the possibility of
creating obstructions downstream. Wherever possible, large stable
debris should be conserved.
(3) Vegetation should be inspected periodically to ensure diverse
vegetative cover and vigorous plant growth consistent with
buffering objectives.
(a) Invasive plant species that may threaten the integrity of the
buffer shall be removed.
(b) Periodic cutting of trees may be necessary to promote vigorous
growth and encourage regeneration.
(4) Excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other
chemicals shall be avoided. These products should be used only
when absolutely necessary to maintain buffer vegetation.
§ 274-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-20
1:415

ARTICLE VII
Design Criteria
§ 274-21. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless: a) the watersheds are subwatersheds of a common
watershed which join together within the perimeter of the
property; b) the effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate
discharged onto adjacent lands; or c) easements from the affected
landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
(3) Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering
plans and performance capabilities and supporting site-specific
soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to
verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources
may be accepted at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer. A
preapplication meeting is suggested.
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
municipality shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the Venango County Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities is strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-21
1:417
etc. Consultation with the City of Oil City and prior approval are
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility or
swale shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway
unless specifically permitted.
(2) The top, or toe, of any slope shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line.
(3) The minimum horizontal distance between any structure and any
stormwater storage facility, such as a basin, shall be 25 feet. The
lowest floor elevation of any structure constructed immediately
adjacent to a detention basin or other stormwater facility shall be a
minimum of two feet above the one-hundred-year water surface
elevation.
(4) Stormwater management facility bottom (or surface of permanent
pool) elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain
elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined,
bottom elevations must be greater than existing ground elevations
50 feet from top of stream bank in the facility's vicinity.
(5) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-year
floodplain elevation must be used for all design storms, or the
applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent
watercourse for each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be
50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a floodplain is not
designated or no other evidence is provided.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high-groundwater table.
§ 274-21 OIL CITY CODE § 274-21
1:418
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage or hydrostatic provisions are provided.
(7) Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(8) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed 3:1 and must be
further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(9) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
(10) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
1% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(11) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
(12) Unless specifically designed as a Volume Control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests
performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom
depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-toempty
calculations if infiltration is a factor.
(13) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Discharges to drainage swales shall be dissipated, or piped, to an
acceptable point.
(14) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal maintenance saturation-tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(15) A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of the
municipality, for any stormwater management facility. The fence
shall be a minimum of four feet high and of a material acceptable to
the municipality. A gate with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for maintenance access.
(16) Principal outlet structures. The primary outlet structure shall be
designed to pass all design storms (up to and including the onehundred-
year event) without discharging through the emergency
spillway. All principal outlet structures shall:
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-21
1:419
(a) Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative
material approved by the Municipal Engineer. When approved
for use, all metal risers shall:
[1] Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion.
[2] Have a concrete base attached with a watertight
connection. The base shall be of sufficient weight to
prevent flotation of the riser.
[3] Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent
debris from entering the riser.
[4] Provide an antivortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
(b) Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices equivalent to 12 inches or
smaller in diameter.
(c) Provide outlet aprons and extend to the toe of the basin slope
at a minimum.
(17) Emergency spillways. Any stormwater management facility
designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway
designed to convey the one-hundred-year post-development peak
rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency
spillway shall be designed per the following requirements:
(a) The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one
foot of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation
calculated when the spillway functions for the one-hundredyear
post-development inflow with a blocked outlet structure.
(b) Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible.
(c) The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the
one-hundred-year post-development flow with a blocked
primary outlet structure.
[1] Synthetic liners or riprap may be used. Calculations to
support proposed armor must be provided. An earthen
plug must be used to accurately control the spillway invert
if riprap is the proposed armoring material. Emergency
spillway armor must extend up the sides of the spillway
and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet past the
toe of slope.
(d) The Municipal Engineer may require the use of additional
protection when slopes exceed 4:1 and spillway velocities
exceed NRCS standards for the particular soils involved.
§ 274-21 OIL CITY CODE § 274-21
1:420
(e) Underground stormwater management facilities must provide
a method to bypass flows higher than what they were designed
without structural failure or causing downstream harm or
safety risks.
(18) Stormwater management basins. Design of stormwater
management facilities having three feet or more of water depth
measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the facility to the
crest of the emergency spillway shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(a) The maximum water depth within any stormwater
management facility shall be no greater than eight feet when
functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(b) The top of embankment width shall be at least 10 feet.
(c) A ten-foot-wide access to the basin bottom must be provided
with a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
(d) Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification system consisting of CH, MH, CL or
ML. Soils used shall be tested to determine density analysis
per ASTM 698. The embankments will be constructed in a
maximum of six-inch lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to a
density at least 98% of its maximum dry density. Each layer of
compacted fill shall be tested to determine its density per
ASTM 2922 or ASTM 3017.
(e) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be
provided under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
The cutoff trench shall run the entire length of the
embankment and tie into undisturbed natural ground.
(f) Antiseep collars, or a PADEP-approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the PADEP E&S
Manual. A fifteen-percent increase in seepage length must be
used in accordance with the requirements for permanent
antiseep collars.
(19) Construction of stormwater management facilities:
(a) Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrently with any earthmoving or land disturbances. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative
and on the plan.
(b) Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as not to
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-21
1:421
(c) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
available to review at all times with copies forwarded to the
Municipal Engineer upon request.
(d) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures
shall be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins
immediately upon reaching final grade.
(20) Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
the municipality for BMPs that retain or detain water and are of a
much smaller scale than traditional stormwater management
facilities.
C. Stormwater-carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater-carrying facilities that service drainage areas
within the site must be able to convey post-development runoff
from the ten-year design storm.
(2) Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water
through the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year
storm event or larger events, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer.
(3) All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the post-development onehundred-
year storm event without damage to public or private
property.
(4) Storm sewers.
(a) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff
without surcharging inlets for the ten-year storm event.
(b) When connecting to an existing storm sewer system, the
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and downstream
capacity.
(c) Inlets, manholes, pipes and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT
Publication 408, and as detailed in the PennDOT Publication
72M - Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), or other
details approved by the Municipal Engineer. All material and
construction details must be shown on the SWM site plan and a
note that all construction must be in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408 and PennDOT Publication 72M, latest edition.
A note shall be included on the plan stating that all frames,
concrete top units, and grade adjustment rings shall be set in a
bed of full mortar according to Publication 408.
§ 274-21 OIL CITY CODE § 274-21
1:422
(d) A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems (public or private) proposed for
construction in the municipality. Pipes shall be designed to
provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second when
flowing full, but in all cases the slope shall be no less then
0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be used
in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility conflict conditions
exist.
(e) All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from the bottom of the subgrade to the crown of pipe.
(f) In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of
water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb
during the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration.
Gutter depth shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity
calculations that account for road slope and opening area.
[1] Inlets shall be placed at a maximum of 300 feet apart.
[2] Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross
intersections or street center lines.
(g) PennDOT Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall
be used along curbed roadway. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the Municipal Engineer when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
(h) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same, or the smaller pipe's
crown shall be at a higher elevation.
(i) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(j) On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or a single inlet shall be placed on
each side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100 feet.
(k) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent
properties to channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater
runoff away from dwellings and structures.
(l) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan or inlet details therein.
(m) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-21
1:423
exiting inlets shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet.
A note to this effect shall be included in the SWM site plan or
inlet details therein.
(n) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the
subgrade prior to placing the base and surface course on
roadways.
(o) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater then five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs at 15 inches centers
and shall be detailed on the SWM site plan.
(p) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP). Pipe shall be flush with the
bottom of the box, or concrete channels shall be poured.
(q) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all
points of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
(r) All storm drainage piping shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or end sections compatible with
the pipe material and size at its entrance and discharge.
(s) Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided at
all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion
consistent with the E&S Manual.
[1] Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall
not result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
(t) Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not be connected to
storm sewers or discharge onto impervious areas without
approval by the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Swale conveyance facilities.
(a) Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
ten-year design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the
swale.
(b) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
(c) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the
design dimension.
(d) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less
than ten-percent slope. Shear criteria may be used for all
§ 274-21 OIL CITY CODE § 274-21
1:424
§ 274-22. Calculation methodology.
swales. Documentation must be provided to support velocity
and/or shear limitations used in calculations.
(e) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the
purpose of designing swale erosion protection:
[1] When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
[2] When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
[3] When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(f) Manning's "n" values used for swale capacity design must
reflect the permanent condition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Methods shall be selected by the design professional based on the
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular site.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) Rational method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type
II twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be consistent with the
following table:
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.05
2 2.45
10 3.44
25 4.07
50 4.58
100 5.12
D. Runoff volume.
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-22
1:425
(1) Rational Method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is NOT
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates.
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more then one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing is unacceptable.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS's TR-55 - limited to 100 acres in size.
[2] NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-HMS - no size limitations.
[3] Other models as preapproved by the Municipal Engineer.
(b) The NRCS Antecedent Runoff Condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to 1/10 of
a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).92
(2) NRCS rainfall-runoff method. Use Table C-2 (Appendix C). Curve
numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in hydrologic
models as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest
whole number.
92.Editor's Note: Appendix C is attached to this chapter.
§ 274-22 OIL CITY CODE § 274-22
1:426
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundredyear
hydrographs through the facility using the Storage Indication
Method or Modified Puls Method. The design storm hydrograph
shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(3) All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition that
best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by the Municipal
Engineer:
(a) Predevelopment - NRCS's Lag Equation:
Time of Concentration = Tc = (Tlag.6) * 60] (minutes).
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by:
S = [(1000/CN) - 10]
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed
§ 274-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-22
1:427
(b) Post-development; commercial, industrial or other areas with
large impervious areas (>20% impervious area) - NRCS
Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's equation.
(c) Post-development; residential, cluster or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area - NRCS Lag
Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development Tc shall never be greater that the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed,
including when swales are designed to reduce flow velocities.
In the event the post-development Tc is greater than the
predevelopment, it shall be set equal to the predevelopment Tc
for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
post-development watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc can not be assumed
for predevelopment.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of Tc calculation.
I. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the postdevelopment
analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
J. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes and storm sewers. The Manning equation should not be
used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PennDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet control shall be checked at all
inlet boxes to ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design
event is contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
§ 274-22 OIL CITY CODE § 274-22
1:428
K. The municipality may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
L. The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
Municipal Engineer.
§ 274-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-22
1:429

ARTICLE VIII
SWM Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 274-23. General requirements.
For any activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for exemptions
provided in § 274-12, the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or
the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until
the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the
municipality.
§ 274-24. SWM site plan and report contents.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected.
Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and other applicable local ordinances shall be
followed in preparing the SWM Site Plan.
A. SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a size that meets the requirements
for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Venango
County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet; and
(c) All lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans
are reduced to half size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal and signature of the
individual preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet
and illustrates the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
§ 274-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-24
1:431
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between five and 15%; no greater than two feet; and
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. Any
areas necessary to determine downstream impacts, where required
for proposed stormwater management facilities, must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
waterlines on and within 50 feet of property lines, including inlets,
manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and
other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic soil
group classification including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a separate E&S Plan.
(18) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the municipality or its designees access to all
easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
§ 274-24 OIL CITY CODE § 274-24
1:432
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(20) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations
and maintenance responsibilities.
(21) Notes and statements.
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by the municipality.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy or the release of the
surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________, hereby certify that the stormwater management
plan meets all design standards and criteria of the City of Oil
City's Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer
reviewing the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________, have reviewed this stormwater management
plan in accordance with the design standards and criteria of
the City of Oil City's Stormwater Management Ordinance."
B. SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) General data, including:
(a) Project name.
(b) Project location - address of the property site.
(c) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property.
(d) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address and
engineering seal and signature of the individual preparing the
SWM site report.
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information:
(a) Narrative.
§ 274-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-24
1:433
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed. Overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and
materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions,
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] Total site area – pre and post, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
[11] Whether site is a water-quality-sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features,
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management elements.
[16] Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities.
[17] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables.
§ 274-24 OIL CITY CODE § 274-24
1:434
[1] Predevelopment hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions,
curve numbers (CN), computation of average slope,
hydraulic length, computed time of concentration.
[2] Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[3] Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[4] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[5] Land use for each subarea.
[6] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers
(CN).
[7] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[8] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and
out.
[9] Pond maximum return period design data, including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation, and
emergency spillway elevation.
[10]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations.
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of antiseep
collars.
[3] Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume versus
elevation) and all supporting computations.
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings.
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets,
depicting the time of concentration path for both existing
conditions and post-developed condition.
§ 274-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-24
1:435
[2] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail, including easements and
buffers boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be
rejected for review by the Municipal Engineer and will be returned
to the applicant.
(4) Description of, justification and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation
and maintenance responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for
inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).93
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Venango Conservation District.
(4) A NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
(7) Geotechnical or soils investigation report, including boring logs,
compaction requirements, and recommendations for construction
of detention basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
93.Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 274-24 OIL CITY CODE § 274-25
1:436
§ 274-25. SWM site plan and report submission.
§ 274-26. SWM site plan and report review.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Five copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
executed review fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this
chapter.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Venango County Planning Commission.
(4) One copy to the Venango Conservation District.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
PADEP.
A. The municipality shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The municipality shall review the
SWM site plan and report for consistency with the purposes,
requirements, and intent of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the municipality may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission.
C. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.94
D. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
municipality. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior
to issuance of a building permit.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 274-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-27
1:437
§ 274-27. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 274-28. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted with the
revisions addressing the municipality's concerns documented in writing to
the municipality in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan
and report.
§ 274-29. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The municipality
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the municipality signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
approved within this time, then the municipality may consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 274-30. Record drawings, completion certificate and final
inspection.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality as a prerequisite
for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
(1) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes and stormwater control
facilities.
C. After receipt of the record drawing, the municipality may conduct a
final inspection prior to certification of completion by the municipality.
§ 274-27 OIL CITY CODE § 274-30
1:438
ARTICLE IX
Easements
§ 274-31. Easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate drainageways.
B. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
C. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including but not limited to detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
D. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
E. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass
the one-hundred-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater
facility.
F. Easements shall provide ingress and egress to a public right-of-way. In
lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be
added to the plan granting the municipality or its designees access to
all easements via the nearest public right-of-way available for vehicle
ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
G. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
H. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement.
I. All easement agreements shall be recorded and referenced on the site
plan. The format and content of the easement agreement shall be
reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer and Solicitor.
§ 274-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-31
1:439

ARTICLE X
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 274-32. Financial guarantee.
§ 274-33. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified professional, verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM
site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the municipality to certify
compliance with this chapter after receipt of the certification of
completion and record drawings by the municipality.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The description
shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules
necessary to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control
facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
the municipality.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
§ 274-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-33
1:441
§ 274-34. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
(3) Facilities, areas or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
(5) The municipality may take enforcement actions against an
applicant for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. The municipality, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
D. If the municipality accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the
municipality may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to
the municipality to offset the future cost of inspections, operations and
maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the municipality grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
A) covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
(1) Municipalities are exempt from the requirement to sign and record
an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipality, Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the municipality may perform the
§ 274-33 OIL CITY CODE § 274-34
1:442
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 274-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-34
1:443

ARTICLE XI
Inspections
§ 274-35. Schedule of inspections.
§ 274-36. Right of entry.
A. PADEP or its designees inspect for compliance with NPDES permits on
sites where applicable. In addition to PADEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its assignee may inspect all phases of the installation of
temporary or permanent stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the municipality
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the
municipality shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a
revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved as specified in this
chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner or the
landowner's designee according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The municipality may require copies of the inspection reports in a
form as stipulated by the municipality.
(2) If inspections are not conducted or inspection reports are not
submitted as scheduled, the municipality or its designee may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(a) Prior to conducting inspections, the municipality shall inform
the owner of its intent to conduct an inspection. The owner
shall be given 30 days to make the required inspections and
submit inspection reports to the municipality.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the municipality such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
§ 274-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-36
1:445
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the municipality access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 274-36 OIL CITY CODE § 274-36
1:446
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 274-37. Notification.
§ 274-38. Enforcement.
§ 274-39. Public nuisance.
§ 274-40. Suspension and revocation.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or falls to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the
municipality shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed
to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
A. The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM site
plan shall be on file at the project site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. The municipality or its designee may make
periodic inspections during construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity on any property except as provided for by an
approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or
revoked for:
§ 274-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-40
1:447
§ 274-41. Penalties.
§ 274-42. Appeals.
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipality or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation(s) has been
corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $_____ for each violation recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality through its Solicitor may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the municipality
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality relevant to
the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Venango County Court
of Common Pleas within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 274-40 OIL CITY CODE § 274-42
1:448
ARTICLE XIII
Prohibitions
§ 274-43. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or underground, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or Waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the municipality's separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of
the commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except those in Subsection D below and discharges allowed under a
state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(2) Irrigation drainage.
(3) Air-conditioning condensate.
(4) Springs.
(5) Water from crawl space pumps.
(6) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(7) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
§ 274-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-43
1:449
§ 274-44. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 274-45. Alteration of BMPs.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the municipality or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D is a significant contributor to
pollution to the waters of the commonwealth, the responsible person(s)
shall be notified to cease the discharge. Upon notice provided by the
municipality or PADEP, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as
determined by the municipality or PADEP, to cease the discharge,
consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program without the written approval of the
municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 274-43 OIL CITY CODE § 274-45
1:450
ARTICLE XIV
Fees and Expenses
§ 274-46. General.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. The applicant
shall pay all fees.
§ 274-47. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
§ 274-48. Recording of approved SWM site plan and related
agreements.
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the municipality.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Venango County, within _____ days of approval of the SWM site plan by
the municipality:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).95
(3) Easements under § 274-31.
(4) Riparian buffers under § 274-20.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
95.Editor's Note: Appendix A is attached to this chapter.
§ 274-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-48
1:451
Chapter 278
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 154.
Gas, oil and water lines — See Ch. 179.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 274.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 274-48 OIL CITY CODE § 274-48
1:452
ARTICLE I
Water from Eaves and Downspouts
[Adopted 6-12-1885 by Ord. No. 222 (Ch. 160, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 278-1. Discharge over sidewalks prohibited.
All owners of buildings, the water from which drops directly on the
sidewalks, shall place eave spouts thereon and connect the same with the
sewers where laid, and where there is no sewerage and the water runs from
the spouts over the sidewalk, there shall be placed in the walk a plank or
stone cut out for the purpose of conducting the water to the gutter.
§ 278-2. Notice to correct condition. [Amended 12-22-1986 by Ord.
No. 2456]
Anyone offending against the provisions of this article and who shall not
correct the situation, as required by § 278-1, after 30 days' notice from the
Director of the Department of Public Works to do so, shall be subject to the
penalty provided in § 278-3 hereof.
§ 278-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2452]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 and costs
of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-3
1:453

ARTICLE II
Snow Removal
[Adopted 2-28-1928 by Ord. No. 1179 (Ch. 156 of the 1986 Code)]
§ 278-4. Occupant to remove snow, ice or dirt from sidewalk.
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation occupying any
building fronting on any street in the City of Oil City to remove the snow,
ice or dirt from the sidewalks in front of or abutting the lot or lots enclosing
said buildings.
§ 278-5. Time for removal of snow.
The snow shall be removed from said sidewalks within 12 hours after said
snow shall have ceased to fall. In case of unoccupied buildings or lots, the
duty of removing the snow, ice or dirt shall be upon the owners of said
unoccupied buildings or lots.
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties.
All violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $5 for
the first offense and not less than $3 nor more than $20 for each additional
offense against this article, to be recovered summarily. The party failing to
pay the same may be imprisoned at the discretion of the Magisterial District
Judge for a period not to exceed 10 days.
§ 278-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-6
1:455

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Maintenance in C-2 District
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 2592 (Ch. 160, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 278-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to existing, replacement and new
sidewalks within the Central Business District (C-2) as laid out and as
changed from time to time by amendment to the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Oil City.96
§ 278-8. Maintenance; costs.
§ 278-9. Obstructions; violations and penalties.
A. Keeping sidewalks clear. It shall be the duty of all persons owning any
parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk within the Central
Business District, whether the parcel is occupied by a structure or not,
to keep such sidewalks adjoining such property in a clean and sanitary
manner and free from snow and ice. Snow and ice shall be removed
within 12 hours after a snowfall. During business hours, sidewalks shall
be kept clear.
B. Severe icing. In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, it shall,
within the time specified in Subsection A of this section, be strewn and
kept strewn with ashes, sand, sawdust or other suitable material so as
to no longer be dangerous to life and limb. As soon as practicable
thereafter, the sidewalk shall be completely cleared of snow, ice and
other materials strewn thereon, as provided in this Subsection B.
C. Failure to keep clear; removal by City; costs. If such owner or occupant
or other person fails to remove snow and/or ice within 24 hours after a
snowfall or fails to comply with any other provisions of Subsections A
and/or B of this section, the City may cause such snow, ice, dirt or other
materials to be removed or covered with suitable materials. The cost of
any such action taken plus a flat fine of $50 will be charged to the
property owner. If not paid within 30 days, an action, as provided by
general law, to recover the amount plus costs may be maintained by the
City against the property owner.
A. Obstructions on sidewalks. No owner or occupant or other person shall
place, keep, permit or suffer to be placed or kept on any sidewalk in
front of, adjoining or adjacent to such premises within the Central
Business District any goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels,
vehicles or material things of any kind or description, nor shall he in any
manner obstruct any such sidewalk or in any manner obstruct or
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
§ 278-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-9
1:457
§ 278-10. Repair, reconstruction and replacement.
interfere with the use of any such sidewalk, except as hereinafter
provided. Such persons shall be permitted to place food, wares and
merchandise on sidewalks temporarily for sale and display purposes,
provided that a path at least four feet wide for pedestrian movement is
maintained at all times. Such persons shall also be permitted to place
goods, wares or merchandise on the sidewalk temporarily while loading
or unloading the same, provided that pedestrian traffic is allowed the
right-of-way, provided that it is done without unnecessary delay,
provided that such goods, wares or merchandise are not allowed or
permitted to remain on such sidewalks within the prohibited area for a
period longer than one hour, and provided that vehicles are not parked
on the sidewalk at any time.
B. Fines for obstructing sidewalks. Any person who violates the provisions
of Subsection A of this section shall be given written or verbal
notification by the police or by any other properly authorized City
employee to move the items and comply with Subsection A within one
hour. If any person is in violation after one hour, or if the same person
has received a warning within the past 10 days, he or she shall be cited
for unlawful conduct and, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for
each and every offense and, in default of the payment of such costs and
fine, shall be committed to the jail for a period not exceeding 30 days
for each and every offense.
A. Maintenance and construction. The owner of any parcel of real estate
within the Central Business District shall keep sidewalks in front of or
adjacent to such premises in good and sufficient repair for the general
use of the public and free from cracks, spalling, heaving or other
deterioration. Any existing sidewalk shall not be eliminated and shall be
immediately replaced upon removal in accordance with this article.
B. Permit for repair. Anyone planning to repair, reconstruct or replace any
sidewalk regulated under this article shall first obtain a building permit
for such work from the Code Enforcement Officer, as provided in
§ 278-11 of this article.
C. Failure to maintain; notice to repair. If any owner fails to comply with
Subsection A of this section, the City may require the owner to repair,
reconstruct or replace any sidewalk adjacent to said premises within 30
days of notification (or such other time as indicated in such
notification). Any such repair, reconstruction or replacement will
require a building permit as described in Subsection B of this section
and shall comply with all other provisions of this article.
D. Noncompliance by owner; costs. If the owner fails to repair, reconstruct
or replace the sidewalk within the time provided in said notice, the City
shall cause the sidewalk to be repaired, reconstructed or replaced, and
such costs will be charged to the owner. If not paid within 30 days, an
§ 278-9 OIL CITY CODE § 278-10
1:458
§ 278-11. Construction standards. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord. No.
2654]
action, as provided by general law, to recover the amount plus costs
may be maintained by the City against the property owner.
E. Right of appeal. If the owner so notified of his obligation to repair,
reconstruct or replace the sidewalk has reason to object to such
obligation, he may, within 15 days of receipt of such notice, file an
appeal with the Oil City Code Appeals Board, which Board shall hear
appeals and make a decision on the validity of the appeal.
A. Construction or improvement of public curb and sidewalk in the Central
Business District shall conform to the standard detail and notes
included at the end of this article,97 except that sidewalks constructed
as part of the Oil City Northside Revitalization Projects or any other
such project undertaken by the City (after the effective date of this
article), and which contain any decorative characteristics which differ
from the standard detail and notes at the end of this article, shall be
maintained. Any reconstruction of these sidewalks, including patches
which may be necessary for various reasons, shall conform to the most
recent design plans and specifications under which the sidewalks were
constructed. Any repair work requiring trenching in sidewalks shall be
done in a manner which will prevent damage to adjacent sidewalks; saw
cuts shall be made at existing joints, and new sidewalks shall be
installed to match existing. Any nonconcrete component of such a
sidewalk, such as brick, historical markers, etc., shall be removed prior
to demolition of the concrete and shall be reinstalled in the new
sidewalk per the design plans and specifications. Such components
shall be stored in a secure location until they are reincorporated into
the sidewalk.
B. Any property owner wishing to construct or reconstruct a sidewalk
shall obtain a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer and
shall comply with all provisions of the Building Code of the City of Oil
City,98 which code is in force at the time of application. The Code
Enforcement Officer and/or City Engineer will provide information
concerning this article, including construction details for sidewalks
constructed as part of a project undertaken by the City, and will inspect
the work to ensure conformance with this article. If a sidewalk is not
constructed according to this article, the City may take action as
described under the Building Code of the City of Oil City.
97.Editor's Note: The standard detail is on file in the City offices.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Building Construction, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 278-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-11
1:459

ARTICLE IV
Parking Restrictions
[Adopted 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2627 (Ch. 160, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 278-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BLOCK — To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means, including but
not limited to parking on the part of the sidewalk that is fit for travel or
placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such sidewalk.
CURBLINE — The lateral boundary between the traveled and untraveled
area of any street, road, highway or alley, whether or not actually marked
by a curb.
DRIVEWAY — That part of the passage located on private property that
provides vehicular ingress and egress to a property fronting on a public
street.
PARK — The act of leaving or placing an occupied or unoccupied vehicle at
a particular location or site.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other
property that is owned or controlled by law or regulation by a governmental
entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer designed and
used as a travel trailer, camper, motor home, tent trailer, boat, boat trailer,
snowmobile, snowmobile trailer or camping trailer and for any similar
purpose.
REPAIR — To restore to sound and operable condition.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians on
any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of a governmental entity.
STREET — The paved area within the public right-of-way intended for
vehicular traffic.
VEHICLE — Any motorized or nonmotorized device, including a trailer,
capable of being moved upon a public street and in, upon or by which
persons or property may be transported or drawn upon a public street.
WATERCRAFT — Any motorized or nonmotorized vessel or machine which
is constructed to operate on water.
§ 278-13. Prohibition of parking or permitting parking in public
right-of-way.
No person shall park any vehicle nor shall any person permit a vehicle
owned by him or under his control to be parked at any time in that portion
§ 278-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-13
1:461
of the public right-of-way which is located in that area between the curbline
and any sidewalk which runs parallel to the street.
§ 278-14. Prohibition of blocking any public sidewalk.
No person shall block any sidewalk or portion thereof, nor shall any person
permit a vehicle used by him or under his control to block any sidewalk by
obstructing the same.
§ 278-15. Prohibition of conducting repairs to any vehicle in public
right-of-way.
No person shall repair any vehicle in the public right-of-way nor permit a
vehicle owned by him or under his control to be repaired in the public rightof-
way, nor shall such persons leave a vehicle in an unsafe or hazardous
condition in the public right-of-way so as to create a potentially dangerous
situation to the travelling public.
§ 278-16. Regulating of parking or storage of recreational vehicles
or watercraft on public streets.
No person shall store or park any recreational vehicle or watercraft nor
permit any recreational vehicle or watercraft owned by him or under his
control to be stored or parked on any public street within the City of Oil City
for a period exceeding 48 hours.
§ 278-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of $10 if paid within 48 hours of the time when such notice was
attached to the vehicle. After the expiration of such time, the fine shall be
$15. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10 days of the date of the
violation will result in summary proceedings, whereupon conviction thereof
shall subject the violator to a fine of not more than $100 together with the
costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. A violation occurs on each day that the vehicle remains in an
illegal location as defined in this article.
§ 278-13 OIL CITY CODE § 278-17
1:462
Chapter 285
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Redevelopment Authority — See Ch. 11, Art. I.
Blighted Property Review Committee — See
Ch. 15.
Abandoned or vacant property — See Ch. 80.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 225.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 242.
Rental occupancy reports — See Ch. 246, Art.
I.
§ 278-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-17
1:463

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-30-1977 by Ord. No. 2352 (Ch. 166, Art. IV, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in a provision of this article,
unless otherwise distinctly expressed herein or manifestly incompatible
with the intent of the particular provision, shall be construed as follows:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent, rather
than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until
some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home.
In the case of businesses or associations, the "domicile" is that place
considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability, other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement, or payments arising
under workers' compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as "old age benefits,"
"retirement pay" or "pensions" paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment, or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or "unemployment compensation
payments" made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-1
1:465
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer
the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 285-2. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the provisions of Act No. 511
of 1965 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
known as and hereinafter identified as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," its
amendments and supplements.99
§ 285-3. Imposition of tax.
An annual tax for the year 1978 and each calendar year thereafter be, and is
hereby, levied effective January 1, 1978, for general revenue purposes of the
City of Oil City as the rate of 1% on earned income and net profits earned,
paid and/or received on and after January 1, 1978, both by any resident
of and by any person employed and/or operating a business, profession or
other activity in the City of Oil City.
§ 285-4. Declaration and payment of tax on net profits.
A. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Income Tax Officer, a final return
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 285-1 OIL CITY CODE § 285-4
1:466
§ 285-5. Declaration and payment of tax on earned income.
Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make
and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a form prescribed or approved
by the Income Tax Officer, a final return showing the amount of earned
income received during the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has
been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at source
and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer
shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or
credit in the case of overpayment.
§ 285-6. Declaration and payment of tax on income not subject to
withholding.
Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation and who received any earned income not subject to the
provisions relating to collection at source shall make and file with the
Income Tax Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Income Tax
Officer, an annual return setting forth the aggregate amount of earned
income not subject to withholding from him during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year and such other
information as the Income Tax Officer may require and pay to the Income
Tax Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon on or before April 15 of
the succeeding year. Every taxpayer making such return shall, at the time
of filing thereof, pay to the Income Tax Officer the amount of tax shown as
due thereon.
§ 285-7. Collection at source.
showing the amount of net profits earned during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax
paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall
pay to the Officer the tax due.
B. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the City of Oil City who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, and who has not previously
registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer under this
article, register with the Income Tax Officer his name and address and
such other information as the Income Tax Officer may require.
B. Reports by employer.
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-7
1:467
(1) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the City of Oil City who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall deduct at
the time of payment thereof the tax imposed by this article on the
earned income due to his employee or employees and shall, on or
before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, file a return and pay to the Income Tax Officer the amount of
taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon
between the Officer and employer, shall show the name and social
security number of each such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefor, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned
income of all such employees during such preceding three-month
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
(2) Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods,
has failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed
to pay over the proper amount of tax to the Income Tax Officer may
be required by the Income Tax Officer to file his return and pay the
tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the
Income Tax Officer on or before the last day of the month
succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. Returns by employer.
(1) On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer
shall file with the Income Tax Officer:
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the Income Tax Officer for the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year.
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year,
setting forth the employee's name, address and social security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee
during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Officer.
(2) Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
§ 285-7 OIL CITY CODE § 285-7
1:468
§ 285-8. Designation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall be designated by resolution of and shall
receive such compensation for his services and such expenses as
determined from time to time by the Council of the City of Oil City.
§ 285-9. Administration.
It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties
imposed by this article and to keep a record showing the amount received
by him from each person or business paying the tax and the date of such
receipt. The Income Tax Officer shall have all the powers and duties and
shall be subject to the requirements, provisions and penalties provided in
the Local Tax Enabling Act.101
§ 285-10. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Income Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article, including
provisions for the reexamination and correction of declarations and returns
and of payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an
overpayment is claimed or found to be occurred, and to make refunds
in cases of overpayment for any period of time not to exceed six years
subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved, and to prescribe
forms necessary for the administration of this article; provided, however,
that no rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been
approved as to form and legality by the City Solicitor and approved by the
City Manager. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall
be available for public inspection.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9100 of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make
the deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of
the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
100. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.312.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 285-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-11
1:469
§ 285-11. Refund of tax paid on necessary business expenses.
The Income Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the
taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
§ 285-12. Examination of books and records.
The Income Tax Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized
to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due.
Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the Income Tax
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the Income Tax Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
§ 285-13. Disclosure of confidential information.
Any information gained by the Income Tax Officer, his agents or by any
other official or agent of the City of Oil City as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by
the article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 285-14. Establishment of different filing or payment dates.
The Income Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting
and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
§ 285-15. Suit for collection of tax.
The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the City of Oil City for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
§ 285-16. Time for institution of suit.
Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be begun
within three years after such tax is due or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
A. Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under provisions
of this article, there shall be no limitation.
§ 285-11 OIL CITY CODE § 285-16
1:470
§ 285-17. Suit for recovery of erroneous refunds.
The Income Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided that such suit is begun within two years after making such refund,
except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any
part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material
fact.
§ 285-18. Interest and penalty on delinquent taxes.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax, for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 285-19. Violations and penalties.
B. Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person
or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in the
possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there
shall be no limitation.
C. In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or more
and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
D. Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Income Tax
Officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
E. This section shall not be construed to limit the Council of the City of Oil
City from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by
the Local Tax Enabling Act.102
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Income Tax Officer or
any agent designated by said Officer to examine his books, records and
papers; and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or
fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the
full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income, in
order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed
by this article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any court of
competent jurisdiction in Venango County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 285-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-19
1:471
to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of said
fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 285-19 OIL CITY CODE § 285-19
1:472
ARTICLE II
Residence Tax
[Adopted 1-23-1978 by Ord. No. 2355 (Ch. 166, Art. V, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-20. Imposition of tax.
For the fiscal year beginning on the first day of January 1978, and ending
on the 31st day of December 1978, and annually thereafter, a residence tax
shall be and is hereby levied and assessed for general revenue purposes
upon all residents and inhabitants of the City of Oil City over 18 years of
age.
§ 285-21. Amount of tax; payment.
Each resident and inhabitant of the City of Oil City over 18 years of age
shall pay to the City of Oil City for the year 1978, and annually thereafter,
for general revenue purposes, a residence tax of $5.
§ 285-22. City Assessor to prepare list of residents annually.
It shall be the duty of the City Assessor to return annually a list of all
residents and inhabitants of the City of Oil City over 18 years of age. Such
list shall be added to and included in and made part of the tax duplicate and
delivered to the City Treasurer annually.
§ 285-23. Collection of tax by City Treasurer.
The tax herein levied and assessed shall be collected by the City Treasurer
in the manner provided by law for the collection of personal taxes.
§ 285-24. Notice to taxpayers.
Within 30 days after delivery to the City Treasurer of the City of Oil City
of the duplicate of taxes containing a list of residents and inhabitants
aforementioned, the City Treasurer shall give the notice required by law to
each taxable whose name appears on the duplicate delivered to him.
§ 285-25. Adding names to tax duplicate.
If the City Treasurer shall at any time find any resident or inhabitant of
the City of Oil City above the age of 18 years whose name does not appear
on the tax duplicate, he shall forthwith report the name of such person or
persons to the City Assessor. The City Assessor shall thereupon promptly
certify said name or names to the Board of Revision of Taxes and Appeals of
the City of Oil City, which shall then promptly certify such name or names
to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall thereupon add the name and
assessment of such person to the duplicate and proceed to collect the taxes
against such person as herein provided.
§ 285-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-26
1:473
§ 285-26. Authority of Treasurer.
For the collection and enforcement of the taxes herein levied and assessed,
the Treasurer shall have all of the rights and remedies provided by law
for the collection of per capita, residence and occupation taxes in cities of
the Third Class,103 including the right to demand, receive and collect the
same from the employer of each person taxable under the provisions of this
article.
§ 285-27. Discounts and penalties.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the aforementioned residence tax
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such taxes upon
making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the
date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of such
taxes for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a
penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Treasurer
and be collected by him.
§ 285-28. Liability for tax.
All persons over the age of 18 years residing in the City of Oil City on the
first day that this article becomes effective shall be liable for the tax herein
imposed, and all persons over the age of 18 years residing in said City of Oil
City on the first day of January of each year thereafter, during the time this
article remains in effect, shall be liable for such tax.
§ 285-29. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted by the City of Oil City pursuant to the provisions of
the Third Class City Code, 1931, June 23, P.L. 932, and its amendments and
supplements.104
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 37531.
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 285-26 OIL CITY CODE § 285-29
1:474
ARTICLE III
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 1-26-1978 by Ord. No. 2356 (Ch. 166, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth
below:
BUSINESS — Carrying on or exercising for gain or profit within the City
of Oil City any trade, business, including but not limited to profession,
vocation, service, construction, communication or commercial activity or
making sales to persons or rendering services from a place, office or
establishment within the City of Oil City and/or attributable to work done
or services performed within the City of Oil City, regardless of the location
of said place, office or establishment. "Business" shall not include the
following: any business activity or transaction which is subject to the City
of Oil City mercantile license tax;105 any natural person, partnership,
unincorporated association or corporation which is subject to the City of Oil
City license tax; the business of any political subdivision; any employment
for a wage or salary; any business upon which the power to levy a tax is
withheld by law.
CITY — The City of Oil City.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Cash, credits, property of any kind or nature received
in or allocable to or attributable to the City of Oil City from any business
or commercial transaction or services rendered within the City of Oil City,
without deduction therefrom on account or cost of the property sold,
materials used, labor, services or other costs, interest or any other expense.
LICENSE TAX OFFICER — The person authorized and empowered by
Council to assist the City Treasurer in administering and enforcing the
provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation, limited partnership or association. Whenever used in any
provision prescribing a fine or penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations and associations, shall mean the officers thereof.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the City of Oil City.
105. Editor's Note: See Art. IV of this chapter, Mercantile License Tax.
§ 285-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-31
1:475
§ 285-31. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 2720; 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2731]
Every person engaging in any business in the City of Oil City beginning with
the tax year 2006 and annually thereafter shall pay an annual tax at the rate
of 0.375 mills on each dollar of volume of the gross annual receipts thereof.
§ 285-32. Computation of gross annual receipts.
§ 285-33. Registrations and returns.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual
receipts received by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the tax year
1978 or who has commenced his business subsequent to the beginning
of any tax year, for such tax year, shall compute his annual gross
receipts upon the actual gross receipts received by him during the part
of such tax year remaining and on the actual gross receipts of his first
full year for the second full tax year he engages in business, as the case
may be. In case of a business commencing less than one full year prior
to any tax year, the average monthly value of business multiplied by 12
shall be the basis for computing the gross volume of business for the
first full tax year.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual gross receipts
received by him during such tax year.
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall forthwith
register with the City License Tax Officer and set forth his name,
address, business address and the nature of the business activity in
which he is engaged.
B. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Treasurer.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall, on or before April 30, 1978, and annually thereafter,
file with the Treasurer a return setting forth his name, his business and
business address and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the annual gross volume of business transacted by him
during the preceding year and the amount of tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the tax year 1978 shall, on or before April 30, 1978, file with the
§ 285-31 OIL CITY CODE § 285-33
1:476
§ 285-34. Payment of tax.
The tax hereby imposed shall be due and payable to the Treasurer at the
same time the aforesaid returns are required to be filed.
§ 285-35. Powers and duties of Treasurer.
Treasurer a return setting forth his name, his business, business
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual volume of business transacted by him during the period of
operation prior to January 1, 1978, and the amount of tax due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year for such tax year
shall, on or before January 31 of the succeeding tax year, file a return
with the Treasurer setting forth his name, his business, his business
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross volume of business transacted by him during such tax
period and the amount of the tax due.
F. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year shall, on or before
April 30 of the succeeding tax year, file a return with the Treasurer
setting forth his name, his business, his business address and such
other information as may be necessary in arriving at the gross volume
of business for the first full tax year and the amount of tax due. The
average monthly volume of business transacted in the preceding year
multiplied by 12 shall be the basis for computing the gross volume of
business for the first full tax year.
G. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the Treasurer setting forth his name, his
business, his business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business during the
tax period and the amount of the tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him for each
person paying the tax, the period for which such payment was made
and the date of such receipt.
B. The Treasurer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
of returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
§ 285-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-35
1:477
§ 285-36. City License Tax Officer.
The City Assessor, who acts and shall act as the License Tax Officer of the
City of Oil City, and who is herein sometimes referred to as the "Collector,"
shall assist the City Treasurer in administering and enforcing the provisions
of this article.
§ 285-37. Examination of books and records.
The City Treasurer or the City License Tax Officer shall have authority
to examine the books, papers and records of any taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Treasurer or City
License Tax Officer the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
§ 285-38. Suit for collection; penalty.
§ 285-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2451]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his
custody or control, when the right to make such inspection by the Treasurer
or License Tax Officer is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a
return required by this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of said fine or costs, to be imprisoned in the Venango
County jail for a period not exceeding 90 days for each offense.
§ 285-40. Saving clause.
aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer shall have the right to
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Venango County, Pennsylvania,
as in other cases provided.
A. The Treasurer or City License Tax Officer may sue for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, business or
any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the City
§ 285-35 OIL CITY CODE § 285-40
1:478
§ 285-41. Payments under protest; refunds.
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of business tax claimed by the City in any case where the
taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the City's claim for tax. If
it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable
to cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court
of competent jurisdiction and where payment by the taxpayer has been
made under protest.
§ 285-42. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, and its amendments.106
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
the laws or Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
decision of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose the
taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other persons as
herein provided.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 285-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-42
1:479

ARTICLE IV
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 1-26-1978 by Ord. No. 2357 (Ch. 166, Art. III, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-43. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BROKER — Any merchandise broker, factor or commission merchant
but shall not include any stockbroker, bill broker, note broker, exchange
broker, real estate broker or agent, or pawnbroker.
BUSINESS, TRADES, OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS AND
MERCHANDISING OPERATIONS — Those enterprises engaged in by
merchants or merchandisers, social and fraternal clubs with permanent
club rooms, publishers of newspapers, magazines and periodicals,
printers, lithographers, processors, hotel operators, motel operators,
restaurants or other eating or drinking establishments, warehousemen,
upholsterers, radio stations, physicians, lawyers, dentists, engineers,
doctors, architects, chemists, chiropractors, chiropodists, morticians,
certified public accountants, accountants, promoters, factors, real
estate brokers, barbershop operators, beauty shop operators, cleaning,
pressing and dyeing establishment operators, laundry operators,
launderette operators, shoe repair shop operators, tailors,
seamstresses, electrical, plastering, bricklaying, carpentry, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and painting contractors, contractors engaged in
the class of heavy building or other construction of any kind, or in the
alteration, maintenance or repair thereof, individuals engaged in the
repair of electrical, electronic and automotive machinery or equipment
or other machinery and equipment and other wares and merchandise,
and all other business, trades, occupations and professions in which
there is offered any service or services to the general public or a
product or products offered for sale to the general public or a portion
thereof. These terms shall also include those persons or entities which
lease real estate to others for either commercial or residential
purposes.*[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
CITY — The area within the corporate limits of the City of Oil
City.[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
CITY LICENSE TAX OFFICER — The person authorized and empowered
by Council to assist the City Treasurer in administering and enforcing
the provisions of this article.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax
herein imposed.[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
§ 285-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-43
1:481
FISCAL YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December
31.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period corresponding to the fiscal
year of the City of Oil City, which begins on the first day of January of
each year.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation.*
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public, or a limited or selected number thereof, may, upon
payment of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement,
entertainment, exhibition, contest, recreation, including among other
places theaters, opera houses, motion-picture houses, baseball or
football parks or fields, skating rinks, dance halls and other like places.
The term "place of amusement" does not include any exhibition,
amusement, performance or contest conducted by a nonprofit
corporation or association organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer
in or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise but is not a wholesale
dealer or wholesale vendor.*
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted at one location for less than six months in any
calendar year.[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the City of Oil City.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to
no other person.*
* NOTE: The terms "person," "wholesale vendor," "wholesale dealer,"
"retail vendor" and "retail dealer" or "business, trades, occupations
and professions" shall not include the following: employees or
agencies of the government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or nonprofit corporations or
associations organized solely and exclusively for religious,
educational or charitable purposes and not conducting any regular
or established business competing commercially with any other
persons subject to the tax herein imposed. [Amended 12-17-2007
by Ord. No. 2748]
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 285-43 OIL CITY CODE § 285-44
1:482
§ 285-44. Imposition of tax.
For the fiscal year of the City of Oil City beginning on the first day of January
1978, the City hereby imposes a mercantile license tax in the manner and
at the rate hereinafter set forth.
§ 285-45. Procuring of business license. [Amended 12-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 2507; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2748]
A. For the tax year beginning January 1, 2008, the City hereby imposes an
annual tax and business license requirements in the manner and at the
fee and rates hereinafter set forth.
(1) Every person desiring to begin a business, trade, occupation,
profession or merchandising operation within the City shall, prior
to the commencement of business, make application for a business
license for each place of business within the City with the Collector,
on a form provided by the Collector, and shall pay the Collector a
business license fee as provided below. Such license shall not be
assignable.
(2) License tax.
(a) Every person desiring to continue to engage in a business,
trade, occupation, profession or merchandising operation
within the City shall pay the Collector a business license tax of
$100, unless the business shall have gross receipts in the
calendar year prior to the year the tax is due of $100,000 or
less, in which event the business license tax due shall be
according to the following fee schedule:
[1] Gross receipts between $5,000 and $100,000: $50.
[2] Gross receipts less than $5,000 or a new business: $25.
(b) The reduced license tax shall only be applicable, however, if
the business shall have first submitted to the Collector a copy
of IRS Form Schedule C and/or Schedule E, stating the gross
receipts of the business for the year prior to the year the tax is
due, or such other form or schedule that is acceptable to the
Internal Revenue Service for federal income tax purposes. A
new business venture in the City shall not be required to
furnish any evidence of gross receipts to the Collector and will
automatically be assessed the lower tax fee.
B. Any business license that has been issued may be revoked or suspended
at any time by the City Manager or his designee if it is determined that
the holder secured the license by misrepresentation; failed to maintain
any qualifications required by federal, state or local laws; engaged in
fraudulent or misleading advertising; consented to or allowed any
behavior which would constitute a crime under federal, state or local
laws, including but not limited to drug trafficking or drug possession;
§ 285-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-45
1:483
§ 285-46. Rate of tax.
Every person engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses
in the City shall pay a mercantile license tax for the fiscal year of the City
beginning on the first day of January 1978 at the rate set forth:
committed an act of gross negligence, or allowed any manner of public
nuisance.
C. Any temporary, seasonal or itinerant business shall be subject to
Chapter 225 of the Code of the City of Oil City relating to peddling or
soliciting.
D. All renewals of business licenses by businesses that continue to operate
in a new tax year shall be due on or before April 1. Any renewal that is
not received by May 1 of the new tax year will result in a penalty that is
equal to the cost of the original business license fee. If the person
responsible for the business, trade, occupation, profession or
merchandising operation shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
of the provisions of this section, he shall, upon conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction in the matter, be guilty of
a summary offense and be fined an amount not more than $300 plus
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, be subject to
imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days. The fine imposed
above shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other
part of this section.
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the
rate of 0.25 mills on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
business transacted by them. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2720; 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2731107]
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise; all persons
engaged in conducting restaurants or other places where food, drink or
refreshments are sold, whether or not the same is incidental to other
business or occupation; and all persons conducting places of
amusement, whether or not the same is incidental to some other
business or occupation, at the rate of 0.375 mills on each dollar of the
volume of the annual gross business transacted by them. [Amended
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2720; 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2731]
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise, at the rate of 0.25 mills on each dollar of the volume of
the annual gross wholesale business transacted by them and 0.375 mills
on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross retail business
transacted by them. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2720;
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2731]
107. Editor's Note: This article provided that said rate is effective 1-1-2007.
§ 285-45 OIL CITY CODE § 285-46
1:484
§ 285-47. Computation of volume of business.
§ 285-48. Filing of returns.
D. Brokers, at the rate of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the annual gross
business transacted by them. In the case of brokers, the term "gross
business transacted" shall mean gross commissions earned.
E. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume of
annual business covering the resale of the goods, wares or merchandise
taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one year prior to the beginning of the
license year shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding fiscal year of the City of Oil City.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of the license year shall compute his annual gross
volume of business for such license year upon the gross volume of
business transacted by him during the first month he engages in
business multiplied by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the license
year shall compute his annual gross volume of business for such license
year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the
first month of his engaging in business multiplied by the number of
months he engages in business in such license year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall compute his gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during such license year.
E. Every person who shall discontinue business during the license year
after having paid the mercantile tax for the entire year, upon making
proper application to the Treasurer, shall be entitled to receive a refund
of a pro rata amount of the tax paid, based upon the period of time he
was not in business during the license year.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the City License
Tax Officer. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness
thereof by affidavit.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
the license year shall, on or before the 30th day of April of said year, file
§ 285-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-48
1:485
§ 285-49. Payment of tax.
At the time of the filing of the return, the person making the same shall pay
the amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Treasurer of the City of Oil
City.
§ 285-50. Powers and duties of Treasurer.
with the City License Tax Officer of the City of Oil City a return setting
forth his name, business, business address, such other information as
may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the preceding fiscal year, and the amount of
tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the license year shall, on or before the 30th day of April of said year,
file with the City License Tax Officer a return setting forth his name,
business, business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business transacted
by him during his first month of business and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the license year shall, within
40 days from the date of commencing of such business or on or before
the 30th day of April of said year, whichever date is later, file a return
with the City License Tax Officer setting forth his name, business,
business address and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross volume of business transacted by him
during his first month of business and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the City License Tax Officer setting forth his
name, business, business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business transacted
by him during such period and the amount of tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person paying the tax, the period for which such payment was made
and the date of such receipt.
B. The Treasurer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
of returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
§ 285-48 OIL CITY CODE § 285-50
1:486
§ 285-51. City License Tax Officer.
The City Assessor, who acts and shall act as the License Tax Officer of the
City of Oil City and who is herein sometimes referred to as the "Collector,"
shall assist the City Treasurer in administering and enforcing the provisions
of this article.
§ 285-52. Examination of books and records.
The City Treasurer or the City License Tax Officer shall have the authority
to examine the books, papers and records of any taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Treasurer or City
License Tax Officer the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examinations and investigations as hereby are authorized.
§ 285-53. Compliance with other ordinances by persons engaged in
temporary, seasonal or itinerant vending.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve
any person who engages in a business or occupation, temporary, seasonal
or itinerant by its nature, from the duty of complying with the provisions
of other valid ordinances of the City of Oil City regulating and licensing
transient wholesale and retail merchants within the City.
§ 285-54. Compliance with other ordinances by circuses and
carnivals.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve
any person who engages in conducting or operating in the City any show,
circus, menagerie, carnival or other public exhibition for pay under tent,
canvas or other temporary structure from the duty of complying with the
provisions of other ordinances of the City of Oil City regulating such shows,
circuses, menageries, carnivals and other public exhibitions for pay
conducted under tent, canvas or other temporary structure.
§ 285-55. Suit for collection; penalty.
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Treasurer shall have the right to
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Venango County, Pennsylvania,
as in other cases provided.
A. The Treasurer or City License Tax Officer may sue for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and
§ 285-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-55
1:487
§ 285-56. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
2451]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his
custody or control, when the right to make such inspection by the Treasurer
or License Tax Officer is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a
return required by this article, and whoever fails or refuses to apply for and
procure a mercantile license when so required under this article or fails to
keep his license conspicuously posted at his place of business as required
herein shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300 for each offense and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
said fine or costs, to be imprisoned in the Venango County jail for a period
not exceeding 90 days for each offense.
§ 285-57. Saving clause.
§ 285-58. Payments under protest; refunds.
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of mercantile tax claimed by the City in any case where
the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the City's claim for tax. If
it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
that the City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable
to cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court
of competent jurisdiction and where payment by the taxpayer has been
made under protest.
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax,
the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, business or
any portion of any business not within the taxing power of the City
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the laws or Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
decision of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose the
taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other persons as
herein provided.
§ 285-55 OIL CITY CODE § 285-59
1:488
§ 285-59. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, and its amendments, and under the authority of the Third Class
City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.108
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 285-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-59
1:489

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 2460109 (Ch. 166, Art. IX, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 285-60. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City
of Oil City."
§ 285-61. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
City of Oil City, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 285-62. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor; land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid, or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years; or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 285-61 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
109. Editor's Note: This article also provided that it shall be effective on 4-13-1987.
§ 285-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-62
1:491
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the City of Oil City,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 285-62 OIL CITY CODE § 285-62
1:492
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
D.
§ 285-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-62
1:493
§ 285-63. Imposition of tax.
§ 285-64. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 285-65. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by the City of Oil City under the
authority of that act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the City of Oil City; provided, however, that the City of Oil City and any
other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 285-63 shall not be imposed upon:
§ 285-62 OIL CITY CODE § 285-65
1:494
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the
condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of
record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance
is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the City of Oil City is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 285-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-65
1:495
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 285-65 OIL CITY CODE § 285-65
1:496
§ 285-66. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided herein, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 285-67. Acquired companies.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 285-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-67
1:497
§ 285-68. Credits against tax.
§ 285-69. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 285-70. Proceeds of judicial sales.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 285-67 OIL CITY CODE § 285-70
1:498
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 285-71. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 285-72. Statement of value required.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 285-73. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount taxable to the City of Oil
City based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the City of Oil City.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
City of Oil City all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of
the county, together with a report containing the information as is
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 285-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-73
1:499
§ 285-74. Tax to become a lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the City of Oil City, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article; said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Venango County
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 285-75. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 285-76. Promulgation and enforcement of additional regulations.
The City Treasurer of the City of Oil City is charged with enforcement
and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into and made
a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is not for more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 285-73 OIL CITY CODE § 285-76
1:500
ARTICLE VI
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 2560 (Ch. 166, Art. X, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-77. Imposition of tax.
For the fiscal year beginning on the first day of January 1993, and
continuing on the first day of each year thereafter, a per capita tax shall be
and is hereby levied and assessed for general revenue purposes upon all
residents and inhabitants of the City of Oil City, male and female, over 18
years of age.
§ 285-78. Amount of tax.
Each resident and inhabitant of the City of Oil City over 18 years of age,
male and female, shall pay to the City of Oil City for general revenue
purposes a per capita tax of $10.
§ 285-79. Tax roll.
It shall be the duty of the City Assessor to return annually a list of all the
residents and inhabitants of the City of Oil City, male and female, over 18
years of age. Such list shall be added to, included in and made a part of the
tax duplicate and delivered to the City Treasurer annually.
§ 285-80. Collection.
The tax herein levied and assessed shall be collected by the City Treasurer
in the manner provided by law for the collection of personal taxes.
§ 285-81. Notice of tax due.
Within 30 days after delivery to the City Treasurer of the duplicate taxes
containing a list of residents and inhabitants aforementioned, the City
Treasurer shall give the notice required by law to each taxable whose name
appears on the duplicate delivered to him.
§ 285-82. Additions to tax list.
If the City Treasurer shall at any time find any resident or inhabitant of
the City of Oil City above the age of 18 years whose name does not appear
upon the tax duplicate, he shall forthwith report the name of such person
or persons to the City Assessor. The City Assessor shall thereupon promptly
certify the same name or names to the Board of Revision of Taxes and
Appeals of the City of Oil City, which shall then promptly certify such name
or names to the City Treasurer. The Treasurer shall thereupon add the name
and assessment of such person to the duplicate and proceed to collect the
taxes against such person as herein provided.
§ 285-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-83
1:501
§ 285-83. Powers and duties of Treasurer.
For the collection and enforcement of the taxes herein levied and assessed,
the Treasurer shall have all of the rights and remedies provided by law for
the collection of per capita, residence and occupation taxes in cities of the
third class, including the right to demand, receive and collect the same from
the employer of the person taxable under the provisions of this article.
§ 285-84. Discount for timely payment; penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the aforementioned per capita tax
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such taxes upon
making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the
date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of such
taxes for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a
penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Treasurer
and be collected by him.
§ 285-85. Husband to be liable.
Every husband against whose wife a per capita tax is levied shall be liable
for the payment of such taxes. Collection from such husband may be made
and enforced in the manner provided by law for the collection and
enforcement of payment of other taxes by such husband, including the
collection thereof from the husband's employer.
§ 285-86. Residency requirement.
All persons, male and female, over the age of 18 years, residing in the City
of Oil City on October 1, 1993, shall be liable for the tax herein imposed;
and all persons, male and female, over the age of 18 years, residing in the
City of Oil City on the first day of each year thereafter during the time this
article remains in effect shall be liable for such tax.
§ 285-87. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted by the City of Oil City pursuant to the provisions of
the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania approved the
31st day of December 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the "Local Tax Enabling
Act,"110 and the supplements and amendments thereto; and the tax herein
levied and assessed shall be in addition to other taxes levied and assessed
by the City of Oil City, including, by way of illustration and not limitation,
the residence tax levied by the City against residents and inhabitants of said
City under the provisions of the Third Class City Code.111
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 285-83 OIL CITY CODE § 285-87
1:502
ARTICLE VII
Property Assessment
[Adopted 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2680112 (Ch. 166, Art. VI, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-88. Statutory provisions; ratio.
In conformity with the provisions of Article I, Section 104 of The Fourth to
Eighth Class County Assessment Law, the Council of the City of Oil City does
hereby elect to subject the City to the provision of the Act of 1943, May 21,
P.L. 571 (72 P.S. § 5453.101 et seq.113), as amended, and known and cited as
"The Fourth to Eighth Class County Assessment Law." The City also elects
to adopt a 100% ratio to the market valuation supplied by the County of
Venango for assessment purposes.
112. Editor's Note: This article also superseded former Art. VI, Property Assessment and
Revision, adopted 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 2377, as amended. It also provided that it shall
be operative for the fiscal year beginning 1-1-2003 and thereafter.
113. Editor's Note: 72 P.S. §§ 5453.101 to 5453.107 was repealed by 2010, Oct. 27, P.L. 895, No.
93, effective 1-1-2011. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8868 for provisions related to consolidated
county assessment and use by cities.
§ 285-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-88
1:503

ARTICLE VIII
Property Tax Exemptions
[Adopted 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2725 (Ch. 166, Art. VII, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 285-89. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning set forth below:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — A property subject to a governmental order
requiring the property to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason
of noncompliance with law, ordinance or regulations and/or a property that
does not meet minimum standards for habitability, safety, health, economic
use and/or amenity.[Amended 5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
CITY — The City of Oil City.[Amended 5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The City of Oil City, the Oil City Area School
District, and Venango County, or any other governmental entity having the
authority to levy real property taxes within the City of Oil City.[Amended
5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
DETERIORATED AREA — An area, the boundaries of which are determined
by the City, in which improvements to deteriorated properties are eligible
for tax exemption.[Added 5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations or additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
§ 285-90. Exemption area.
§ 285-91. Exemption amount.
A. The Council of the City of Oil City does hereby affix the boundaries of
the deteriorated areas to be all those parcels of land located within the
City limits of the City of Oil City.
B. All commercial, industrial or local business properties located in the
City may be eligible to participate in this tax exemption program.
A. The amount to be exempted shall be limited to that portion of the
additional assessment attributable to the actual cost of new
construction or improvements to the deteriorated property.
B. The exemption for taxes shall be limited to the additional assessment
valuation attributable to the actual cost of the new construction or
improvements. No tax exemption shall be granted or continued if:
[Amended 5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
§ 285-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-91
1:505
§ 285-92. Exemption schedule; exemption to run with property.
(1) The taxpayer does not secure the necessary and proper permits
and/or approvals prior to improving the property.
(2) The property as completed does not comply with the minimum
standards of the housing, building and zoning codes of the City of
Oil City.
(3) All property taxes imposed upon all properties owned by the
taxpayer or the taxpayer's subsidiaries, affiliates, other associated
holdings or business entities in the City of Oil City are not current.
(4) All fees for municipal services (including, but not limited to, water,
sewer and trash collection services) are not current for all
properties owned in the City of Oil City by the taxpayer or the
taxpayer's subsidiaries, affiliates or other associated holdings or
business entities.
(5) The exemption from real estate taxes provided under this article
shall be forfeited by the taxpayer and/or any subsequent owner of
the subject property for failure to pay nonexempt real estate taxes
by their due date.
C. In any case after the effective date of this article where deteriorated
property is damaged, destroyed or demolished by any cause or for any
reason and the assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of said damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall
be limited to that portion of new assessment attributable to the actual
cost of new construction or improvements that is in excess of the
original assessment that existed prior to damage, destruction or
demolition of the property.
A. Schedule. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2753]
(1) The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in
accordance with the portion of improvements to be exempted each
year as set forth below:
Length Portion
1st year 100%
2nd year 100%
3rd year 100%
4th year 90%
5th year 75%
6th year 60%
7th year 45%
8th year 30%
§ 285-91 OIL CITY CODE § 285-92
1:506
§ 285-93. Notice to taxpayers.
Length Portion
9th year 20%
10th year 10%
(2) After the 10th year, the exemption shall terminate.
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
C. Any exemptions previously approved under this article prior to the
effective date of this amendment shall not be affected or modified by
the amendments hereto. [Added 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2753]
A. There shall be placed on or with the form application for the building,
zoning and alteration permits the following language:
Notice to Taxpayers
Under the provisions of Ordinance No. 2725, you may be entitled
to a property tax exemption on your contemplated alteration or new
construction of deteriorated industrial, commercial or other business
property. An application for exemption may be obtained from the Code
Enforcement Office and must be filed with the City of Oil City at the
time a building or alteration permit is secured.
B. At the time a building or alteration permit is secured for the
construction of an improvement for which an exemption is requested,
the taxpayer shall apply to City Council for the exemption provided for
in this article. A certified request for the exemption must be in writing
as prescribed by the City setting forth the following information:
[Amended 5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
(1) The location (address) of the property to be improved.
(2) The use being made and to be made of the property.
(3) Whether or not the property has been condemned, ordered to be
vacated or demolished, or the subject of any citation, sanction or
penalty issued by any governmental body or agency for
noncompliance with any laws, regulations, codes and/or
ordinances.
(4) Attach a certification that the property has been inspected and
examined by the City's Code Enforcement Officer.
(5) The date the building permit or alteration permit was issued for
said new construction or improvements.
(6) The type of new construction or improvement.
§ 285-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-93
1:507
§ 285-94. Procedure for obtaining exemption. [Amended 5-23-2013
by Ord. No. 2819]
A copy of the request for exemption shall be forwarded to the Venango
County Assessment Office by the City. Upon completion of the improvement
or new construction, the taxpayer shall notify the City so that the City
may have the County Assessor assess the improvements separately for the
purpose of calculating the amount of assessment eligible for tax exemption
in accordance with the limits established in this article. The City will then
obtain from the County Assessor the amount of the assessment eligible for
exemption and will then notify the taxpayer. Appeals from the reassessment
and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer
or the City, as provided by applicable law or as may be stipulated by any
regulations adopted by the County for handling appeals of tax assessments.
After the initial assessment and an initial appeal, if one is undertaken, the
applicant waives the right to appeal the assessment for the term of the
program or exemption.
§ 285-95. Rules and regulations. [Added 5-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2819]
The Council of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and empowered to
prepare, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations to implement this
article. Such rules and regulations shall have the full force and effect of law
unless modified, revoked or repealed by Council.
§ 285-96. Termination. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2753;
5-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2819]
Unless otherwise repealed by Council, this article shall terminate on June
30, 2018. Nothing contained herein shall act to prohibit the Council of the
City of Oil City from enacting a similar ordinance or extending this one. Any
property tax exemptions granted under the provisions of this article shall
be permitted to continue according to the exemption schedule even if this
article expires or is repealed.
§ 285-97. Effective date.
This article shall become effective May 1, 2006.
(7) The summary of the plan of the new construction or improvement.
(8) The estimated cost of the new construction or improvement.
(9) The estimated date the new construction or improvement will be
completed.
(10) Any or all such additional information as may be required to
process the application for exemption.
§ 285-93 OIL CITY CODE § 285-97
1:508
ARTICLE IX
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-28-2007 by Ord. No. 2742]
§ 285-98. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CITY OF OIL CITY — The area within the corporate limits of the City of Oil
City.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.114
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.115
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 285-99 of this article.
114. Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act was repealed as of June 30, 2012.
Pursuant to Section 23 of Act 32 of 2008, a new chapter, Chapter 5, Consolidated
Collection of Local Income Taxes, was added to the Local Tax Enabling Act. The definitions
of “earned income” and “net profits” are now contained in Section 501 of that chapter (53
P.S. § 6924.501).
115. Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act was repealed as of June 30, 2012.
Pursuant to Section 23 of Act 32 of 2008, a new chapter, Chapter 5, Consolidated
Collection of Local Income Taxes, was added to the Local Tax Enabling Act. The definitions
of “earned income” and “net profits” are now contained in Section 501 of that chapter (53
P.S. § 6924.501).
§ 285-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-98
1:509
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 285-99. Levy of tax.
§ 285-100. Exemptions.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon those individuals engaged
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the City of
Oil City during the tax year. Each person who exercises such privilege
for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year
in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes as the same may be allocated by the City of Oil City
from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85,
Subchapter F.116
B. The City of Oil City shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from
the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes
of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision. The
tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
116. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 285-98 OIL CITY CODE § 285-100
1:510
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subparagraph, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
§ 285-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-100
1:511
§ 285-101. Refunds.
The City of Oil City shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law
relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the
employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar
year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be
made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
City of Oil City shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
§ 285-102. Duty of employers to collect.
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax. However, in
accordance with § 285-108, employers shall furnish to the City or
its Collector, at its request, any payroll records that can
demonstrate compliance with this article.
A. Each employer within the City of Oil City, as well as those employers
situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in business
within the City of Oil City, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting
the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for
him within the political subdivision and making a return and payment
thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to
deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ, whether said
employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all
such services are performed within the political subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
§ 285-100 OIL CITY CODE § 285-102
1:512
§ 285-103. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of
a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
paragraph, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the City of Oil City if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 285-100B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 285-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-104
1:513
§ 285-104. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 285-105. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the City of Oil City shall be required to comply with this
article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 285-106. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more
than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim
to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:
§ 285-107. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services of
any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the City of
Oil City do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of the City of
Oil City. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the City of
Oil City and an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of
this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event his or
her tax is not paid, the City of Oil City shall have the option of proceeding
against either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as
hereinafter provided.
A. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
B. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year
declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima
facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 285-104 OIL CITY CODE § 285-108
1:514
§ 285-108. Administration of tax.
§ 285-109. Suits for collection.
§ 285-110. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
A. The Collector shall be appointed by the City of Oil City in accordance
with the City Code. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and
receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person,
together with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to City approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of
payroll records of any employer subject to this article, the examination
and correction of any return made in compliance with this article and
any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998.117
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 285-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-110
1:515
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business or any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 285-111. Interpretation.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
of Oil City to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the City of Oil City under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 285-110 OIL CITY CODE § 285-111
1:516
ARTICLE X
Exemptions for Improvements to Deteriorated Property
[Adopted 5-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2811]
§ 285-112. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
DETERIORATED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A dwelling unit located in
a deteriorated neighborhood or a dwelling unit which has been, or upon
request is, certified by the Bureau of Code and Zoning as unfit for human
habitation for rent withholding or other health or welfare purposes or has
been the subject of an order by the Bureau of Code and Zoning requiring the
unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance
with laws, ordinances or regulations, regardless of whether the property
resides within a deteriorated neighborhood. Deteriorated residential
property may also include any residential property owned by the City of Oil
City Redevelopment Authority, regardless of whether the property resides
within a deteriorated neighborhood.
DWELLING UNIT — Unless otherwise defined in the ordinance or
resolution providing for tax exemption, a house, apartment or group of
rooms intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by family or other
groups or a person living alone, containing a kitchen or cooking equipment
for the exclusive use of the occupants.
DETERIORATED NEIGHBORHOOD or DETERIORATED AREA — That
portion of the City which the City determines to be physically blighted on
the basis of one or more of the following standards:
The residential buildings, by reason of age, obsolescence, inadequate
or outmoded design or physical deterioration, have become economic
and/or social liabilities.
A.
The residential buildings are substandard or unsanitary for healthful
and safe living purposes.
B.
The residential buildings are overcrowded, poorly spaced, or are so
lacking in light, space and air as to be conducive to unwholesome living.
C.
The residential buildings are faultily arranged, cover the land to an
excessive extent or show a deleterious use of land, or exhibit any
combination of the above which is detrimental to health, safety or
welfare.
D.
A significant percentage of buildings used for residential purposes is
more than 20 years of age.
E.
A substantial amount of unimproved, overgrown and unsightly vacant
land exists which has remained so for a period of five years or more,
indicating a growing or total lack of utilization of land for residential
purposes.
F.
§ 285-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-112
1:517
RESIDENTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction,
including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a
structure so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of
housing safety, health or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing housing standards. Ordinary upkeep
and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION — The building or erection of dwelling
units, as defined in this section, upon vacant land or land specifically
prepared to receive such structures.
§ 285-113. Properties, neighborhoods or areas exemption.
There is hereby exempted from all property taxation that portion of any
assessment valuation directly attributable to residential construction or
residential improvements within the following areas of the City, authorized
by City Council, in the amounts and in accordance with the schedules and
limitations provided in § 285-114 below:
§ 285-114. Exemption.
A disproportionate number of tax-exempt or delinquent properties exist
in the area. "Deteriorated neighborhood" means those areas of the City
which the City determines to be physically blighted by using the criteria
published in the act of May 24, 1945 (P.L. 991, No. 385), known as the
"Urban Redevelopment Law," for the determination of "blighted areas,"
and the act of November 29, 1967 (P.L. 636, No. 292), known as the
"Neighborhood Assistance Act," for the determination of "impoverished
areas."
G.
A. Residential improvement to any deteriorated residential property or
dwelling unit located wholly or partially within the following zoning
designations:
(1) R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts.
(2) R-2 Medium Density Residential Districts.
(3) RO Residential Office Districts.
(4) C-2 Downtown Business Districts (restricted to upper-floor
residential uses)
B. Residential construction built in any deteriorated neighborhoods or
deteriorated areas, located wholly or partially within the zoning
designations set forth above in Subsection A.
A. Residential construction.
(1) The City will grant a tax exemption on that portion of any
assessment valuation attributable to the actual cost of residential
construction of a new dwelling unit within a deteriorated
neighborhood or deteriorated area, as defined above.
§ 285-112 OIL CITY CODE § 285-114
1:518
(2) The amount of taxes exempt for residential construction shall be in
accordance with the following schedule for the eligible assessment
in the first nine years during which improvements become
assessable:
Length Portion
1st year 100%
2nd year 100%
3rd year 100%
4th year 100%
5th year 100%
6th year 80%
7th year 60%
8th year 40%
9th year 20%
After the 9th year, the exemption shall terminate.
B. Residential improvement.
(1) The City will grant a tax exemption on that portion of any
assessment valuation attributable to the actual cost of residential
improvement to a dwelling unit within a deteriorated neighborhood
or deteriorated area, as defined above.
(2) The amount of taxes exempt for residential improvement shall be in
accordance with the following schedule for the eligible assessment
in the first five years during which the improvement becomes
assessable:
Length Portion
1st year 100%
2nd year 80%
3rd year 60%
4th year 40%
5th year 20%
After the 5th year, the exemption shall terminate.
C. If a residential property is granted tax exemption pursuant to this
article, any improvements shall not during the exemption period be
considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
D. The date of the residential improvement or construction shall be the
date of issuance of the building permit, improvement record or other
required notification of construction. The exemption shall commence in
the tax year immediately following the year in which the building
permit, improvement record or other notification is issued.
§ 285-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-114
1:519
§ 285-115. Procedure for obtaining tax exemption.
E. A separate request for exemption will be made for each new
construction or improvement, and each exemption requested will be
evaluated by the County Tax Assessment Office. No tax exemption shall
be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary and
proper permits prior to improving or building upon the property. No tax
exemption shall be granted if the property as completed does not
comply with the minimum standards of the Housing and Building Codes
of the City of Oil City.
F. In any case after the effective date of this section where deteriorated
property is damaged, destroyed or demolished by any cause or for any
reason and the assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of such damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall
be limited to that portion of new assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvement or construction that is in excess of the original
assessment that existed prior to damage, destruction or demolition of
the property.
G. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property, unless otherwise provided in this article.
H. To facilitate the monitoring of this tax exemption program and to ensure
all tax exemptions end after the nine-year exemption period, the City
Department of Finance, in conjunction with the City Treasurer, will
establish a system for auditing, tracking and managing all tax
exemptions within the City.
I. Sunset provision. This article shall expire nine years from the date of its
passage unless otherwise extended by act of City Council as permitted
by law. Not later than 90 days prior to the expiration date of this article,
City Council will consider the expiration or continuation of this article,
with any required modifications. The terms and exemption periods of
this article will remain applicable to all residential properties granted
tax exemptions prior to the termination of this article.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article should apply
to the City at the time a building permit is secured for improvement of
deteriorated property or residential construction, as the case may be.
(1) The application must be in writing upon forms specified by the City,
setting forth the following information:
(a) The date the building permit was issued for such improvement
or construction;
(b) The location of the property to be improved or built;
(c) The nature of the property to be improved or built;
§ 285-114 OIL CITY CODE § 285-115
1:520
(d) The type of improvements;
(e) The summary of the plan of the improvements;
(f) The cost of the improvements;
(g) Whether the property has been condemned by any
governmental body for noncompliance to laws or ordinances;
(h) Whether the property has been inspected and verified by the
Bureau of Code and Zoning; and
(i) Such additional information as the City may require.
(2) There shall be on the form application for a building permit the
following notice:
Notice to Taxpayer
By Ordinance No. 2811, you may be entitled to exemption from
tax on your contemplated improvement or construction by
reassessment. An application for exemption may be secured from
the Building Inspector or other properly designated official and
must be filed at the time the building permit is secured.
B. A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded to the Venango
County Tax Assessment Office by the Bureau of Code and Zoning. Upon
completion of the improvement or construction, the taxpayer shall
notify the City so that the City may have the County Assessor assess the
improvement separately for the purpose of calculating the amount of
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established in this article. The City will then obtain from the County
Assessor the amount of the assessment eligible for exemption and will
then notify the taxpayer. The City Treasurer shall keep a separate list of
all such exempted properties, and upon receipt of the assessments for
each property from the Bureau of Code and Zoning, the City Treasurer
shall see to it that each such exempted property is credited with its
proper exemption as against the County Assessment figure.
C. The cost of residential improvement or construction, per dwelling unit
of residential properties to be exempted, and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption
shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent
amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated
prior to their adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the City or by the taxpayer as provided by
law.
§ 285-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-116
1:521
§ 285-116. Revocation of exemption privileges.
The tax exemption from real estate taxes provided in this article shall be
forfeited by the applicant and/or any subsequent owner of the real estate for
failure to pay nonexempt real estate taxes by December 31 of the year the
taxes become due. Upon receipt of notice for nonpayment of nonexempt real
estate taxes, the City Department of Finance shall direct the City Treasurer
to discontinue the tax exemption.
§ 285-117. Delegation.
Appropriate City officials are authorized and directed to take such actions
as are necessary to effectuate this article.
§ 285-116 OIL CITY CODE § 285-117
1:522
Chapter 290
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 154.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 290-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Shade Tree Ordinance
of the City of Oil City."
§ 290-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings as set forth below:
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — A tree's diameter in inches
measured by a diameter tape at 4 1/2 feet from the surface of the
ground. On trees having multiple stems, the largest diameter stem will
be measured.
DRIPLINE — The approximately circular vertical extension to the
ground of the outermost branches and/or leaves of the tree as an
indication of the spread of the root system.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
HAZARD (FALL) ZONE OF A TREE — The area inside a circle whose
radius is equal to the height of the tree, the center being the trunk.
HAZARD TREE — A tree with structural defects likely to cause failure
of all or part of the tree which could fall within a public right-of-way.
LANDMARK TREE —
The Shade Tree Committee shall determine whether a tree
qualifies as a "landmark tree." A tree may qualify as a landmark
tree if it meets one or more of the following criteria:118
(1)
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 285-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:523
LARGE TREES — Designated as those attaining a height at maturity of
45 feet or more.
MEDIUM TREES — Designated as those attaining a height at maturity
of 30 feet to 45 feet.
MEMORIAL TREE — A tree planted in the name of a resident of the City
who has died, including those who died while in the military service of
the United States or in consequence thereof. Such trees shall bear some
permanent indication of their purpose.
PARKS — Includes any City public spaces designated recreation,
conservation, forestry and/or riparian areas.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
PROPERTY LINE — The legal boundary line between private and City
owned land.
PROPERTY OWNER — That person owning such property as recorded
by the Venango County Recorder's office.
PUBLIC SITE — Includes any other grounds owned by the City.
PUBLIC TREES — Includes all trees now or hereafter growing on any
street, park or any other public or City owned site, including but not
limited to memorial trees and municipal forestlands.
REMOVE or REMOVAL — The removal of all aboveground parts,
including the stump and visible roots, so that the parts shall not project
above the surface of the soil line measured at one inch below the
ground.
SMALL TREES — Designated as those attaining a height at maturity of
under 30 feet.
STREETS — Includes all the public streets, avenues, lanes, routes,
alleys, highways or other public ways and shall mean the entire width
(a) The species is rare.
(b) The tree is more than 100 years of age.
The tree is of extraordinary height or has an extraordinary
trunk diameter for a tree species or has extraordinary foliage;
a unique tree for its species.
(c)
The location; the historical significance, shade value,
fragrance, erosion control, aesthetic features or scenic
enhancement of such a tree is of special importance to the City.
(d)
All City trees that are designated as "landmark trees" shall be
shown on the official Landmark Tree Register managed and
maintained by the Shade Tree Committee, with a duplicate copy on
file with the Public Works Department, the Planning Commission
and the public library, and shall be reviewed yearly.
(2)
§ 290-2 OIL CITY CODE § 290-2
1:524
§ 290-3. Creation and establishment of Shade Tree Commission.
§ 290-4. Appropriation, revenues and Council intent.
of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, including the areas between the sidewalks and the
curb on any of the streets and/or legal street right-of-ways and Cityowned
property.
TREE or SHADE TREE — A tree in or on a City street, City-owned
property or forestry lands, as that term is defined herein:
TREE LAWN — That part of a street right-of-way not covered by a
sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that
portion of the street usually used for vehicular traffic or the public
right-of-way directly in front of said property. Owners of properties
directly behind said tree lawn or public right-of-way are responsible for
all maintenance of said tree lawn and trees contained within that space.
Any living plant with needles or scale-type leaves that has a welldefined
stem or stems with a diameter of at least six inches at 4 1/
2 feet from the surface of the ground.
(1)
Any living, self-supporting woody broadleaf plant that has a welldefined
stem or stems with a diameter of at least two inches at 4 1/
2 feet from the surface of the ground.
(2)
Any living self-supporting woody plant that has a well-defined stem
or stems which has been intentionally cultivated and established.
(3)
A. There is hereby created and established a Shade Tree Commission for
the City of Oil City, which shall be composed of five residents of the City
of Oil City, who shall be appointed by the City Manager, with advice and
consent of City Council, and shall serve without compensation for a
term of five years. On the expiration of the term of any Commissioner, a
successor shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and
consent of City Council. Vacancies in the office of Commissioner shall
be filled by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, for the unexpired term. Any Commissioner having three
unexcused absences within 12 consecutive months shall be considered
as having resigned.
B. Prior to January 31 of each year, the Shade Tree Commission shall meet
and elect a member to serve as Chairman of the Commission. The
Chairman shall have the authority to call and conduct meetings of the
Commission and to receive all permit applications, correspondence,
and other materials on behalf of the Commission.
A. Appropriation. All monies necessary to be expended for the purchase,
maintenance, planting, removal, administration and development of
forestry lands and/or trees shall be appropriated and applied as is now
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:525
§ 290-5. Compensation.
Members of the Tree Commission shall serve without compensation but
shall be entitled to reimbursement for any and all necessary expenditures
in carrying out the duties of said Commission and may retain the services of
qualified professionals as may be necessary to facilitate the function of said
Commission.
§ 290-6. Operation.
§ 290-7. Duties and responsibilities.
done for City purposes. The needed amount shall be certified each year
by the Commission to Council in time for inclusion in the proposed City
budget. City Council may levy a special tax, not to exceed the sum of 1/
10 of one mill of assessed valuation of the property in Oil City. The City
may provide for such expenses by appropriations.
B. Revenues. All revenues and emoluments arising from forestry lands
shall be paid into the City treasury to be used for general City purposes.
C. Council intent. Whenever the City Council deems it expedient to
acquire any municipal lands for the purposes of municipal forest, or sell
any municipal forestlands, it shall so declare in an ordinance, wherein
shall be set forth all facts and conditions relating to the proposed
action.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall meet once a month and shall hold its
first meeting in the month following enactment of this chapter, at which
time it shall elect a Chairman, and thereafter shall elect officers at its
first meeting in January of each year. A majority of members shall
constitute a quorum, and any actions of the Tree Commission may be
taken by a majority of the members present once a quorum is achieved
at the meeting at which the action is taken. A special meeting may be
called by the Chairman or any two tree Commissioners.
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to the City
Council at Council's first stated meeting in October of its transactions
and expenses for the last fiscal year of the City.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Shade Tree Commission to develop,
administer and maintain a written plan of works to be known as "The
Master Tree Plan" and shall include memorial trees and forestlands.
The master plan shall include recommendations for the planting and
removal of shade trees in the City and the purchase or sale of forestry
lands.
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of
the shade trees of the City and may plant, remove, maintain and protect
shade trees on the streets and sidewalks in the City. The Commission
may require the planting and replanting of shade trees along the street
§ 290-4 OIL CITY CODE § 290-7
1:526
and sidewalks of the City. The kind of tree and the alignment and
locations of the trees shall be determined by the Commission but shall
not prevent necessary or reasonable use of streets, sidewalks, abutting
property or the conduct of business.
C. The Commission may employ and pay superintendents, engineers,
foresters, tree wardens or other assistants or may contract for personal
and professional services for the proper performance of the duties
devolving upon it and may make, publish and enforce regulations for
the care and protection of the shade trees of the City.
D. Upon the acquisition of any municipal forests or lands suitable for such,
the Council shall notify the Department of Forest and Waters, which
shall make such rules for the government and proper administration of
the same as may be necessary. The Council shall publish such rules,
declare the uses of the forest and make such provisions for its
administration, maintenance, protection and development as shall be
deemed necessary or expedient. Municipal forestlands may be used by
the public as general outing or recreation grounds, subject to the rules
governing their administration as municipal forest. The rules governing
the administration of such forestlands shall have for their main purpose
the producing of continuing City revenue by the sale of forest products.
No such regulation shall be in force until it has been approved by the
Council and until it has been published at least twice in not more than
two newspapers of the City.
E. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to designate a
shade tree permit and enforcement officer, who shall have all the
powers and perform all of the duties as the Commission may by
regulation provide.
F. The Shade Tree Commission may consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming
within the scope of its work. The Shade Tree Commission shall study
the problems and determine the needs of the City in connection with its
tree planting program.
G. The Shade Tree Commission shall recommend to the Public Works
Director the type and kind of trees to be planted upon such streets or
parts of streets or in parks as designated.
H. The Shade Tree Commission shall assist the Public Works Director, as
well as the Council and citizens of the municipality, in the dissemination
of news and information regarding the selection, planting and
maintenance of trees within the community and to make such
recommendations from time to time to Council as to the desirable
legislation concerning the tree planting program and activities for the
City. The Shade Tree Commission shall work in conjunction with civic
and public interest groups devoted to tree care and preservation.
I. The Shade Tree Commission shall convene regular and special
meetings at which the subject of trees, insofar as it relates to the City,
§ 290-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:527
§ 290-8. Master Tree Plan.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to formulate a Master
Tree Plan. The Master Tree Plan shall include the inventory of existing
public trees and shall specify the requirements for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting and removal or disposition of trees in parks,
along streets and on other public sites and shall specify the species of trees
to be planted in these areas. The Master Tree Plan shall also include the
placement and administering of the memorial trees and forestlands. The
Master Tree Plan shall be updated and presented to Council annually no
later than the last meeting in April and, upon its acceptance and approval,
shall constitute the official comprehensive Master Tree Plan for the City.
From and after the effective date of the Master Tree Plan, or any
amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto.
§ 290-9. Tree species to be planted.
The Shade Tree Commission shall develop and maintain a list of desirable
large, medium and small trees for planting in parks, along streets and on
other public sites based on mature height. Lists of trees not suitable for
planting in these areas shall also be created by the Shade Tree Commission.
may be discussed by members of the Shade Tree Commission, officers
and personnel of the City and all others interested in the tree program.
J. The Shade Tree Commission shall review plans for residential,
commercial and industrial developments in order to evaluate the
number and size of trees proposed to be removed from building sites
and to make recommendations concerning the retention of areas where
trees have been proposed for removal. Professional counsel from an
arborist or landscape architect will be obtained as needed.
K. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to investigate and
recommend conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with
the terms of this chapter.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the responsibility of conducting
an inventory by classifying as to location, species, size and condition
and evaluation of the existing public trees as an integral part of the
Master Tree Plan. This inventory shall be updated annually.
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall consider all existing and proposed
buildings, utilities and environmental factors or other work for all
streets and public sites within the City when recommending the
planting of a specific species.
C. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to amend or add to
the Master Tree Plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable.
D. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the responsibility and authority
to administer and maintain any and all public forestry lands.
§ 290-7 OIL CITY CODE § 290-10
1:528
§ 290-10. Spacing.
The spacing of trees planted along streets will be in accordance with the
three species size classes listed in § 290-9 of the chapter. No trees may be
planted closer together than the following: large trees, 50 feet; medium
trees, 40 feet; and small trees, 30 feet; except in special plantings designed
or approved by the Tree Commission.
§ 290-11. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 290-9
of this chapter. No trees may be planted closer to any curb, curbline or
sidewalk than the following: large trees, four feet; medium trees, three feet;
small trees, two feet, or as approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 290-12. Distance from street corners and fire hydrants.
No tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any street corner,
measured from the point or nearest intersecting curbs or curbline. No tree
shall be planted closer than 10 feet from any fire hydrant.
§ 290-13. Utilities.
No public tree other than those species referred to as small trees in § 290-8
of this chapter may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire or over or within 10 lateral feet of any underground
waterline, sewer line, gasline or other utility.
§ 290-14. Public tree care.
A. The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove all
public trees, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve
or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public sites. The Shade Tree
Commission may remove or cause to be removed any public tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gaslines, waterlines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious disease, insect or
fungus.
B. This section does not prohibit the planting of a tree along streets by
property owners, providing that the selection of said tree is in
accordance with §§ 290-9 through 290-13 of the chapter. No property
owner shall plant a tree within the right-of-way without first obtaining a
permit from the City and permission from the Shade Tree Commission.
C. The Shade Tree Commission shall use as a reference for tree care the
standards in the latest version of the ANSI "Standards for Tree Care
Maintenance Operations" for pruning guidance or use a certified
arborist. A copy of the above standard is attached to and becomes a
part of this chapter.119
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-15
1:529
§ 290-15. Removal, replanting and replacement of public trees.
§ 290-16. Topping of public trees.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or department
to top any public tree. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Public trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical
may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 290-17. Obstruction; trees pruned.120
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees
to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the
streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk, obstruct
the vision of traffic signs or obstruct the view of any street intersection.
Said persons shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken
or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight
feet over sidewalks and 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares,
which shall have a clearance of 16 feet.
A. Whenever it is necessary to remove a public tree in connection with the
paving of a sidewalk or the widening of a portion of a street or highway,
the tree shall be replaced with a species listed in § 290-9 of this chapter.
This City requirement will be satisfied if an equivalent number of trees
are planted at the nearest appropriate location, as determined by the
Shade Tree Commission.
B. No person shall remove a public tree for the purpose of construction or
any other reason without the written permission of the Shade Tree
Commission and with the advisement of the time and place of the
meeting at which such work is to be considered and shall be published
in not more than two City newspapers published in the City once a week
for two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The
Enforcement Officer, with the advisement of the Tree Commission may
require replacement of a removed tree as a condition to said
Commission's approval. Such replacement shall be in accordance with
the species listed in § 290-9 of the chapter. The person or property
owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all public trees
removed.
A. Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property
bordering on any street fail to prune trees as herein above provided, the
119. Editor's Note: A copy of said Standards is on file in the City's office.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-15 OIL CITY CODE § 290-17
1:530
§ 290-18. Dead, diseased or hazardous tree removal on private
property.
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any trees on private
property within the City when such trees constitute a hazard to life,
property or public safety.
§ 290-19. Abuse and/or mutilation of public trees.
Unless specifically authorized by the Shade Tree Commission, no person
or firm shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, whether above or below
ground, or transplant or remove any public tree, attach any rope, wire,
nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree, allow any
gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in
contact with them or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or
heat from there will injure any portion of any public tree. No person shall
pour salt water or a chemical or chemicals upon any street or right-of-way
Shade Tree Commission shall order such person or persons to so prune
such trees within 30 days after receipt of written notice.
B. Order required. The order herein shall be served by certified mail to the
last known address of the property owner.
C. Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises to whom an order is
directed fails to comply within the specified time prescribed, the Shade
Tree Commission shall cause the pruning of such tree either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement or with a private
person, and the cost of such pruning, including administration fees,
shall be charged against such real estate upon which the tree is located
and shall be a lien on such real estate. The City may also proceed for the
recovery and collection of the claim by civil action against the owner, as
such remedy is provided by general law.
A. Notice to remove. Should any person or persons fail to remove trees as
herein provided, the Shade Tree Commission shall order such person or
persons to remove such trees within 30 days after receipt of written
notice.
B. Order required. The order herein shall be served by certified mail to the
last known address of the property owner.
C. Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises to whom an order is
directed fails to comply within the specified time prescribed, the Shade
Tree Commission shall cause the removal of such tree either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement or with a private
person, and the cost of such removal, including administration fees,
shall be charged against such real estate upon which the tree is located
and shall be a lien on such real estate. The City may also proceed for the
recovery and collection of the claim by civil action against the owner, as
such remedy is provided by general law.
§ 290-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-19
1:531
in such a way as to injure any tree planted or growing thereon. The City
shall not be restricted in the use of deicing materials.
§ 290-20. Placing materials on public property.
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place
of the City any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any
public tree growing therein, except by written approval of the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 290-21. Protection of public trees.
All public trees located near any excavation or construction of any building,
structure or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fence,
frame or box not less than four feet high, placed at the dripline. All laborers,
building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside this barrier. The
Shade Tree Commission may permit a variance in cases where the barrier
would impede the flow of traffic on a street, private street or driveway and
where the dripline overhangs a building or permanent structure.
§ 290-22. Public utility companies.
§ 290-23. Emergencies.
In the case of officially declared emergencies, such as windstorms, ice
storms or other disasters, the requirements shall be waived so that the
requirements of this chapter would in no way hinder public and/or private
A. No public utility shall trim or remove trees located within the public
right-of-way, parks, forestry lands or any publicly owned lands within
the City of Oil City, without first providing not less than 72 hours'
advance notice of said tree trimming or tree removal to the City of Oil
City, and it must comply with the definition of "remove or removal" in
§ 290-2B.
B. Said notice shall be accomplished by written notice to the Shade Tree
Enforcement Office or City Manager.
C. The requirement for advance notice shall not be required in emergency
service restoration work.
D. Any public utility failing to provide advance notice prior to trimming or
removing trees located within the public right-of-way within the City of
Oil City shall be guilty of unlawful trimming or removal of trees and,
upon being found guilty of such violation, shall be fined $500 per tree.
In addition, if any unnecessary injury, mutilation or death of a tree is
caused as a result of the failure to provide notice as required by this
section, the cost of repair or replacement of such trees shall be ordered
in addition to the fine set forth above.
§ 290-19 OIL CITY CODE § 290-23
1:532
work to restore order in the City. This work shall follow maintenance
standards as outlined by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 290-24. Moving large objects.
No person shall move any building or other large objects that may injure
public trees or parts thereof without first obtaining the written approval of
the Shade Tree Commission. All repairs will be made in whole.
§ 290-25. Interference with Shade Tree Commission.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Shade Tree
Commission or any of its agents while engaged in carrying out the execution
of enforcement of this chapter on public or private property; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit
the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any
property within the municipality.
§ 290-26. Registration of tree experts.
A. Permits required for certain work.
B. No person shall trim, spray, cut or interfere with the root system of any
shade tree or remove any shade tree on any street, as hereinabove
defined, without first filling out an application and procuring a permit
from the Shade Tree Commission, with the exception set forth in
§ 290-23 relating to emergencies. No person shall plant or set out any
tree on any street, as hereinabove defined, without first filing an
application and procuring a permit from the Shade Tree Commission.
(1) A license is required to prune, maintain or remove trees.
Requirements for a license shall be as follows:
(a) The license fee shall be the cost of a business license fee,
annually and in advance.
(b) Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file
evidence verifying:
[1] Coverage by workers' compensation.
[2] Liability insurance coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 bodily injury and damage to property to cover
and save harmless the City and its agents from all suits,
claims or actions of every class and nature for or on
persons or property damage caused or claimed to be
caused, directly or indirectly, by the conduct of the work
contemplated, or by acts of strangers, or any conditions
due to the elements or any defects or insufficiencies in any
method, materials, ways, machinery, equipment or
apparatus used in connection with the work.
§ 290-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-26
1:533
§ 290-27. Commission as trustee.
The Tree Commission may act as trustee for any property, assets or funds
donated to the municipality for the care and maintenance of public trees,
provided the donor designates or provides for the designation of the
Commission as such trustee. In such an event, the Commission shall have
all those powers and duties necessary to carry out the purpose of the trust.
§ 290-28. Establishment of funds.
[3] Any work to be performed on a landmark tree shall be
under the supervision of a certified arborist, certified by
the International Society of Arboriculture.
(2) A permit issued by the City shall be required of any private
property owner maintaining, planting, pruning, spraying, interfere
with root systems, or removing any public or private tree whose
hazard (fall) zone falls upon public land. The requirements for said
permit shall be as follows:
(a) The permit fee shall be $10 paid in advance.
(b) Before the permit is issued, each private property owner shall
first file evidence verifying homeowner's insurance coverage
for bodily injury or damage to property to cover and save
harmless the City and its agents from all suits, claims or
actions of every class and nature for or on persons or property
damage caused or claimed to be caused, directly or indirectly,
by the maintenance or removal of said tree.
C. All licensed persons and or companies shall perform work according to
the National Arborist Association standards and accepted
arboricultural practices.
D. All licensed persons and/or companies shall operate under the
guidelines specified in the latest version of ANSI. A copy of the above
standard is attached to and becomes a part of this chapter.
A. A rotary trust fund account, within the various funds of the City, known
as the "Shade Tree Commission Fund Account"; a separate account
known as the "memorial tree fund account," is hereby established
which is to be utilized for the receipt of license and permit fees, bond
monies generally, grant monies, damages, penalties and donation.
Disbursement shall be solely for the purpose of encouraging the
planting, maintenance, removal, relocation and memorial tree
permanent plaque of public trees within the municipality under the
jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission.
B. The Clerk-Treasurer of the City is authorized and directed to receive
such monies at intermittent intervals, to segregate them into the trust
fund account for the purpose herein mentioned, and thereafter to
periodically disburse any funds that shall be appropriated to provide for
§ 290-26 OIL CITY CODE § 290-28
1:534
§ 290-29. Review by Council.
Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 290-30. Appeal procedure.
§ 290-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person or firm violating any provision of this chapter or who fails to
comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500 for each separate offense plus the cost of prosecution or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, if as the result of the violation of any provision of this chapter
the injury, mutilation or death of a tree is caused; the cost of repair or
replacement of such trees shall be borne by the party in violation. The
replacement value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the
latest revision of "Valuation of Landscape Trees, Shrubs and Other Plants"
as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. All penalties or
assessments imposed under this chapter shall be placed to the credit (into
the funds) of the Shade Tree Commission for the purposes authorized in this
chapter.
Chapter 295
the planting, maintenance and relocation of public trees within the
municipality under the jurisdiction of the Tree Commission.
A. Any adjustment of the standards required by this chapter or an appeal
of a decision of the Enforcement Office shall be taken within 30 days of
the receipt of the appeal to the Shade Tree Commission for review, who
may affirm, reverse or modify its decision or Enforcement Officer
decision. Any further appeal of the adjustments to the standards shall
be taken within 10 days to City Council. City Council, upon receipt of a
written request, shall have the authority and duty to consider and act
upon the request. The request shall clearly and in detail state what
adjustments or requirements are being sought, reasons such
adjustments or requirements are being sought, reasons such
adjustments are warranted and shall be accompanied with such
supplementary data as is deemed necessary to substantiate the
adjustments. City Council may approve, modify or deny the requested
adjustments, based upon the protection of public interest, preservation
of the intent of this chapter and possible unreasonable hardships
involved in the case.
B. Council shall act on the application as expeditiously as possible and
shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken within 10 days of
the decision.
§ 290-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-31
1:535
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Oil City Parking Authority — See Ch. 11, Art.
III.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 278, Art. IV.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 298.
§ 290-31 OIL CITY CODE § 290-31
1:536
ARTICLE I
Metered Parking
[Adopted 6-1-1987 by Ord. No. 2462 (Ch. 173, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and control of
motor and other vehicles parked on the streets and highways of the City of
Oil City in the hereinafter-defined area and in the off-street parking facilities
established by the Oil City Parking Authority; to establish time limits for
parking on streets in the areas, which time limits shall be governed by
parking meters; to establish rates and use of the off-street parking facilities
established by the Oil City Parking Authority; and to provide the penalties
for violation thereof.
§ 295-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall be defined as follows:
OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES — The areas of land in the City
acquired by the Oil City Parking Authority, which areas are improved,
paved, lighted and marked off into individual parking spaces and equipped
with parking meters or attendants and used for parking of vehicles.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A portion of the off-street parking facility
designated and marked off by the Oil City Parking Authority to
accommodate a parked vehicle.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A portion of the right-of-way or street
sufficient to accommodate a parked vehicle, as the same shall be designated
by the appropriate official.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, except a police or fire vehicle
or ambulance, whether occupied or not, upon a highway, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PARKING METER — A mechanical device which shall indicate thereon the
length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place
or space, which shall have as a part thereof a receptacle or chamber for
receiving and storing coins of United States money, a slot or place in which
coins may be deposited and a timing mechanism to indicate the passage
of the interval of time during which parking is permissible, and which
shall also display an appropriate signal when the aforesaid interval of time
has elapsed, and which device shall contain on the outside thereof brief
instruction as to its operation and a schedule of parking meter rates and
time of operation.
PARKING PERMIT — A monthly sticker, issued by the City, which must
be displayed on the vehicle, authorizing said vehicle to occupy one of the
designated off-street parking spaces in a particular off-street lot.
§ 295-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-2
1:537
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a public highway, except such as are used
exclusively by human power.
§ 295-3. Designation of parking spaces.
§ 295-4. Installation, maintenance and removal of parking meters;
designation of nonmetered two-hour on-street parking zones.
[Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2784]
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to place, install,
maintain and remove, if necessary, parking meters along the curbside or, in
case of off-street parking, in the immediate vicinity of individual on-street
parking spaces or individual off-street parking spaces, where so designated
and marked. The City Manager is further authorized and directed to
designate nonmetered two-hour on-street parking zones within the City
through placement of proper signage in the immediate vicinity of individual
on-street parking spaces designated to be two-hour parking. The
designation of metered and nonmetered on-street parking zones within the
City may hereafter be prescribed or changed by the City Manager with the
approval of City Council by resolution.
§ 295-5. Deposit of coins in parking meters.
Whenever a vehicle shall be parked in an individual parking space on-street
or off-street, where a parking meter has been installed, the person parking
such vehicle shall deposit coins of the United States in such parking meter
for the time desired by such person.
A. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and
directed to designate and mark off spaces as he deems proper along the
streets in the City of Oil City for the parking of vehicles. At each place
where an individual parking space is so marked off, each vehicle shall
be parked entirely within such individual space.
B. The individual parking spaces that have been set out and marked off in
the off-street parking facilities shall be done at the direction of the Oil
City Parking Authority, and designation of such individual spaces which
may be done in the future on off-street parking facilities shall be done
by the same body. A maximum number of permitted spaces in
designated off-street lots shall be established by the Authority; these
spaces will be made available as the parking permits are sold.
C. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is further authorized and
directed to remove, vacate, alter or change such individual on-street
parking spaces from time to time as circumstances and conditions of
traffic flow and congestion may require.
§ 295-2 OIL CITY CODE § 295-6
1:538
§ 295-6. Overtime signal.
No person shall permit a vehicle to remain in any individual on-street or
off-street parking space adjacent to a parking meter while such meter is
displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such space has
been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space.
§ 295-7. Parking beyond legally established period, on-street
meters. [Amended 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 2559]
No person shall permit any motor vehicle owned or operated by such person
to be parked beyond the limit of legal parking established for any individual
on-street parking space, regardless of whether or not the meter adjacent to
such space displays an overtime signal. The maximum limit for parking at
any individual metered, on-street parking space in the City of Oil City shall
be two hours daily during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., exclusive of
weekends and holidays.
§ 295-8. Manner of parking; penalty.
§ 295-9. Days and hours of parking meter operation.
A. Persons parking a vehicle at an on-street location shall park such
vehicle within the area designated. No person shall permit any portion
of the vehicle to extend beyond or over the designated parking space.
B. Persons parking a vehicle at an off-street location shall park such
vehicle within the area designated. Backing into off-street parking
spaces shall be prohibited. No person shall permit any portion of the
vehicle to extend beyond or over the designated parking space.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of $2 if paid within 10 days. Failure to pay the fine for a violation
within 10 days of the date of the violation will result in summary
proceedings under the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code,121 subjecting
the violator to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $15 together with
the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not
more than 10 days.
A. Each parking meter shall be in operation and the provisions of this
article regulating such operation at all on-street and off-street meter
locations shall apply between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
days other than Saturdays and Sundays and the following legal
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
B. Parking shall be prohibited in all on-street parking spaces between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., seven days per week, 365 days per
121. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 295-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-9
1:539
§ 295-10. Penalties for overtime parking meter violations.
[Amended 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 2559; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711]
§ 295-11. Penalties for parking beyond legally established periods
for on-street meters and two-hour parking zones. [Added 9-13-1993
year. Violations under this section shall be subject to the penalties as
contained and set forth in § 295-10 of this article.
A. For each overtime violation occurring at an off-street parking meter, the
enforcement officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked overtime in
violation of certain sections of this article. Each owner or operator may,
within 48 hours of the time when such notice was attached to such
vehicle, pay the fine of $5. After the expiration of such time, the fine
shall be $10. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10 days of the
date thereof will result in summary proceedings under this article,
subjecting the violator to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $30,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default thereof to
imprisonment for not more than 10 days. A second violation at the same
location will be deemed occurring one hour after the time on the initial
violation. The fine for the second violation shall be $10 if paid within 48
hours. After the expiration of such time, the fine for the second violation
shall be $20. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10 days of the
date of the violation will result in summary proceedings under this
article, subjecting the violator to a fine of not less than $20 nor more
than $40, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default thereof
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days. [Amended 11-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 2855]
B. For each overtime violation occurring at an on-street parking meter, the
enforcement officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked overtime in
violation of certain sections of this article. Each owner or operator may,
within 48 hours of the time when such notice was attached to such
vehicle, pay the fine of $15. After the expiration of such time, the fine
shall be $20. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10 days of the
date thereof will result in summary proceedings under this article,
subjecting the violator to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $40
together with the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to
imprisonment for not more than 10 days. A second violation at the same
location will be deemed occurring one hour after the time of the initial
violation. The fine for the second violation shall be $20 if paid within 48
hours. After the expiration of such time, the fine for the second violation
shall be $30. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10 days of the
date of the violation will result in summary proceedings under this
article, subjecting the violator to a fine of not less than $40 nor more
than $50 together with the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof,
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days. [Amended 7-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 2802]
§ 295-9 OIL CITY CODE § 295-11
1:540
by Ord. No. 2559; amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711122;
9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2784]
§ 295-12. Loading zones.
§ 295-13. Handicapped parking.
A. For each violation of parking beyond the legally established periods set
for on-street meters and nonmetered two-hour parking zones, the
enforcement officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the
time limit established for on-street meters and the two-hour limit for
nonmetered two-hour parking zones within the City of Oil City.
B. Each owner or operator may, within 48 hours of the time when such
notice was attached to such vehicle, pay the fine of $10. After the
expiration of such time, the fine shall be $20. Failure to pay the fine for
a violation within 10 days of the date thereof will result in summary
proceedings under this article, subjecting the violator to a fine of not
less than $20 nor more than $40 together with the costs of prosecution
and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
C. A second violation at the same location will be deemed occurring two
hours after the time on the initial violation. The fine for the second
violation shall be $20 if paid within 48 hours. After the expiration of
such time, the fine for the second violation shall be $40. Failure to pay
the fine for a violation within 10 days of the date of the violation will
result in summary proceedings under this article, subjecting the
violator to a fine of not less than $40 nor more than $80 together with
the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not
more than 20 days.
A. No operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or for the unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case
shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
B. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties as provided in
§ 295-14 of this article.
A. Parking spaces shall be reserved and made available to handicapped
persons. These spaces shall be near pedestrian exits and free of
barriers to wheelchairs. The international symbol indicating parking for
handicapped persons shall be displayed in the reserved spaces. No
person who is not handicapped shall park a vehicle in any such space.
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former § 173-11, Permit parking; penalties, and
renumbered former § 173-10.1, Penalties for parking beyond legally established periods
for on-street meters, as § 173-11.
§ 295-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-13
1:541
§ 295-14. Penalties for loading zone and handicapped parking
violations.
§ 295-15. Defacing or tampering with parking meters; use of slugs;
penalties.
§ 295-16. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Oil City or any
duly authorized parking meter enforcement officer of the City of Oil City to
enforce the parking provisions of this article.
§ 295-17. Rate schedules.
The off-street and on-street parking sites and rates to be charged therefor
are established as per schedules attached hereto and made a part hereof by
reference.123
B. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties as provided in
§ 295-14 of this article.
A. For each violation occurring at an on-street or off-street space
designated as a loading zone or as a handicapped parking space, the
enforcement officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this
article.
B. Each owner or operator may, within 48 hours of the time when such
notice was attached to such vehicle, pay the fine of $50. After the
expiration of such time, the fine shall be $60. Failure to pay the fine for
a violation within 10 days of the date thereof will result in summary
proceedings under this article, subjecting the violator to a fine of not
less than $60, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default
thereof to imprisonment for not more than 10 days. [Amended
2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711; 11-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2855]
A. No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or parking meter
stand installed on the streets of the City of Oil City or in any of the offstreet
parking facilities hereinbefore described.
B. No person shall deposit in any parking meter installed on an on-street
or off-street parking facility any slug, device, plastic or metallic
substance or substitute any substance of any nature or kind for a coin of
the United States.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or aids,
abets or assists in the violation of such provision shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $50, together with the costs of repair or
replacement and prosecution, and in default thereof shall be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days.
§ 295-13 OIL CITY CODE § 295-17
1:542
123. Editor's Note: The rate schedules are on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-17
1:543

ARTICLE II
Oil City Parking Garage
[Adopted 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 2550 (Ch. 173, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and control of
motor and other vehicles parked in the Oil City Parking Garage located
between Elm Street and Seneca Street at Duncomb Street in the City of Oil
City, to establish time limits for parking therein, and to establish rates and
provide for the penalties for violation thereof.
§ 295-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall be defined as follows:
OIL CITY PARKING GARAGE — The area in the City of Oil City which
is located between Elm Street and Seneca Street at Duncomb Street and
which provides for parking therein.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, except a police or fire vehicle or
ambulance, whether occupied or not.
PARKING ATTENDANT — An employee of the City of Oil City who is
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a public highway, except such as are used
exclusively by human power.
§ 295-20. Designation of off-street parking spaces.
§ 295-21. Manner of parking.
A. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and
directed to designate and mark off spaces as he deems proper within
the Oil City Parking Garage located between Elm Street and Seneca
Street. At each place where an individual parking space is so marked
off, each vehicle shall be parked entirely within such individual space.
B. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is further authorized and
directed to remove, vacate, alter or change such individual off-street
parking spaces from time to time as circumstances and conditions of
traffic flow and congestion may require.
A. Persons parking a vehicle in the Oil City Parking Garage shall park such
vehicle within the proper area designated. Backing into spaces shall be
prohibited. No person shall permit any portion of the vehicle to extend
beyond or over the designated parking space.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of $5 if paid within 48 hours of the notice of violation. Failure to pay
§ 295-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-21
1:545
§ 295-22. Days and hours of operation.
§ 295-23. Parking conditions; payment; fines.
the fine for violation within 48 hours of the date of the violation will
result in an increased fine of $10, which if not paid within 10 days of
the violation will result in summary proceedings, whereupon conviction
thereof shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than $15 nor more
than $50 together with the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof,
shall be imprisoned for a term as outlined in the regulations of Chapter
65 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.124 [Amended 2-28-2005
by Ord. No. 2711]
A. The Oil City Parking Garage shall be in operation, and the provisions of
this article regulating such operation shall apply, from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. on days other than Saturdays and Sundays, and the following legal
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
B. Except for the hours noted above, the areas of the Oil City Parking
Garage which are located above the first level gate will be considered
closed to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and any violators found to be
within this area, including the closed and open stairways, shall be
considered trespassers and subject to all local or state laws regulating
the same. This section shall not apply to any duly authorized
representatives, officials or employees of the Quaker State Corporation
who utilize the closed stairwell for ingress and egress from the offices
on the mezzanine level.
A. Parking in the Oil City Parking Garage shall be self-parking and subject
to the terms and conditions as stated herein or as posted.
B. The Oil City Parking Garage shall be operated as a combined parking
facility for monthly parking on a permit basis and for daily parking at
metered locations.
C. Monthly parking permit holders shall only park in areas of the Oil City
Parking Garage designated for such use, which shall be parking spaces
where the car stops are colored red for under-roof permit parking ($20
per month) or on the roof level for uncovered parking ($10 per month).
Failure to park in such designated areas shall result in a fine as
specified below in Subsection E or § 295-25D, as situations warrant.
D. Daily parking shall only be allowed in areas of the Oil City Parking
Garage where parking meters are available. Failure to park in such
designated areas shall result in a fine as specified below.
E. Any person failing to park in the properly designated area as required
in this article or as stated in the terms and conditions posted at the Oil
124. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501 et seq.
§ 295-21 OIL CITY CODE § 295-23
1:546
§ 295-24. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Oil City, any duly
authorized parking meter enforcement officer of the City of Oil City or any
duly authorized parking attendant of the City of Oil City to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 295-25. Rate schedule.
City Parking Garage shall be subject to a fine of $5 if paid within 48
hours of the notice of violation. Failure to pay the fine within 48 hours
of the date of the violation will result in an increased fine of $10,
which if not paid within 10 days of the violation will result in summary
proceedings, whereupon conviction thereof shall subject the violator to
a fine of not less than $15 nor more than $50 together with the costs
of prosecution and, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned for a term
as outlined in the regulations of Chapter 65 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.125 This subsection shall not be applicable to the premium
permit monthly spaces located in specially designated areas on the first
level of the parking garage. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711]
F. Any person parking in the premium permit monthly spaces on the first
level of the Oil City Parking Garage without the proper parking permit
will be subject to a fine of $20, if paid within 48 hours of the notice of
violation. Failure to pay the fine within 48 hours of the violation will
result in an increased fine of $30, which if not paid within 10 days of the
date thereof will result in summary proceedings under this article,
whereupon conviction thereof shall subject the violator to a fine of not
less than $30 nor more than $50 together with the costs of prosecution
and, in default thereof, to imprisonment for a term as outlined in the
regulations of Chapter 65 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
[Added 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711]
A. The parking rates charged for parking in the Oil City Parking Garage be
and are amended as set forth on Exhibit A, the rate schedule attached
hereto and made a part hereof by reference. The rate schedule will be
maintained in the office of the City Manager and may be viewed by the
public during normal business hours. [Amended 12-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 2693]
B. The City Manager is hereby authorized to cooperate and develop plans
and programs for promotion and operation of the Oil City Parking
Garage.
C. Charges for all monthly parking permits are due on the first day of the
month in advance of the month for which they are applicable. All
monthly parking permit holders will be considered delinquent if
payment for their parking permit is not received by the City of Oil City
by the 10th day of the month for which they are due. Any delinquent
125. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501 et seq.
§ 295-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-25
1:547
§ 295-26. Parking terms and conditions.
monthly parking permit holders who continue to park in any area
designated only for monthly permit parking shall be subject to a fine of
$5. Failure to pay the fine within 48 hours will result in an increased
fine, which if not paid within 10 days of the date of the violation will
result in a citation being filed under this section, whereupon conviction
thereof shall subject the violator to a fine of not less than $15 nor
more than $50 together with the costs of prosecution and, in default
thereof, shall be imprisoned for a term as outlined in the regulations of
Chapter 65 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.126 Such fine shall
be applicable for each day such delinquent monthly parking permit
holder is in violation of this section.
D. Any person failing to pay the required fee for metered parking shall be
subject to a fine of $2 if paid within 48 hours. Failure to pay the fine
within 48 hours will result in an increased fine of $4, which if not paid
within 10 days of the date of the violation will result in a citation being
filed under this section, whereupon conviction thereof shall subject the
violator to a fine of not less than $15 nor more than $50 together with
the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, shall be imprisoned for
a term as outlined in the regulations of Chapter 65 of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2711]
A. Any rules and regulations established by the City Manager or his
designee shall become the terms and conditions for parking at the Oil
City Parking Garage, and violation thereof by any person or persons
shall subject such person or persons to any fines or penalties provided
herein or, if not specifically addressed, shall be subject to the penalties
provided in § 295-23E above.
B. A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking at the Oil
City Parking Garage is attached hereto and made a part hereof.127
126. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6501 et seq.
127. Editor's Note: A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking is on file in
the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-25 OIL CITY CODE § 295-26
1:548
ARTICLE III
Nonmetered Parking
[Adopted 11-29-1995 by Ord. No. 2593 (Ch. 173, Art. III, of the
1986 Code)]
§ 295-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of the location of
parking on certain City streets or portions thereof for reasons of safety and
ease of vehicular traffic.
§ 295-28. Specific regulations.
Parking shall be on the following City streets in the manner hereinafter set
forth:
A. No parking. Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets or parts
of streets:
Street Side Location
Allegheny
Avenue
West From East Second Street to East
Third Street
Bishop Avenue Both From Home Avenue to Cedar
Avenue
Bishop Avenue South Entire length
Cowell Avenue West From West First Street to West
Seventh Street
Drake Drive East and south
(side of street
with evennumbered
houses)
Entire length
Gay Street South Entire length
Graff Street
(after the middle
school closes)
South Entire length
Harriott Avenue South From Bissell Avenue to Hone
Avenue
Hasson Avenue West Entire length
Lawrence Street South Entire length
Linden Avenue West Entire length
§ 295-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-28
1:549
Street Side Location
Lynch Boulevard
[Added
9-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 2629;
amended
11-30-2005 by
Ord. No. 2717]
East From East Bissell Avenue to Oak
Grove Street (NOTE: Parking shall
be permitted on the west side of
Lynch Boulevard between East
Bissell Avenue and Oak Grove
Street, except for the areas within
40 feet of the two driveways
which lead to the Oil City Area
Middle and High Schools and
within 40 feet of the intersections
with East Bissell Avenue and Oak
Grove Street. The area between
the two driveways that lead to
said middle and high schools shall
have no parking during the period
of time of 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
on school days.)
Martin Street West Entire length
Oak Street East Entire length
Orange Street Both From north side of the property at
719 Orange Street to south side of
the property at 721 Orange Street
Orange Street West From Front Street to the City line
Petroleum Street
[Added
4-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 2600]
Both From West First Street to West
Front Street, with the exception of
the area of recessed curbing that
begins 38 feet north from the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Petroleum Street
and West First Streets and
extends for a length of 83 feet,
which may be used as a loading
zone for a period not to exceed 15
minutes
Plum Street East Entire length
Seeley Avenue South Entire length
Siverly Avenue East Entire length
Washington
Avenue
East From Colbert Avenue to Harriott
Avenue
§ 295-28 OIL CITY CODE § 295-28
1:550
§ 295-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
of $5 if paid within 10 days. Failure to pay the fine for a violation within 10
days of the date of the violation will result in summary proceedings under
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, subjecting the violator to a fine of not
more than $15 together with the costs of prosecution and, in default thereof,
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
Street Side Location
West First Street
[Added
6-15-2009 by
Ord. No. 2768]
South From a location at the
easternmost curb cut of the exit
driveway in front of 607 W. First
Street, then in a westerly
direction 89 feet to a point that is
20 feet beyond the westernmost
curb cut of the entrance driveway
to the same property
West Second
Alley
Both Between Innis Street and Moran
Street
Willow Street South From Colbert Avenue to Alcorn
Avenue
§ 295-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-29
1:551

ARTICLE IV
Relief Street Parking Lot
[Adopted 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 2603 (Ch. 173, Art. IV, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and control of
daily meter and monthly permit parking in the Relief Street Parking Lot (Lot
No. 2) located between Relief Street and Oil Creek in the City of Oil City, to
establish time limits for parking therein, and to establish rates and provide
for the penalties for violation thereof.
§ 295-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall be defined as follows:
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, except a police or fire vehicle or
ambulance, whether occupied or not.
RELIEF STREET PARKING LOT or LOT — The area in the City of Oil City
which is located between Relief Street and Oil Creek and which provides for
parking therein.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a public highway, except such as are used
exclusively by human power.
§ 295-32. Designation of off-street parking spaces.
§ 295-33. Manner of parking.
Persons parking a vehicle with a monthly permit in the Relief Street Parking
Lot shall park such vehicle within the proper area designated. Backing into
spaces shall be prohibited. No person shall permit any portion of the vehicle
to extend beyond or over the designated parking space.
§ 295-34. Days and hours of lot operation.
The Relief Street Parking Lot shall be in operation and the provisions of this
article regulating such operation shall apply from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on
days other than Saturdays and Sundays and the following legal holidays:
A. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and
directed to designate and mark off permit spaces as he deems proper
within the Relief Street Parking Lot.
B. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is further authorized and
directed to remove, vacate, alter or change such individual off-street
parking spaces from time to time as circumstances and parking
conditions may require.
§ 295-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-34
1:553
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
§ 295-35. Payment for parking; parking conditions.
§ 295-36. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Oil City or any
duly authorized parking meter enforcement officer of the City of Oil City to
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 295-37. Rate schedules.
§ 295-38. Terms and conditions for parking; violations and
penalties.
A. Parking in the Relief Street Parking Lot shall be self-parking and
subject to the terms and conditions as stated herein or as posted.
B. The Relief Street Parking Lot shall be operated as a combined parking
facility for monthly parking on a permit basis and for daily parking at
metered locations.
C. Monthly parking permit holders shall only park in areas of the Relief
Street Parking Lot designated for such use, which shall be parking
spaces so marked by appropriate signage. Failure to park in such
designated areas shall result in a fine as specified below, as situations
warrant.
D. Daily parking shall only be allowed in areas of the Relief Street Parking
Lot where parking meters are available. Failure to park in such
designated areas shall result in a fine as specified below.
A. The parking rates to be charged for parking in the Relief Street Parking
Lot are established as per the schedule attached hereto and made a
part hereof by reference.128
B. Charges for all monthly parking permits will be $10 per month and are
due on the first day of the month in advance of the month for which they
are applicable. All monthly parking permit holders will be considered
delinquent if payment for their parking permit is not received by the
City of Oil City by the 10th day of the month for which they are due.
A. Any rules and regulations established by the City Manager or his
designee shall become the terms and conditions for parking at the
Relief Street Parking Lot, and violation thereof by any person or
persons shall subject such person or persons to any fines or penalties
provided herein or, if not specifically addressed, shall be subject to the
penalties provided above.
128. Editor's Note: Said rate schedule is on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-34 OIL CITY CODE § 295-38
1:554
B. A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking at the
Relief Street Parking Lot are attached hereto and made a part hereof.129
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a fine of $5 per day. Failure to pay within 48 hours will result in the
doubling of the fine, which if not paid within 10 days of the date of the
violation will result in summary proceedings, whereupon conviction
thereof shall subject the violator to a fine of $15 together with the costs
of prosecution, and, in default thereof, be committed to jail for a period
not exceeding 15 days. Nothing in this article shall change the metered
parking in the Relief Street Parking Lot as governed by Chapter 295 of
the Code of the City of Oil City.
129. Editor's Note: A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking is on file in
the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-38
1:555

ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 10-25-1999 by Ord. No. 2642 (Ch. 173, Art. V, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-39. Designation of one-way streets.
The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the
direction established for traffic on such street.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Drake Alley Entire length West
East First Street Central Avenue Wilson Avenue East
East Front
Street
Wilson Avenue Central Avenue West
Elm Street Veterans Memorial
Bridge
Duncomb Street North
Emerald Street Cooper Avenue Pulaski Street North
Harriott Avenue Spring Street Pearl Avenue East
Lindon Alley East Second Street East First Street North
Luther Lane Sycamore Street Seneca Street South
Orchard Street Petroleum Street Division Street West
Orchard Street State Street Central Avenue West
Seneca Street Duncomb Street Veterans
Memorial Bridge
South
Spruce Street Pulaski Street Cooper Avenue South
State Street East First Street East Third Street South
Sycamore
Street
Elm Street Luther Lane West
Washington
Avenue
Seeley Avenue Harriott Avenue South
West First
Street
Petroleum Street Central Avenue East
West Front
Street
Central Avenue Petroleum Street West
West Front
Street
Wyllis Street Petroleum Street East
§ 295-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-39
1:557

ARTICLE VI
Justus Park Parking Lot
[Adopted 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2713 (Ch. 173, Art. VI, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and control of
daily meter and monthly permit parking in the Justus Park Parking Lot (Lot
No. 15), to establish time limits for parking therein, and to establish rates
and provide for the penalties for violation thereof.
§ 295-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall be defined as follows:
JUSTUS PARK PARKING LOT or LOT — The parking area in the City of Oil
City which is located at the southernmost end of the Northside Business
District and adjacent to the Allegheny River and Oil Creek.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, except a police or fire vehicle or
ambulance, whether occupied or not.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a public highway, except such as are used
exclusively by human power.
§ 295-42. Designation of off-street parking spaces.
§ 295-43. Manner of parking.
Persons parking a vehicle with a monthly permit in the Justus Park Parking
Lot shall park such vehicle within the proper area designated. Backing into
spaces shall be prohibited. No person shall permit any portion of the vehicle
to extend beyond or over the designated parking space.
§ 295-44. Days and hours of lot operation.
The Justus Park Parking Lot shall be in operation and the provisions of this
article regulating such operation shall apply from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
days other than Saturdays and Sundays and the following legal holidays:
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
A. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is hereby authorized and
directed to designate and mark off permit spaces as he deems proper
within the Justus Park Parking Lot.
B. The City Manager of the City of Oil City is further authorized and
directed to remove, vacate, alter or change such individual off-street
parking spaces from time to time as circumstances and parking
conditions may require.
§ 295-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-45
1:559
§ 295-45. Payment for parking and conditions.
§ 295-46. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the City of Oil City or any
duly authorized parking meter enforcement officer of the City of Oil City to
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 295-47. Rate schedules.
§ 295-48. Terms and conditions for parking; violations and
penalties.
A. Parking in the Justus Park Parking Lot shall be self-parking and subject
to the terms and conditions as stated herein or as posted.
B. The Justus Park Parking Lot shall be operated as a combined parking
facility for monthly parking on a permit basis and for daily parking at
metered locations.
C. Monthly parking permit holders shall only park in areas of the Justus
Park Parking Lot designated for such use, which shall be parking spaces
so marked by appropriate signage.
D. Failure to park in such designated areas shall result in a fine as
specified below, as situations warrant. Daily parking shall only be
allowed in areas of the Justus Park Parking Lot where parking meters
are available. Failure to park in such designated areas shall result in a
fine as specified below.
A. The parking rates to be charged for parking in the Justus Park Parking
Lot are established as per the schedule attached hereto and made a
part hereof by reference.130
B. Charges for all monthly parking permits will be $15 per month and are
due on the first day of the month in advance of the month for which they
are applicable. All monthly parking permit holders will be considered
delinquent if payment for their parking permit is not received by the
City of Oil City by the 10th day of the month for which they are due, and
thereupon such person shall be subject to the sanctions hereinafter set
forth in § 295-48C.
A. Any rules and regulations established by the City Manager or his
designee shall become the terms and conditions for parking at the
Justus Park Parking Lot, and violation thereof by any person or persons
shall subject such person or persons to any fines or penalties provided
herein or, if not specifically addressed, shall be subject to the penalties
provided above.
130. Editor's Note: Said rate schedule is on file in the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-45 OIL CITY CODE § 295-48
1:560
B. A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking at the
Justus Park Parking Lot are attached hereto and made a part hereof.131
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a fine of $5 per day. Failure to pay within 48 hours will result in the
doubling of the fine, which if not paid within 10 days of the date of the
violation will result in summary proceedings, whereupon conviction
thereof shall subject the violator to a fine of $15 together with the costs
of prosecution and, in default thereof, be committed to jail for a period
not exceeding 15 days. Nothing in this article shall change the metered
parking in the Justus Park Parking Lot as governed by Chapter 295 of
the Code of the City of Oil City.
131. Editor's Note: A copy of the terms and conditions for monthly permit parking is on file in
the office of the City Manager.
§ 295-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-48
1:561

ARTICLE VII
Speed Limits
[Adopted 1-30-2006 by Ord. No. 2723 (Ch. 173, Art. VII, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 295-49. Designation of speed limits.
The maximum speed limit has been established on portions of the specified
streets as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
on any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
Fern Court 15
Fern Drive 15
§ 295-50. Violations and penalties.
Upon enactment of this article, any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall
pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour in excess of the maximum speed limit.
§ 295-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-50
1:563
Chapter 298
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 295.
§ 295-50 OIL CITY CODE § 295-50
1:564
ARTICLE I
Operation on City Property
[Adopted 5-10-1976 by Ord. No. 2334 (Ch. 176, Art. I, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 298-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Oil City.
CITY PROPERTY — All real estate owned or leased by the City of Oil City
and includes the City's parks, playgrounds and recreational areas.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, company or
organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Any motor-powered conveyance upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported. Exclusion is made for vehicles in the
service of the City or vehicles maintaining City property.
§ 298-2. Operation on City property restricted.
No person on City property shall:
§ 298-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $300, together with judgment of imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, if any fine imposed, together with costs, is not paid
within 10 days of the date of imposition thereof.
A. Drive, operate, wheel or push any vehicle, as hereinabove defined, on or
upon any City property, except the public streets, highways, roads and
alleys within the City and upon other City property, but only in the areas
to the extent and in the manner expressly permitted and authorized by
signs duly erected and posted by the City.
B. Fail to obey all City police officers and park or playground employees;
such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct
vehicular traffic operators whenever and wherever needed in the City
parks, playgrounds and recreational areas.
C. Fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution,
stopping or parking and all other posted signs within the City parks,
playgrounds and recreational areas.
§ 298-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-3
1:565

ARTICLE II
Engine Braking
[Adopted 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2699 (Ch. 176, Art. II, of the 1986
Code)]
§ 298-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGINE BRAKING — The use or operation of any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression or deceleration of any
motor vehicle which results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise
from such vehicle.
§ 298-5. Prohibition.
No motor vehicle shall utilize an engine braking system on the following
sections of City streets, which prohibition shall be properly posted to the
traveling public:
Street Description
Colbert Avenue From Graff Street south to its intersection with Alcorn
Avenue
East First Street From Central Avenue to its intersection with Wilson
Avenue
West First Street From the City line east to its intersection with Central
Avenue
§ 298-6. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
use of an engine braking system to protect the safety and property of City
residents, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians and the operator and
passengers of the motor vehicle involved in the emergency situation.
§ 298-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300 and the cost of
prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, shall be sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 298-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-7
1:567
Chapter 303
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Gas, oil and water lines — See Ch. 179.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 230.
Sewers — See Ch. 255.
Solid waste — See Ch. 268.
§ 298-7 OIL CITY CODE § 298-7
1:568
ARTICLE I
General
§ 303-1. Reference to Codes.
This chapter is intended to complement the Plumbing Code of the City of Oil
City. If there is any conflict between this chapter and any Plumbing Code
adopted by the City, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
§ 303-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to words used in this chapter:
CITY — City of Oil City.
PLUMBING CODE — The International Plumbing Code, as adopted and
readopted by the City from time to time.
SATISFACTORY — A condition used to describe a customer service line that
is able to withstand normal operation and maintenance of the customer's
curb valve and interior shutoff valves without leaking.
WORKMANLIKE — A manner of performing work which is professional
according to usual trade practices.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-2
1:569

ARTICLE II
Water Service
§ 303-3. City to supply water.
§ 303-4. Service to properties beyond City limits.
The City currently serves some properties situate beyond the limits of the
City. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the City to
continue such service, and it may, subject to the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, discontinue such service at any time.
§ 303-5. Rules and regulations.
The water service supplied by the City of Oil City shall be provided to
such persons, firms and corporations, subject to the following rules and
regulations:
A. The City of Oil City shall have the exclusive right, at all times, to supply
the City, and such persons, firms or corporations therein as may desire
the same, with water. All occupied buildings in the City of Oil City shall
be connected to the City water supply system, and no other piped or onsite
supply of water to such occupied buildings shall be allowed to be
used for drinking or bathing purposes. Any building not so connected at
the time of this chapter shall be so connected immediately unless a
written waiver is granted by the City.
B. The City shall have the authority to enter upon or into any building or
premises where City water is supplied and billed at all reasonable times
for the purpose of inspection of pipes and fixtures; setting, testing,
repairing, replacing or reading meters; turning water off or on; and
enforcing rules generally. If such building or premises is occupied, the
City employee shall present credentials to the occupant and request
entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the City employee
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person
having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the City shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry. When the City employee shall have first
obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law
to secure entry, no owner or occupant or person having charge, care or
control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper
request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by
the City employee for the purpose of inspection and examination
pursuant to this chapter. In addition, each and every refusal of the
City's right to enter a building or premises will render the offending
party liable to penalties prescribed for violation of the rules as further
described herein.
A. Service taps.
§ 303-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:571
(1) A separate tap to the City of Oil City water main shall be made for
each customer to which water may be furnished by the City. Such
tap from the City main to the curb stop shall be made only by the
proper officers and employees of the City or under its immediate
direction, supervision and control at the cost and expense of the
owner of the property being served.
(2) There are existing service taps in the City which serve more than
one customer. Whenever such customer replaces his portion of a
service line, separate taps and service lines will be made by the
City to serve each customer. In such cases, each property owner
served shall be solely responsible for all costs associated with the
installation of a separate service line to his premises but shall not
be obligated to pay a tap fee for such separate tap. Any property
owner not conforming to this requirement may have his water
service terminated by the City until compliance is achieved.
B. Service lines.
(1) The service lines from the curb stop to the meter shall be installed
and maintained in satisfactory condition at the cost and expense of
the owner of the property to be served. Such lines shall be not less
than 3/4 inch in diameter. Water service pipe shall be rated for 200
psi (pounds per square inch) minimum pressure and shall be made
of Type K copper or copper alloy tubing, or polyethylene (PE)
plastic tubing (outside diameter must be the same as copper tubing
size), in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing Code of
the City of Oil City, as adopted and readopted by the City from time
to time, and shall also conform to the American Waterworks
Standard Specifications for potable water service, as applicable.
For polyethylene (PE) water service pipe, stainless steel stiffeners
must be used at all fittings and connections, and a tracer wire made
for the purpose of locating underground pipes shall be installed
over and along the service pipe and shall be connected to water
system components capable of conducting electricity at either end.
Water service pipe and tracer wire shall be installed and connected
to the satisfaction of the City. [Amended 8-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2812]
(2) There shall be no physical connection between the City water
supply and any private or on-site water supply, and each system
shall be entirely independent of the other.
(3) Customer service lines shall be maintained in satisfactory
condition. Whenever it is determined that a leak exists through a
service line for which the property owner is responsible, the
property owner shall have such leak repaired immediately at his
cost and expense. If the City determines that the leak is causing a
great loss of water or other problem, the City may, at its sole
discretion, turn the water off immediately. If the City determines
that a leak exists, it will notify the property owner, giving said
§ 303-5 OIL CITY CODE § 303-5
1:572
owner 10 days to repair the leak. If the property owner fails to
repair the leak within the ten-day period, the City reserves the
right to discontinue water service (if it has not already been
discontinued) to the premises until such leak has been repaired.
In such cases, the property owner will be responsible for any turnon
fee which may be required to continue water service unless
the turn-on is accomplished during working hours of the Water
Distribution Department.
C. Installation of service lines.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property being
served by the water service line to notify the City and to secure the
necessary permit(s) from the City's Code Enforcement Office when
a water service line will be replaced or repaired and for ensuring
all installation work is done in a workmanlike manner. Any
damages to City facilities shall be promptly reported to the City.
The City shall then repair such facilities at the sole cost and
expense of the persons or firms causing the damage or of the
property owner of the premises being served if compensation
cannot be collected from the persons of firms causing the damage.
Any damages to other than City facilities shall be promptly
reported to the owner of those facilities.
(2) The City reserves the exclusive right to operate curb valves and all
other water system facilities. Persons or firms desiring to turn curb
valves off or on must have prior permission from the Water
Distribution Foreman. Anyone in noncompliance with this provision
shall be subject to penalties as designated in the City's Plumbing
Code.132
(3) Connection of an old service line to the City's curb valve shall be
the responsibility of the property owner of the premises being
served and shall be done only by a plumber who is preapproved by
the City of Oil City. The City's Code Enforcement Office shall
maintain a list of approved plumbers allowed to do such work. Any
person or firm performing such connection work who does not
obtain the proper preapproval shall be subject to penalties as
designated in the City's Plumbing Code.133 The City shall connect
new service pipes to the curb valves, as long as all requirements of
the Distribution Department are met; this will be done at no charge
during normal working hours of the Water Distribution
Department, but a fee will be charged to the property owner for
work performed during other times.
(4) Water service pipe shall be installed in a trench of sufficient depth
to provide not less than four feet of cover over the pipe. The pipe
shall be installed and the trench kept open until the line has been
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Plumbing Standards.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Plumbing Standards.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:573
inspected and approved by the City. At least a six-inch cushion shall
be provided between the pipe and any rock in the bottom of the
trench. Backfill shall be carefully placed and tamped under and
around the pipe with no voids under the pipe. The backfill shall
be placed and tamped in six-inch layers for a depth of not less
than one foot over the pipe. The remaining earth may be bulldozed,
except that no large stones shall be placed in the trench. All
backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable
or organic material, boulders, rocks or stones or other material
which, in the opinion of the City, is unsuitable. Service lines shall
be installed in a straight line, if possible. Thrust blocks shall be
installed in all lines over two inches in diameter whenever there is
a change in size or direction of the line.
(5) The water service pipe shall be placed at least 10 feet horizontally
from any building drain or building sewer, except that, only as a
last resort and at the sole discretion of the City, it may be placed in
the same trench with the building drain or sewer when the
following conditions are met:
(a) The water service pipe is placed on a solid shelf excavated on
one side of the common trench.
(b) The elevation of the bottom of the water service pipe is at least
18 inches above the top of the building drain or building sewer.
(c) The materials and joints of sewer and water service pipe are
installed in such manner and possess the necessary strength
and durability to prevent the escape of solids, liquids and gases
therefrom under all known adverse conditions, such as
corrosion, strains due to temperature change, settlements,
vibrations and superimposed loads.
(6) Service lines shall be installed within a sleeve through the building
wall, which sleeve shall be at least two inches larger in diameter
than the service line pipe diameter. After the service pipe is
installed through such sleeve, the space around the service pipe
shall be sealed with nonshrink grout or other such material to
properly seal the opening.
D. Removal of service lines. When one curb stop serves more than one
premises, and one or more of the premises is being demolished, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner of property being demolished to cut
off and cap his water service line at the point where this line is
separated from the service line that serves the other premises. The cap
shall be placed on the fitting that is used to separate the service lines.
E. Meters.
(1) All water services supplied by the City system shall be metered,
except that lines in place solely for fire protection are not required
to be metered; such fire lines shall be equipped with a three-
§ 303-5 OIL CITY CODE § 303-5
1:574
fourths-inch bypass line on which the City shall install a water
meter to detect water flow through the line. The customer shall
be responsible for the plumbing of the bypass line, which shall
meet the requirements of Figure 2,134 attached as part of this
chapter. The City shall allow more than one meter to serve a single
premises, provided that there is a sufficient reason for multiple
meters, in the sole opinion of the City.
(2) The City initiated a City-wide meter replacement program in 1996.
Water meters replaced under this program are owned by the City of
Oil City, and the City shall be responsible for all testing,
maintenance and replacement of these meters from the date of
installation of the new meter.
(3) No person shall be allowed to remove a meter from the service line
or tamper with a meter in any way; if the City has reason to believe
meter removal or tampering has taken place, the property owner of
the premises served shall be subject to penalties as prescribed
herein.
(4) Property owners are responsible for all other plumbing, including
the piping up to the connections on either side of the meter. The
City is responsible for the meter connections. Whenever plumbing
near or around the water meter is replaced or the water service
line is replaced, the new plumbing shall meet the requirements of
the applicable standard meter setting, attached as Figures 1-1 and
1-2 to this chapter.135 [Amended 8-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2812]
(5) All water meters shall be of a make, design and size approved by
the City and shall be located as approved by the City. Water meters
shall be located either in an approved pit located outside the
building or within the building being serviced as per the
requirements outlined in Figures 1-1 and 1-2, as applicable.136
(6) Property owners shall be responsible for ensuring that the meter
and interior plumbing are protected from freezing and that the
meter is kept safe from damage. If a meter becomes frozen or is
damaged in any way, the property owner shall be liable for the
City's costs associated with repairing or replacing the meter.
Property owners are also responsible to notify the City immediately
if a water meter becomes frozen or is damaged in any way. Failure
to do so may result in penalties as prescribed herein being imposed
on the property owner.
(7) Such water meter shall be so located on the premises as to afford
convenient access thereto to the proper officers and employees of
the City.
134. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is attached to this chapter as Typical Fire Line Detail.
135. Editor's Note: Figures 1-1 and 1-2.
136. Editor's Note: Figures 1-1 and 1-2 are attached to this chapter.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-5
1:575
F. Meter pits.
(1) Meter pits outside the building shall be placed adjacent to or within
the immediate vicinity of the street or utility right-of-way and shall
be constructed and maintained by the property owner at his
expense. Meter pit locations must be approved by the City prior to
construction.
(2) Meter pits shall at all times be free of debris and other foreign
matter so that the City shall have unobstructed access to the meter.
(3) All meter pits shall be constructed under the supervision and
inspection of the proper officials of the City. The meter pit shall be
constructed of concrete, brick, steel or of vitrified clay or concrete
pipe or of other material approved by the City and of such a size
and shape to provide for the installation of the meter and shutoff
valves and bypass and appurtenances when required and be of
sufficient depth to provide at least four feet of cover over the pipe.
The meter pit shalt be constructed to provide maximum frost
protection and shall be provided with a drain pipe, drainage pit or
constructed watertight, as required by the City.
(4) Meter pits will be required:
(a) When a service line is less than two inches in diameter and the
distance from the public right-of-way to the building being
serviced is in excess of 100 feet or when the service line is two
inches or larger and the distance from the public right-of-way
to the building being serviced is in excess of 50 feet.
(b) When service lines are placed over unstable ground, over filled
ground, beneath underground structures where settlement
might occur, in excessive slope areas, in areas subject to
vibrations or excessive superimposed loads or any other area
which, in the opinion of the Engineer for the City, might
adversely affect the performance of the service line.
(c) When a suitable place is not available in the building being
serviced for the location of the meter.
G. Main extensions.
(1) For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BONA FIDE PROSPECTIVE CUSTOMER — Any owner or lessee
who is or will be the occupant of an existing developed premises
having a curbline abutting on that part of a public street, alley or
highway in which there is, or is to be, located a distribution main of
the City, who shall file a signed application and pay the City service
connection fee for a new street service connection to such premises
and for water service to begin immediately following installation of
the street service connection.
§ 303-5 OIL CITY CODE § 303-5
1:576
§ 303-6. Water charged to owner of property served.
All charges for water furnished by the City of Oil City shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property which is served by the City with
water at the rate hereinafter fixed; exceptions to this rule are outlined in
Article III herein.
§ 303-7. Reading of meters.
All water meters shall be read by the City monthly, ice and snow permitting,
and bills shall be rendered by the City to the property owners within said
month for the amount of water shown to have been consumed during said
period in accordance with the schedule of rates hereinafter fixed. If an
active meter is found stationary for any meter reading period, the bill for
such period shall be estimated on an equitable basis having regard to
previous readings for similar periods.
STREET SERVICE CONNECTION — A pipe with appurtenances
used to conduct water from a distribution main of the City to the
curbline of the premises.
(2) The City of Oil City will extend existing distribution mains within
public right-of-way in the City of Oil City a distance of 55 feet in
length for each bona fide prospective customer not presently
served by water and making application for water service under
these rules and regulations. Such extensions will be made without
costs to such customer(s).
(3) When an extension greater than 55 feet in length for each bona fide
prospective customer is required, such extension will be made
under the terms of an extension deposit agreement, which shall be
in accordance with the current policies in effect at the time of the
application for water service. The City shall have the exclusive
right to determine the type and size of mains to be installed and the
other facilities required to render adequate service; provided,
however, that where the City decides to install a main larger than
eight inches in diameter and an eight-inch main would render
adequate service throughout the extension, the City will bear the
difference in material cost between a pipe larger than eight inches
and an eight-inch pipe.
(4) In determining the length of and necessity for any extension
required pursuant hereto, the terminal point of such extension
shall, in all cases, be at that point in the curbline which is
equidistant from the side property lines of the last lot for which
water service is requested, and a street service connection will be
provided only for customer service lines from the curb to the
premises to be served which are laid in a straight tine at right
angles to the curbline.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-7
1:577

ARTICLE III
Water Rates/Delinquent Accounts
§ 303-8. Schedule of rates. [Amended 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2677;
7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2704; 12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2709;
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2732; 12-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2825137;
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2844138; 12-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2852139;
12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2860140]
A. Each person, partnership or corporation owning property, within or
outside of the City of Oil City, to which water shall be furnished by the
City, shall pay the City for the same in accordance with the following
schedule of rates, to wit:
(1) Minimum monthly charge.
(a) For all eight-inch water meters: $106.50/per month.
(b) For all six-inch water meters: $106.50/per month.
(c) For all four-inch water meters: $71.50/per month.
(d) For all three-inch water meters: $46.50/per month.
(e) For all two-inch water meters: $26.50/per month.
(f) For all 1 1/2-inch water meters: $21.50/per month.
(g) For all one inch or smaller water meters: $14.50/per month.
(2) In addition to the above minimum monthly charge, the following
rate schedule based on monthly readings as aforesaid also applies:
(a) From zero cubic feet to 1,600 cubic feet add $5.05 per 100
cubic feet.
(b) Over 1,600 to 3,200 cubic feet add $4.95 per 100 cubic feet.
(c) Over 3,200 to 4,800 cubic feet add $4.90 per 100 cubic feet.
(d) Over 4,800 to 6,400 cubic feet add $4.85 per 100 cubic feet.
(e) Over 6,400 to 100,000 cubic feet add $4.65 per 100 cubic feet.
(f) Over 100,000 to 200,000 cubic feet add $4.25 per 100 cubic
feet.
137. Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2014 billing period.
138. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2016 billing period.
139. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2017 billing period.
140. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated that it would become effective beginning with the
1-1-2018 billing period.
§ 303-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-8
1:579
§ 303-9. Delinquent accounts; discontinuance of service. [Amended
5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2714; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2722;
1-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2794]
§ 303-10. Temporary discontinuance of service. [Amended
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2747]
(g) Over 200,000 to 700,000 cubic feet add $3.85 per 100 cubic
feet.
(h) Over 700,000 cubic feet add $3.60 per 100 cubic feet.
B. All bills or invoices shall be dated and shall be due and payable upon
presentation thereof. A penalty of 14% shall be added to the net sum
due and payable if payment is not made within 20 days from the date of
such invoice or bill. Each bill or invoice shall designate the date on and
after which the penalty and amount thereof shall be added.
A. All tenant-occupied properties for which the owner receives the utility
bill will be red-tagged prior to termination when said account has been
delinquent for more than 30 days. A fee of $20 will be added to the
utility bill for each red tag placed on the delinquent property.
B. If any account shall be delinquent for more than 30 days after the same
shall become due and payable, it shall be lawful for the City to
discontinue the furnishing of water to such property and to shut off the
water supply from said property by whatever mans necessary until such
time as the water rent due the City is fully paid. In addition to full
payment, additional charges of $25 for turning the water off and $25 for
turning the water on shall be required if either activity is conducted
during normal working hours (currently 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.); if the
activity is conducted beyond normal working hours, each additional
charge will be increased to $32.50. Upon a second termination of
service within a twelve-month period, an additional cumulative $25 for
turning the water off and $25 for turning the water on shall be required
for each subsequent termination of service within a twelve-month
period. If the customer account has not been terminated for a period of
12 months, the fee shall revert to its original starting point.
A. If a property owner of an owner-occupied or rental unit should desire to
temporarily discontinue water service to one or more units which
receive utility service from the City, the property owner must notify the
City in writing at least two weeks in advance of that desire and give the
address, account number and the desired date of utility discontinuance.
A shutoff fee of $20 will be charged to the property owner for his
discontinuance and must be paid at the time of the discontinuance
request. A separate turn-on fee of $20 will be charged upon notification
to the City to resume service at the service address.
B. Any property owners who fail to notify the City of their desire to
discontinue water service at any service address will be responsible for
§ 303-8 OIL CITY CODE § 303-10
1:580
§ 303-11. Lien for delinquent water rents. [Amended 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 2747]
In addition to the foregoing remedy and such other remedies as are
provided by law for the collection of delinquent water rents, it shall be
lawful for the proper officers of the City to file a lien or liens against the
property for any and all delinquent accounts in the same manner provided
by law in the case of unpaid City taxes on real estate and to proceed to
collect the same.
§ 303-12. Rules and regulations. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2747]
The City reserves the right to and may from time to time adopt, revise or
amend such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and proper for the
use and operation of the Water Department or system, and all such rules
and regulations shall be and become a part of this article and enforceable
as part of this article. Said rules and regulations, when adopted or amended
by official action of Council, shall be printed in book or pamphlet form and
be available for general dissemination to the public and shall become a part
of this article and enforceable as a part of this article.
§ 303-13. Initial and final readings.
a minimum utility bill for all utility services provided to that service
address.
C. Any temporary discontinuance of water service shall also affect any
sewer charges that may relate to the subject property, with the
exception of the conditions outlined in paragraph (D) below.
D. The minimum monthly charges for water and sewer identified in § 303-8
and § 255-13, respectively, shall continue to be billed despite any
temporary discontinuance of service. The only exception to this
requirement is if the property owner obtains a demolition permit from
the City, then the minimum charge for all utilities shall be eliminated.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, all persons who shall
request the initiation of utility service because of moving into a dwelling
unit in the City of Oil City shall be responsible for a fee of $20 to cover
the costs associated with establishing the initial water meter reading at
said location and for other administrative costs related to such
initiation. Such cost will be placed on the initial billing for utility service
at that location.
B. In addition, all persons who are moving from a dwelling unit in the City
must request a final water meter reading in order to formally terminate
the utility service. There will be no charge for the final reading request.
At the time of the final reading, the City will terminate the service at
that location, which service shall not be reconnected until a formal
written request has been made to initiate service at that location.
§ 303-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-13
1:581

ARTICLE IV
Deposits
§ 303-14. Applications.
§ 303-15. Amounts.
§ 303-16. Exception.
A deposit shall not be required of any applicant for which a municipal
lien may be filed against real property of the applicant in the event of
nonpayment of charges for services provided by the City of Oil City.
§ 303-17. Remedies.
In addition to any other remedy provided by the various ordinances of
the City of Oil City pertaining to water service, sewer rentals and solid
waste disposal, if an applicant fails to pay for services provided within 30
days after the due date for payment thereof, the City may discontinue or
disconnect such services and apply any security deposit for such services to
the delinquent account. In the event that a security deposit is insufficient to
cover any such delinquent account, the City of Oil City may resort to further
legal process for the collection of any amounts still remaining due.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, all persons who
request residential or commercial water service, sewer rentals and
solid waste disposal as provided by the City of Oil City shall make
written application for the same through the Utility Office on the proper
form provided.
B. Applications for utility services by tenants will be accepted only when
accompanied by a contract with the landlord. Said contract shall state
that the landlord will assume final responsibility in any delinquency in
payment of utility bills.
A. All such persons who apply for the service set forth hereinabove shall,
at the time of their application, deposit with the City of Oil City the sum
of $150, to be held by the City of Oil City as a security deposit for the
payment of amounts due the City of Oil City for services provided as
from time to time fixed by the City of Oil City. [Amended 1-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 2794]
B. All persons who are currently being provided with residential or
commercial water service, sewer rentals and solid waste disposal and
who have any or all of these services discontinued/disconnected for
nonpayment must also deposit $100 with the City of Oil City prior to the
resumption of these services.
§ 303-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-18
1:583
§ 303-18. Refunds.
Any person who has paid a deposit in accordance with this chapter and
who gives notice to the City, in writing, of his desire to discontinue water
service, sewer rentals and solid waste disposal shall be entitled to a refund
of the deposit, less any amounts due and owing the City for such services.
In addition, any person who has remained current with the payment for any
and all utility charges from the City may have his or her deposit returned
after two years upon written request for such refund.
§ 303-18 OIL CITY CODE § 303-18
1:584
ARTICLE V
Prohibition of Fluoridation
§ 303-19. Fluoridation of water supply prohibited.
The chemical known as "sodium fluoride," or any other fluoride, shall not be
injected, inserted, instilled, blended, furnished or used in the water supply
or water system maintained and operated by the City of Oil City for the
inhabitants and/or users thereof for any purpose whatsoever.
§ 303-20. Purchase of fluorides for water system prohibited.
No elected or appointed officer, official, employee, agent, servant or
functionary of the City of Oil City shall be authorized or permitted to
expend, pay out or disburse municipal moneys or funds for the purchase,
supplying, using, furnishing or contracting for the chemical known as
"sodium fluoride," or any other fluoride, for use in any manner in the water
supply or water system maintained and operated by the City of Oil City.
§ 303-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-20
1:585

ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
§ 303-21. Access to meter.
Any person refusing to allow reasonable access to City employees for the
purpose of inspection of pipes and fixtures; setting, testing, repairing,
replacing or reading meters; turning water off or on; or for generally
enforcing the rules contained in this chapter shall be subject to a
discontinuance of water service.
§ 303-22. Meter tampering.
If the City has reason to believe a meter has been removed from service
or tampered with in any way so as to preclude or avoid an accurate water
meter reading, the person(s) responsible for such action shall be subject to
a fine of up to $300 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment, for each and every
convicted offense, in addition to the normal billing for water service. If the
fine and other costs/fees are not paid within 30 days after conviction, then
water service to the property shall be discontinued by the City until paid.
If a person(s) is convicted of meter removal and/or meter tampering two or
more times, the City will then require a two-hundred-dollar service deposit
to be paid for the service address where the meter removal or tampering
took place. If such service deposit is not paid within 30 days after the
second or any subsequent convictions, along with the fine and other costs/
fees, then water service to the property shall be discontinued by the City
until these costs/fines/deposit are paid.
§ 303-23. Meter damage.
If a meter has been frozen or damaged in any way, the water customer
served shall be responsible to pay the City's costs associated with repairing
or replacing the meter. If such charges are not paid within a thirty-day
period after notification, then the water service may be discontinued by the
City until such time as such charges are paid in full.
§ 303-24. Enforcement.
Any violation of the rules of this chapter not so particularly described
previously shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service. The City
reserves the exclusive right to enforce the requirements of this chapter, and
nothing herein contained shall be construed to relinquish the City's right to
enforce this chapter by whatever means are available under law.
§ 303-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-24
1:587
Chapter 310
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned and vacant buildings — See Ch.
80.
Adult-oriented businesses — See Ch. 84.
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Fees — See 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 274.
§ 303-24 OIL CITY CODE § 303-24
1:588
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 310-1. Title.
The official title of this chapter shall be the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Oil City."
§ 310-2. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 8, 2014.
§ 310-3. Purpose and authority.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the City under
Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are designed:
§ 310-4. Community development objectives.
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this chapter are made in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan for the general welfare of the City
and are intended to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
disaster evacuation, airports and national defense facilities, the
provision of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public
grounds, and other public requirements; as well as
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; and
C. To be in accordance with an overall program and with consideration for
the character of the municipality, its various parts and suitability of the
various parts for particular uses and structures.
A. To support and encourage order and beauty in the development of Oil
City's environment for the convenience and pleasure of present citizens
and future residents through sound land development practices.
B. To encourage future land development to complement a harmonious
and efficient pattern of future City growth.
C. To encourage innovation in residential development and renewals so
that the demand for housing may be met by greater variety and type,
design and layout of dwellings.
D. To preserve strategic properties suitable for industrial development for
the establishment of diversified industry within the City.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4
1:589
§ 310-5. Compliance.
No structure shall be located, erected, demolished, constructed, moved,
altered externally, converted or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land
be used or be designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and
certifications required by this chapter. Except that the City of Oil City will
be exempt from the provisions of this chapter in the exercise of its municipal
functions. Any use not specifically permitted is prohibited.
§ 310-6. Interpretation of regulations.
Whenever the provisions of this chapter are at variance with any other
lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more restrictive
requirements shall govern. (See Municipalities Planning Code, Section
603.1.141)
E. To guide commercial development in such a way as to minimize adverse
influence on adjacent streets and highways and to maintain and protect
existing commercial uses.
F. To protect property values to ensure a suitable, attractive and efficient
community environment.
G. To encourage developers to incorporate adequate public facilities and
open spaces in neighborhood design.
H. To protect the natural environment of Oil City from air, land and water
pollution.
I. To provide for rational residential development at densities consistent
with the welfare of the City.
J. To implement the objectives of the Oil City Comprehensive Plan.
K. To implement the objectives of the Oil City Waterways Study.
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603.1.
§ 310-4 OIL CITY CODE § 310-6
1:590
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 310-7. Interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall
include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "building"
includes "structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or
any part thereof." The phrase "used for" includes "intended," "designed,"
or "arranged to be used or occupied." The word "person" includes an
individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other
legal entity. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to
the specified example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character. Except as defined within this chapter,
all words and phrases shall have their normal meanings and usage.
§ 310-8. Specific terms.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this
section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, incidental to and located
on the same lot as a principal building, and used for an accessory use such
as a garage, shed or swimming pool.
ACCESSORY USE — A use clearly incidental and subordinate to and located
on the same lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any place of business where various forms
of adult entertainment are offered to the general public, which shall include
adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult theater, adult video theater, escort agency, massage parlor,
nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or any other commercial
establishment where adult entertainment is offered or presented for money
or other forms of consideration. For purposes of this section, the term
"specified sexual activities" shall mean any of the following: (a) the fondling
or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus
or female breasts; (b) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; (c)
excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (a) and (b) above; (d) human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; and the term "specified anatomical areas" shall mean
human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, female breast(s) below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a
discernible turgid state, even if completely covered.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place that the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or, for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motionpicture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other
A.
§ 310-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:591
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguishable or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
activities.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
Books, magazines, periodical or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representation that are
characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical activities; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
B.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Live performances that are enhanced by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(3)
C.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, tavern, concert hall, banquet hall, party
room, conference center, restaurant, nightclub, club, bar, reception
center, indoor amusement center, dance hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or seminudity or performances that are
characterized by the exposure of specified sexual areas or specified
sexual activities.
D.
ADULT VIDEO THEATER — A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides
or other photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
E.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration. "Escort" means
a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
F.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:592
APARTMENT — A part of a building containing cooking and housekeeping
facilities, consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended, designed and
used as a residence/dwelling unit.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Same as "dwelling, multifamily."
ARCHITECTURAL SCREEN — Any man-made system or materials used for
blocking a line of sight, which would include a fence or fencing (as defined
by this chapter), and also include panels, latticework, or louvers used to
divide, conceal or protect.
guide or date for another or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or business that provides the
services of massage and body manipulation, including exercise, heat
and light treatments of the body, and all forms and methods of
physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner or
professional physical therapist licensed by the commonwealth. This
definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school
gymnasium, salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or
similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service.
G.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical
areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who
pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studios shall
not include a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania which includes a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or in part by public taxation; private college or
university that maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure where:
There is no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
(1)
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
(2)
H.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
(2)
I.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:593
ASSEMBLY — The concourse or meeting together of a considerable number
of persons at the same time. Also, the persons so gathered.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SERVICES AND GARAGES — Establishments
primarily engaged in furnishing automotive repair, rental, leasing and
parking services to the general public.
AWNING/CANOPY — A roof-like covering made of a durable canvas or vinyl
material supported by a frame that projects over a sidewalk or ground area.
BASEMENT — A story or portion of a story partly below the average grade
of the surrounding ground with at least 1/2 of its height (measured from
floor to ceiling) below the average grade level of the surrounding ground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A private residence which contains eight or
fewer bedrooms used for providing overnight accommodations to the public
and in which breakfast is the only meal served and is included in the charge
for the room.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST RESIDENCE — A use which allows the conversion
of an existing owner-occupied residential dwelling to provide a maximum of
two additional living units that can be temporarily rented to guests by the
owner/occupant, and which allows for the provision of breakfast as a part of
the rental fee.
BILLBOARD — A sign indicating a business conducted somewhere other
than on the premises, on which advertising matter of any character is
printed, posted or lettered by any means and is designed for such purposes.
A billboard may be either freestanding or attached to a surface of a building
or other structure.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the City of Oil City.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A type of residential living facility which provides
food and shelter, for payment, to three or more adults who are unrelated to
the provider and who require no services beyond food and shelter. See also
"rooming house."
BOTTLE CLUB — A place of assembly owned, maintained or leased, for
pecuniary gain, in which no intoxicating beverages are sold, but where
patrons are permitted to bring intoxicating liquors upon the premises for
their own use and consumption.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of that part of the lot not included within the
open space herein required.
BUILDABLE WIDTH — The width of that part of the lot not included within
the open spaces herein required.
BUILDING — A roofed structure, whether or not enclosed by walls, to be
used for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, goods, materials or
animals.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:594
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental
and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo
finishing; and personal supply services.
CARPORT — A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
CAR WASH — A structure or designated area used for the purpose of
cleaning or reconditioning the exterior and interior surfaces of automotive
vehicles, whether self-operated or not, but not including an incidental onebay
washing facility in a gasoline service station.
CHURCH — A place of worship (church, synagogue, temple, mosque or
similar facility) that is used for prayer, religious education or regular
religious services.
COLLEGE HOUSING — A structure or structures owned by a college/
university or owned by a nonprofit corporation whose sole purpose is to
promote and support that college/university that permits living
arrangements within a multifamily dwelling occupied by one or more
persons regardless of relation by blood, marriage or legal adoption, who
are attending undergraduate or graduate school, whether full- or parttime,
offered by a college/university, or any combination of such persons.
In the case where the housing development plan exceeds two contiguous
acres in size, the City shall allow the deviation from the site development
requirements142 as long as the general purposes for the standards are
achieved and the general intent of the chapter is observed, in the opinion of
the Zoning Hearing Board. Notwithstanding the previous statement, there
shall be no more structures permitted on the site than would be allowed if
the lot size requirements for the district were met, i.e., total lot size divided
by the minimum lot size of the district.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION (INDOOR) — A facility which offers various
indoor recreational opportunities for its patrons, including such games as
pool, billiards, bowling, video games, dancing and similar pursuits.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service, or any other wireless communication signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device.
This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes
or television antennas or amateur radio equipment, including without
limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas. However, no satellite dish/
antenna may be installed in the front yard area of a residential structure.
142. Editor's Note: See the Lot, Yard and Height Area and Bulk Requirements Table attached to
this chapter.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:595
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 375 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antenna.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.143
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designed for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designed for common ownership
solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium
unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the
unit owners or as defined by the Uniform Condominium Act of
Pennsylvania.144
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — A commercial establishment engaged in building,
foundation or excavation contracting and related activities. A contractor's
yard is construed to mean office, storage and repair facilities/structures, as
well as open, out-of-doors storage areas. Said facilities are to meet all yard,
setback and related requirements of this chapter. Outdoor storage area(s)
must be fully screened from sight with an architectural screen as defined in
this chapter.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment of limited size, designed
for the sale of newspapers, sundries, groceries, freshly prepared foods, and
combustible fuels, but does not provide repair services, tire sales or similar
activities.
CONVERSION DWELLING — A single-family dwelling that has been
converted into two or more residential units that are consistent with the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable codes.
CURB CUT — An indentation of the curb approved by the City or the state
that allows for smooth passage from a street to a sidewalk or driveway.
DAY-CARE FACILITIES —
FOR CHILDREN — Provides out-of-home care for part of a twenty-fourhour
day to children under 16 years of age, excluding care provided by
relatives. For the purpose of this chapter, day-care facilities are divided
into the following types:
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises operated for profit or
not for profit, in which day care is provided at any one time to four,
five or six children. A family day-care home may be operated from
a single-family dwelling.
(1)
A.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
144. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:596
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units allowed, by this chapter, on one
acre of land.
DETERIORATION — A decline in quality of appearance of signs, having
characteristics including, but not limited to, rotting, peeling, corroded,
worn, torn or frayed.
DETERMINATION — A final action taken by the duly appointed Zoning
Officer of the municipality charged with the administration and
enforcement of the chapter. Determinations shall be appealable only to the
Zoning Hearing Board of the City of Oil City.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Animals that are customarily kept as household
pets for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pets shall
include domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, and similar
animals.
DRIVEWAY — A permanently surfaced area of asphalt, concrete, bricks
or pavers designed for such purposes, crushed stone, crushed bricks or
aggregate, and whereby the entrance from the street has an approved City
or state curb cut.
DUMPSTER — Any large metal fully enclosed container that is used for
the temporary storage of waste products, building materials, garbage, etc.
Dumpsters located in commercial districts and that are openly visible shall
be fully screened from view (this shall include all garbage cans set out to
be emptied in the commercial districts). Dumpsters located in residential
districts shall be emptied at least once per week and must be immediately
removed after its use. This shall apply to current existing dumpsters.
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended, designed or used as the living
quarters for one or more families living independently of each other upon
the premises. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include "hotel,"
"motel" or any other type of temporary accommodation.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises operated for profit or
not for profit in which day care is provided at any one time for more
than six but less than 12 children.
(2)
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTERS — A facility in which care is provided
for seven or more children at any one time, and the child-care areas
are not being used as a family residence.
(3)
To qualify as a day-care facility, these uses must secure any needed
state permits or licenses.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing only one
dwelling unit and occupied by one single-family household.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing two dwelling units
and occupied by no more than two family or nonfamily households.
B.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units and occupied by three or more family or nonfamily
C.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:597
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof containing one or more
rooms for living purposes, together with separate and exclusive cooking and
sanitary facilities, accessible from the outdoors either directly or through
an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units, and used or intended to
be used by either one family or one nonfamily household.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments, authorities or
commissions of underground gas; underground or aboveground electrical,
telephone and cable television transmission or distribution systems; and
public water, public sanitary sewer and public storm sewer facilities,
including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, for adequate services of the public health, safety and
general welfare, but excluding office buildings, gas, telephone and electric
substations, the outside storage of equipment, or maintenance depots.
FAMILY — An individual or group of individuals living together as a single
household and which: 1) are related by blood, marriage or adoption; or 2)
if unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, contain a total of no more than
four unrelated individuals; or a group of disabled or handicapped persons,
as defined by the Fair Housing Amendment (1988) to the Federal Civil
Rights Act of 1968, including any required staff.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier erected to enclose, screen
or separate areas. All fences shall be constructed of traditional fencing
materials, and no fence shall be constructed of fencing material designed
for construction or temporary use, such as plastic mesh, or primarily
designed for agricultural use, such as high-tensile wire or small gauge wire
mesh, or constructed of scrap or inappropriate materials creating visual
blight.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low area which is subject to partial
or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source as indicated on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross area of several floors of a building or
buildings measured from the face of the exterior walls or from the center
line of the walls separating two buildings. Floor area shall exclude spaces
such as garages, basements, open porches and similar areas.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
households, whereby the total number of family or nonfamily
households shall not exceed the number of dwelling units.
D. DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling with yards on all four sides.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:598
GALLERY USE — A use of residential property that would allow for art and
music studios and other cultural and arts related uses as a secondary use of
the premises. See § 310-16A(32).
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or portion of a building, either attached
to the principal building or separate, in which only private or pleasure-type
motor vehicles and crafts used by the tenants of the building or buildings
on the premises are stored or kept.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, together with any
structure thereon, used for the retail sale of motor fuel (gas and diesel),
kerosene, liquid natural gas, and lubricants and incidental services, such as
lubrication and hand washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or
minor repairs of tires, batteries or other automobile accessories.
GLARE — Direct light emitted by a luminary that causes noticeably reduced
vision or momentary blindness.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit occupied as a single housekeeping unit in
a family-like environment for the sheltered care of persons with disabilities,
which, in addition to providing food and shelter, shall also provide some
combination of personal care, social or counseling services, rehabilitative
services and transportation to the group home residents. A group home
may be owned or operated under the auspices of a nonprofit association,
private care provider, government agency or other legal entity, other than
the residents themselves or their parents or other individuals who are
their legal guardians. All group homes shall be licensed or certified by the
appropriate state, national, regional or local licensing or certification body.
The term "group home" shall not apply to recovery homes or halfway houses
for people with drug or alcohol addictions.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deckline or highest point
of coping or parapet of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge of gable, hip, shed and gambrel roofs. When the highest
wall of a building with a shed roof is within 30 feet of a street, the height of
such building shall be measured to the highest point of coping or parapet.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily carried on entirely within
a dwelling by occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and which does
not change the residential character thereof. Home occupations are covered
by § 310-16A(16).
HOUSEHOLD — A person or group of people occupying a dwelling unit.
HOUSEHOLDER — The person owning or leasing the dwelling unit.
INCIDENTAL — Something necessary, appertaining to or depending upon
another which is termed the "principal."
LANDSCAPING — The adornment and finishing of unpaved yard areas or
other open spaces. Materials and treatment generally include naturally
growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs and flowers. This treatment
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:599
shall be permitted also to include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water
features and contouring of the earth.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of the intersection of and abutting on
two or more intersection streets and which has an interior angle of less than
115° at the intersection of two street lines (see also "yard, front").
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area measured from the
exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area.
LOT, LINE — Any line dividing a lot from another lot or from an abutting
street or other right-of-way.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. Such lots are also
known as double-frontage lots (see also § 310-19).
LOT, WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot line measured
at the required front yard building line.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY — Heavy manufacturing includes the
processing of paper, pulp or paperboard; the manufacture of chemicals;
the processing of petroleum products, leather tanning; stone, clay or glass
products; the primary metals industry; the manufacture, repair or
rehabilitation of heavy equipment; the manufacture of motors, railroad
equipment and similar activities which would use heavy equipment. Any
activity which uses heavy presses, drop forges, or is engaged in forging or
foundry work. "Heavy industry" is also defined as any manufacturer which
employs 150 or more persons or which will receive or generate 25 or more
truck visits/trips per day.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — The assembly, fabrication, manufacture,
production, processing, storage and/or wholesale distribution of goods or
products where no process involved will produce noise, light, vibration, air
pollution, fire hazard or emissions noxious or dangerous to neighboring
properties within 400 feet. This includes any manufacturing not defined as
heavy manufacturing.
MARQUEE — See "sign, canopy, attached."
MARQUEE SIGN — See "sign, canopy."
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINICS — Establishments where patients for
doctors or dentists are admitted for examination and treatment on an
outpatient basis. Places which house patients overnight and methadone
treatment facilities are specifically excluded in this definition.
MOBILE HOMES — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:600
for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations. Mobile homes shall be limited to the R-2 Medium Density
Residential Districts. [Subject to the Act of May 11, 1972 (P.L. 286, No.
70), known as the "Industrialized Housing Act," and to Title VI (Public Law
93-383), referred to as the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974.] Also, see § 310-28 of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single
ownership which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
Mobile home parks shall be limited to the R-2 Medium Density Residential
Districts.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing individual rooms
or apartment accommodations primarily for transients, each of which is
provided with a parking space, and offered principally for rental and use
by motor vehicle travelers. The term "motel" includes, but is not limited to,
auto courts, motor courts, motor inns, motor lodges or roadside hotels.
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, an appliance, equipment,
instrument, other devices, or an animal other than a barking dog.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any noise which:
NONFAMILY — An individual or householder who shares the dwelling unit
with persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption and who generally
reside together on a temporary basis.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities; or
Jeopardizes the value of property or erodes integrity of the
environment.
C.
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:601
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions of this chapter or an amendment hereafter enacted, where
such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or structure, which does
not comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter or amendment
hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
PARKING LOT or GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A lot or structure whose
principal use is the parking or storage of motor vehicles for specified time
periods or on a rental basis, but not for commercial or public utility vehicles
or the dead storage of motor vehicles.
PARKING LOT, RESIDENTIAL — A parking area for the exclusive use of
the owners or tenants of a residential structure on the same lot and their
guests, but excluding the rental of parking spaces to nonresidents of the
structure or the long-term use (over 24 hours) of parking spaces by
nonresidents.
PARKING SPACE — An open space with a dustless all-weather surface or
space in a private garage or other structure with an effective length of at
least 18 feet and a uniform width of at least nine feet, for the storage of one
automobile and accessible from a public way.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDINGHOME FOR ADULTS — A premises in which
food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a
period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for more than three adults who are
not relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity must not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:602
in matters as dressing, bathing, diet or medication prescribed for selfadministration
but do not require hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing
or intermediate care facility.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel.
PET DAY CARE — The daytime care of domestic dogs or other household
pets belonging to persons not residing on the premises. No overnight
boarding of pets is permitted.
PET GROOMING — The care associated with a pet that can include washing
and manicuring of coat and nails. It shall not include the keeping, breeding,
training, boarding, offering for sale, or the provisions of medical treatment
of any kind to any pet.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by
a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district, created, from time to time,
under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.145
PORCH — A roofed, open area that may be screened and is attached to or
part of a building, with direct access to or from it.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or studio of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, certified public accountant, real
estate broker or salesman, insurance broker or agent, musician, dance
teacher, gallery, hair dresser, barber shop, or similar occupation.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — One of the following services, when
practiced by an individual duly licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
State: massage therapy, occupational therapy, optometry, physical therapy,
psychology, speech-language and hearing examiners, social workers,
marriage and family therapists, professional counselors, lawyers,
accountants, architects, landscape architects, real estate appraisers and
brokers, professional engineers, land surveyors, and arts therapist.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Public notice as required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.146
PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION — A structure or building used for the
distribution of gas, electric, telephone or cable utilities but not including
office, garage, maintenance or similar facilities.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107 for definition of "public notice."
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:603
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (MOTOR HOME) — A self-contained vehicle,
designed for human habitation, with its own motive power, which contains
a passageway from the body of the vehicle to the driver's and front
passenger's seats.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — Restaurants specializing in fast food
with drive-through facilities.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling having three or more sleeping rooms for
rent to persons not related to its other occupants, and who generally reside
together on a temporary basis. See also "boardinghouse."
SALVAGE — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether
or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed,
processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed or other use disposition.
SALVAGE YARD — Any location whose primary use is as a place where
waste or scrap materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged,
packaged, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, materials
such as scrap metals, papers, rags, tires and bottles.
SCHOOL — A public or private institution which provides primary
(elementary) or secondary education and is duly approved/accredited by the
Pennsylvania Department of Education.
SCREEN PLANTING — "Screen planting," for this chapter, shall mean an
evergreen hedge at least six feet high, planted in such a way that it will
block a line of sight. The screening may consist of either one row or multiple
rows of evergreen bushes or trees.
SCREENING — A fence, screen planting or wall at least six feet high,
provided in such a way that it will block a line of sight.
SHOPPING CENTER — A business district or portion thereof, wherein
stores and shops occupy space in a single structure and where these stores
and shops use a common off-street parking lot.
SIGN —
Any structure, building, wall or other outdoor surface, or any device
or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or other representations used
for announcement, direction, advertisement or identification. The word
"sign" includes the word "billboard," but does not include the flag,
pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, nor
public traffic or directional signs. The word "sign" includes temporary
and portable devices as well as permanent signs.
A.
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
including framework and bracing which is incidental to the display
itself when viewed from its widest silhouette. Where the sign consists
of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, the
area shall be considered the smallest rectangle which can be drawn to
encompass all of the letters and symbols.
B.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:604
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, service or industry conducted, sold, manufactured, assembled
or offered for sale other than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign painted, stamped, perforated or stitched or
otherwise applied on the valance of an awning.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry conducted on the premises or to products sold, manufactured or
assembled upon the same premises upon which it is displayed.
SIGN, CANOPY, ATTACHED — A multisided overhead structure or
architectural projection, supported by attachments to a building on one or
more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also supported
by columns at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached
canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
See also "marquee."
SIGN, CANOPY, FREESTANDING — A multisided overhead structure
supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or
soffit of a freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or
external sources of light.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by one or more upright poles,
columns or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any
building or structure.
SIGN, MATERIALS — All permanent signs shall be constructed of solid body
substrates such as aluminum, wood, porcelain, molded plastic, steel, etc.
The use of vinyl and corrugated materials is prohibited.
SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign constructed of lasting materials, with an
unchanging message, attached to a building or installed in the ground.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted with special permission granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with specific criteria set forth
in this chapter and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
STORAGE — "Storage" shall mean storage of those types of goods, wares
and products not encompassed within the definition of "salvage yard."
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any
floor and the next floor above; if there is not more than one floor, the space
between any floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended
for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation which provides
a means of access to abutting property. The word "street" includes
thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane,
alley and road, or similar terms.
STREET LINE — A line defining the right-of-way boundaries of a street.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:605
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land; the word
"structure" is to include antennas or satellite dish antennas.
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, structural steel, heavy equipment, feed and grain, as well
as related goods. Supply yards do not include any type of auto salvage
operation or salvage yard.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than 30
inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — An area of land
developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income
levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses, including some
structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building.
Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings, and parks are
interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close
proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively
compact, limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an
identifiable center and a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood
is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square or prominent
intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy
of streets laid out in a rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets
and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and
are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles
equally.
TRAILER, CARGO OR UTILITY — An enclosed vehicle without motive power
designed to haul or carry goods, materials or other property in its structure
and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power.
TRAILER, BOAT — An open vehicle without motive power designed to haul
various recreational watercraft on its bed and be drawn by a vehicle with
motive power.
TREE LAWN — The area of yard located between the curbline and the front
of the sidewalk.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily dwelling consisting of three or more
dwelling units that are attached side by side by an unpierced party wall.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
VOCATIONAL/AVOCATIONAL VEHICLE — An automobile, truck, van, bus
or other motorized conveyance that is used in support of a business, firm,
career, profession or hobby and which can only be used for those abovestated
purposes.
WALL — A continuous, permanent structure or barrier made of stone, brick
or block designed to enclose an area.
§ 310-8 OIL CITY CODE § 310-8
1:606
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
YARD — That portion of a lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and
extends from the lot line to the yard line.
YARD LINE — A line within a lot defining the minimum distance between
any building or structure or portion thereof and an adjacent lot line. Such
line shall be measured at right angles from and parallel to the
corresponding lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between an adjacent right-of-way and the building
line and extending for the full width of the lot. On corner lots, the front yard
shall be considered on the street which has the least dimension.
YARD, REAR — A yard between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel
thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any
zoning district and extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open yard space between the side lot line and parallel
thereto extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
ZERO LOT LINE — The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that
one or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the City of Oil City or his
authorized representative.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8
1:607

ARTICLE III
District Regulations
§ 310-9. Zoning Map.
A map entitled "the City of Oil City Zoning Map" is hereby adopted as part
of this chapter. The Zoning Map shall be kept on file and be available for
examination at the City offices.
§ 310-10. Zoning districts.
The City is divided into the districts set forth by this chapter and as shown
by the district boundaries on the Zoning Map. The districts are:
A. Residential districts. Districts designated for residential use are for
dwellings and uses normally associated with residential neighborhoods.
The specific purpose for each of the residential districts is as follows:
(1) R-1 Single-Family Residential District. These zones are for singlefamily
dwellings and related uses.
(2) R-1A District. These zones are for single-family dwellings and
related uses in areas of Oil City with limited lot sizes.
(3) R-1B District. These zones are for single-family dwellings and
related uses in areas of Oil City with limited lot sizes.
(4) R-2 Medium-Density Residential District. This district is
established to provide an area of single-family and multifamily
dwellings.
(5) RLB Residential Limited Business District. This district is
specifically designed to accommodate residential, health, medical
and office uses along major streets in the City.
B. Commercial districts. The commercial districts are designed to provide
for needed commercial and related activities within the City.
(1) C-1 General Commercial District. This district is designed to
accommodate a wide range of commercial uses.
(2) C-2 Downtown Business District. This district is specifically
designed for the existing downtown Oil City business district. It
allows for a wide-range of commercial, upper-floor residential and
related issues while recognizing the physical limitations of this
already built-up area. Most off-street parking and loading/
unloading requirements are eliminated for this zone.
C. I-1 Industrial District. The Industrial District is designed to allow space
for existing and new development to support the City's economic life.
Development within this zone is expected to be of a quality that will be
compatible with surrounding land use. It is specifically aimed at light
§ 310-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10
1:609
§ 310-11. Annexed areas.
Any territory hereafter annexed by the City of Oil City will be automatically
zoned R-1, until otherwise classified by the City.
§ 310-12. District boundaries.
District boundaries that are shown between the lines of streets, streams and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the center lines. The
vacation of streets shall not affect the locations of such district boundaries.
When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a
district boundary by such center lines, by the scale or dimensions stated on
the Zoning Map, or by the fact that it clearly coincides with a property line,
he shall refuse action, and the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall
interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the scale of
the Zoning Map and the purpose set forth in all relevant provisions of this
chapter. Requesting parties or landowners shall be responsible for the cost
of determining the property line/district boundary through a survey done by
a licensed professional.
§ 310-13. Zoning district changes.
All approved changes to zoning districts shall be promptly recorded on the
Zoning Map by the Zoning Officer.
§ 310-14. Permitted uses, permitted uses with conditions,
conditional uses and special exceptions.
manufacturing, fabrication, wholesale uses, nonhazardous research
and development, and similar activities.
D. INST-1 Institutional District. This district is designated to provide an
area where a major institution, such as a college or hospital, has a
significant influence on land use in the surrounding area. The purpose
of this district is to provide defined areas for the location of the parent
institution as well as appropriate ancillary and necessary uses generally
associated with these facilities.
E. IOD Institutional Overlay District. The purpose of this district is to
facilitate the orderly expansion of the Venango College of Clarion
University of Pennsylvania, while minimizing any negative intrusions to
residential neighborhoods. This is to be accomplished by using a
graduated approach to use changes, new construction and/or
renovations.
F. CTO Cell Tower Overlay District. The purpose of this district is to
provide a logical area for the location of cell towers to service the area.
A. The permitted uses, conditional uses, and special exceptions for each
district are shown in the following table (in Subsection C). Special
exceptions may be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board in
§ 310-10 OIL CITY CODE § 310-14
1:610
accordance with the express standards and criteria of this chapter.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purpose of this chapter and protect the neighborhood. Conditional
uses may be granted or denied by City Council pursuant to the
recommendations of the Oil City Planning Commission and the express
standards and conditions of this chapter. In allowing a conditional
use, the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter and protect the neighborhood. Permitted uses that have
conditions attached will be granted or denied by the Zoning Officer
based upon the criteria set forth in this section as well as other
appropriate sections of this chapter.
B. Uses in each category shall be according to the common meaning of the
term or according to definitions set forth in Article II. Uses not
specifically listed therein shall not be permitted.
C. Table of Uses by Zoning Districts.
(1) R-1, R-1A, R-1B Single-Family Residential District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Single-family dwellings
Accessory uses
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
Essential services
Accessory buildings
Oil and gas wells
Planned residential developments (see Article VIII)
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
No-impact, home-based business
(b) Special exceptions.
Family day-care facilities [§ 310-16A(20)]
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Home occupations [§ 310-16A(16)]
Churches [§ 310-16A(2)]
Schools [§ 310-16A(2)]
Bed-and-breakfast residence [§ 310-16A(21)]
Cemeteries [§ 310-16A(4)]
Nursery schools [§ 310-16A(8)]
(2) R-2 Medium-Density Residential District.
§ 310-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14
1:611
(a) Permitted uses.
Single-family dwellings
Two-family dwellings
Accessory uses
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
Accessory buildings
Essential services
Oil and gas wells
Individual mobile homes (§ 310-28)
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
No-impact home-based business
Group homes
(b) Special exceptions.
Funeral establishments [§ 310-16A(9)]
Schools [§ 310-16A(2)]
Churches [§ 310-16A(2)]
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Family day-care facilities/group day care [§ 310-16A(20)]
Multifamily dwellings [§ 310-16A(11)]
Rooming houses/boardinghouses [§ 310-16A(6)]
Home occupations [§ 310-16A(15)]
Bed-and-breakfast inn [§ 310-16A(7)]
Bed-and-breakfast residence [§ 310-16A(21)]
Conversion dwellings [§ 310-16A(26)]
Nursing homes [§ 310-16A(2)]
Personal care boardinghomes for adults [§ 310-16A(19)]
Medical and dental offices (§ 310-16A(5)]
Residential parking lots [§ 310-16A(28)]
Adult day care [§ 310-16A(19)]
Nursery schools [§ 310-16A(8)]
Neighborhood grocery stores [§ 310-16A(29)]
Conversion restaurant dwelling [§ 310-16A(30)]
Cemeteries [§ 310-16A(4)]
Gallery uses [§ 310-16A(32)]
Child day-care centers [§ 310-16A(37)]
(c) Conditional uses.
§ 310-14 OIL CITY CODE § 310-14
1:612
Mobile home parks [§ 310-16A(15)]
(3) RLB Residential Limited Business District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Single-family dwellings
Two-family dwellings
Accessory uses and buildings
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
No-impact home-based business
Group homes
(b) Special exceptions.
Hospitals [§ 310-16A(2)]
Home occupations [§ 310-16A(15)]
Nursing homes [§ 310-16A(2)]
Medical and dental offices [§ 310-16A(5)]
Health-related offices and activities [§ 310-16A(5)]
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Professional services [§ 310-16A(5)]
Insurance offices [§ 310-16A(5)]
Child day-care center [§ 310-16A(37)]
Bed-and-breakfast residence [§ 310-16A(21)]
Residential parking lots [§ 310-16A(28)]
(4) C-1 General Commercial District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Professional offices
Adult day care [§ 310-16A(19)]
Retail business
Professional services
Eating and drinking places (not drive-through)
Theaters
Grocery stores
Accessory uses
Essential services
Accessory buildings
§ 310-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14
1:613
Personal services
Business services
Oil and gas wells
Commercial recreation (indoor)
Motels and hotels
Banks and financial institutions
Dry cleaning and laundry/grocery stores
Communication antennas [§ 310-16A(36)]
Churches
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
Galleries and art studios
Private clubs
Government offices
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
Group homes
(b) Special exceptions.
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Residence as a secondary use [§ 310-16A(17)]
Automotive service [§ 310-16A(18)]
Car washes [§ 310-16A(10)]
Eating and drinking places – drive-through [§ 310-16A(24)]
Convenience stores [§ 310-16A(23)]
Gasoline service stations [§ 310-16A(18)]
Day care, all types [§ 310-16A(20)]
Kennels, veterinary offices [§ 310-16A(27)]
(c) Conditional uses.
Shopping centers [§ 310-16A(22)]
Adult-oriented businesses [§ 310-16A(34)]
(5) C-2 Downtown Business District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Adult day care [§ 310-16A(19)]
Retail business
Corporate offices
Office buildings
§ 310-14 OIL CITY CODE § 310-14
1:614
Hotels and motels
Banks and financial institutions
Government offices
Clinics
Philanthropic institutions
Private clubs
Professional services
Personal services
Eating and drinking places (not drive-through)
Theaters
Accessory uses and buildings
Essential services
Convenience stores
Dry cleaning and laundry
Multifamily dwellings
Oil and gas wells
Communication antennas [§ 310-16A(36)]
Churches
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
Residence as a secondary use
Galleries and art studios
Professional offices
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
Group homes
(b) Special exceptions.
Gasoline service stations [§ 310-16A(18)]
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Automotive service [§ 310-16A(18)]
Car washes [§ 310-16A(10)]
Eating and drinking places – drive-through [§ 310-16A(24)]
Bed-and-breakfast residence [§ 310-16A(21)]
Bottle clubs [§ 310-16A(33)]
Commercial recreation (indoor) [§ 310-16A(35)]
Communication towers [§ 310-16A(36)]
(c) Conditional uses.
§ 310-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14
1:615
Shopping centers [§ 310-16A(22)]
(6) I-1 Manufacturing and Industrial District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Light manufacturing
Commercial bakeries
Dry cleaning plants and commercial laundry
Laboratory and research facilities
Rental service and equipment
Truck terminals
Warehousing
Wholesale sales and storage
Corporate offices
Feed mills
Accessory uses
Essential services
Accessory buildings
Oil and gas wells
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
Public parks, recreation and playgrounds
(b) Conditional uses.
Salvage yards [§ 310-16A(25)]
(c) Special exceptions.
Supply yards [§ 310-16A(13)]
Heavy manufacturing [§ 310-16A(14)]
Public utility substations [§ 310-16A(3)]
Contractor's yards [§ 310-16A(13)]
Communication towers/antennas [§ 310-16A(36)]
(7) INST-1 Institutional District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Single-family dwellings
Two-family dwellings
Accessory uses and buildings
Public parks and playgrounds
Essential services
§ 310-14 OIL CITY CODE § 310-14
1:616
§ 310-15. Lot, yard and height requirements.
The minimum lot area, minimum lot area per family, maximum lot coverage
by buildings and structures, minimum depth of front yard, minimum depth
of rear yard, side yard requirements, maximum height of structures and
number of stories for each district shall be as specified in the Lot, Yard and
Height Area and Bulk Requirements Table attached to this chapter.
§ 310-16. Conditional uses and special exceptions and permitted
uses with conditions.
No-impact home-based business
Forestry [§ 310-16A(1)]
Group homes
(b) Special exceptions.
Colleges/universities [§ 310-16A(2)]
Schools [§ 310-16A(2)]
Churches [§ 310-16A(2)]
Home occupations [§ 310-16A(15)]
Nursery schools [§ 310-16A(8)]
Bed-and-breakfast residence [§ 310-16A(21)]
College housing [§ 310-16A(31)]
Hospitals [§ 310-16A(2)]
(8) IOD Institutional Overlay District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Level I: See § 310-16A(38).
(b) Special exceptions.
Level II: See § 310-16A(38)
(c) Conditional use.
Level III: See § 310-16A(38)
(9) CTO Cell Tower Overlay District.
(a) Permitted uses.
Communication antenna [§ 310-16A(36)]
(b) Special exceptions.
Communication towers [§ 310-16A(36)]
§ 310-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:617
A. The criteria for conditional uses and special exceptions are listed below.
In addition to these, the Zoning Hearing Board, in granting special
exceptions, and the City Council/Planning Commission, in considering
conditional uses, is charged with considering the effect that such
proposed uses will have upon the immediate neighborhood. The
preservation and integrity of existing development must be carefully
weighed and given priority in each decision. In granting a special
exception or conditional use, the Board or Council (as appropriate) may
attach reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this
chapter. Some permitted uses may have standards attached. They will
be permitted or denied based upon the criteria set forth by this chapter;
however, the Zoning Officer does not have the power to impose any
additional conditions.
(1) Forestry. The practice of forestry, including timber harvesting, is
declared as a permitted use in all districts. It is subject to the
following condition: To avoid traffic congestion and sound
disturbance, all activities must start at 7:00 a.m. and end by 8:00
p.m. on Saturday and during the week. No Sunday work shall be
permitted.
(2) Churches, schools, hospitals and nursing homes:
(a) Shall provide all parking and loading/unloading requirements
as required by this chapter.
(b) Shall be located on a public street with a minimum cartway of
20 feet.
(c) The design and landscaping shall be compatible with and
preserve the character of adjoining residential uses.
(d) All parking and recreation/play areas which abut residential
uses shall be screened.
(e) Any outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties.
(f) All necessary licenses or permits issued by county, state or
federal agencies shall be presented to the Board, and required
licenses, certificates or permits shall be a condition for
approval.
(3) Public utility substations:
(a) Shall be landscaped and screened with evergreen plantings to
present a minimum intrusion upon the neighborhood.
(b) Shall be enclosed by a security fence at a minimum height of
six feet. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, the
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:618
height of this fence shall be adequate to provide proper
security for the installation.
(c) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
(4) Cemeteries. Prior to the establishment of a new cemetery or the
expansion of an existing cemetery, the owner shall:
(a) File a site plan with the City to demonstrate the design and
layout of the proposed cemetery or cemetery expansion,
specifically illustrating: the proposed drainage plan, the
internal circulation plan, and the location of accessory
building(s).
(b) Avoid streets or driveways opposite proposed means of ingress
and egress. Connections to existing City streets will be no
closer than 50 feet to a street intersection, 15 feet to a fire
hydrant, 30 feet to a driveway on the same side of the street.
(c) Demonstrate compliance with applicable state laws.
(d) All accessory uses must be clearly incidental and subordinate
to the function of the cemetery.
(e) All crematoriums must secure and present all required permits
from the federal, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
County of Venango governments.
(5) Medical and dental clinics, professional services and health-related
facilities, including rehabilitation services.
(a) Such facilities shall exclude penal or correctional institutions
and methadone treatment facilities.
(b) Access shall be from a street with a pavement width of at least
20 feet.
(c) All required parking, loading and unloading shall be contained
entirely on the lot, including sufficient maneuvering room so
that vehicles will not back onto a public street. Any parking
area next to a residential use shall be screened and must be
hard-surfaced (see definition of "screening").
(d) All lighting shall be so arranged to prevent glare to adjoining
properties.
(e) The total floor area of the principal structure and all accessory
uses shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(6) Rooming houses.
(a) Must meet all City Building Code requirements.
(b) May not house more than four total roomers.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:619
(c) Shall not adversely affect the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(d) Shall provide off-street parking for all tenants.
(7) Bed-and-breakfast inn. A bed-and-breakfast inn may be permitted
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in all
commercial districts and in the R-2 Residential Districts. The
principal use of a bed-and-breakfast inn is for lodging, although the
owner(s) may reside on the premises. The following conditions
shall also be observed:
(a) The quarters to be utilized by the guests or the occupants of
the premises shall not be permitted in any accessory structure.
(b) The use by guests shall be temporary only.
(c) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room or
rooms designated for guests as well as any employee(s) of the
inn.
(d) Serving of meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast
only.
(e) Each room that is designated for guest occupancy must be
provided with a minimum of one approved single-station smoke
detector.
(f) Up to eight guests shall be permitted.
(8) Nursery schools. These uses shall:
(a) Provide evidence that they have the necessary City Building
Code, state licenses/permits or registration.
(b) Provide on-lot parking for all employees (see Article IV).
(c) Provide a plan for the pickup and dropoff of students in a safe
manner. For new structures, a circular drive or similar
arrangement shall be required so this activity is off-street. For
existing structures, the same arrangement is required, where
feasible. In any event, the operator of the facility is required to
clearly show how student dropoff/pickup will occur in a safe
manner.
(9) Funeral establishments.
(a) There shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet of off-street
parking, but in no event less than required by Article IV of this
chapter.
(b) All crematoriums must secure and present all required,
licensed permits from the federal government, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the County of Venango.
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:620
(10) Car washes.
(a) Car stacking. The entrance to the car wash shall be designed
as to permit a waiting line of at least six cars. In no event shall
cars be permitted to use the public right-of-way while waiting
to use the wash facility.
(b) All such facilities shall present a drainage plan.
(11) Multifamily dwellings.
(a) All multifamily units shall meet the residential lot and yard
requirements set forth in the R-2 Medium Density Residential
District. Project density shall not exceed that allowed for
multifamily uses in the R-2 District.
(b) The facility shall provide on-site parking as required for
residential units.
(12) Townhouse developments. The following design criteria are
intended for multifamily townhouse developments:
(a) There shall be no townhouse building consisting of more than
six dwelling units.
(b) The developer shall vary architectural treatments between
units in a townhouse development. Variations may include
those of exterior elevation, building setbacks, provision of
balconies, architectural details, pitch of roof, exterior
materials, or use of color. Variety and flexibility in design,
layout and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, services,
recreational areas, common open space, and planting that fully
considers the particular physical characteristics of the site and
natural amenities is highly desired.
(c) The horizontal distance between townhouses shall be:
[1] Two times the average height of the two groups of
townhouses for front or rear walls facing front or rear
walls;
[2] One-and-one-half times the average height for front or rear
walls facing side walls; and
[3] Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls
facing side walls.
(d) The minimum width of any side yard abutting a street,
driveway or parking area shall be not less than 30 feet.
(e) Access and service shall be provided in the front of each
dwelling unit in the townhouse. Parking will be provided on the
lot as carports, as an integral part of the townhouse, or a joint
parking facility for a group of townhouses, with such deed
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:621
restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and
maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of
assigning charges for maintaining snow removal and repairs.
(f) Adequate refuse storage facilities shall be provided and shall
be either in a structure closed on at least three sides or shall be
screened from adjoining properties by a fence or screen
plantings.
(13) Supply and contractor's yards. Supply and contractor's yards shall
effectively screen the yards facing surrounding properties. Such
screening shall be via fencing or screen planting to a minimum
height of six feet.
(14) Heavy manufacturing. Heavy manufacturing shall be located where
the emission of objectionable gases, fumes, smoke or dust will not
be objectionable to established permitted uses nearby or is
controlled by the installation of special equipment. Outside storage
yards abutting or immediately across a street from any R, C or
INST-1 District shall be screened. They shall meet all performance
standards set forth in § 310-22.
(15) Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks will be allowed, as a
conditional use, in the R-2 District, provided the following
conditions are met:
(a) The minimum site required for a mobile home park shall be five
contiguous acres.
(b) The site of a mobile home park shall be serviced by public
water and public sewers.
(c) Around the perimeter of the mobile home park site there shall
be minimum front and rear yards of 50 feet each and minimum
side yards of 30 feet each. No portion of an individual mobile
home lot may extend into the required perimeter yards.
Landscaping, parking and recreational facilities may project
into the required perimeter yards.
(d) Individual mobile home lots shall meet the following minimum
requirements.
[1] Lot area: 6,000 square feet.
[2] Lot width: 60 feet.
[3] Interior yards:
[a] Twenty-five feet from interior access roads.
[b] Thirty feet between parallel ends or sides of mobile
homes or other principal buildings.
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:622
[c] Fifteen feet between mobile homes and any other
accessory building.
(e) Support and anchoring. Individual mobile homes shall be
placed upon perimeter foundations as set forth by § 310-28 of
this chapter.
(f) Common facilities. No less than 10% of the mobile home park
site shall be devoted to common facilities for passive and active
recreation limited to use by the residents of the mobile home
park.
(g) Screening. All property lines shall be screened by a screen
planting area which is at least 15 feet in depth measured from
the property line.
(h) Interior streets shall be lighted.
(i) Interior streets shall be designed in accordance with the
following standards:
[1] One-way minor streets serving less than 20 lots shall have
a minimum paving width of 14 feet. Two-way minor streets
serving less than 20 lots shall have a minimum paving
width of 18 feet.
[2] All other one-way streets within the mobile home park
shall have a minimum paving width of nine feet per moving
lane where on-street parking is prohibited and shall have a
minimum paving width of 12 feet per moving lane where
on-street parking is permitted.
[3] All other two-way streets within the mobile home park
shall have a minimum paving width of 18 feet where onstreet
parking is prohibited and shall have a minimum
paving width of 24 feet where on-street parking is
permitted.
(j) All parts of the park, and mobile home lots in particular, shall
be suitably graded to prevent water ponding. Facilities for
stormwater management shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(16) Home occupations.
(a) Home occupations are a potential intrusion upon residential
areas and as such must meet all the requirements listed in this
section.
[1] Parking. In addition to providing the required parking
spaces for residents of the dwelling units, off-street
parking must be provided for employees and customers in
accordance with the criteria set forth by this chapter.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:623
[2] Employees. No person shall be employed in the home
occupation who is not a permanent resident or family
member of the dwelling unit.
[3] Restrictions. The use generates no traffic, parking, refuse,
sewage, electrical or water use in excess of what is normal
in a similar residential dwelling not having a home
occupation. Among the activities excluded shall be real
estate and insurance offices, kennels, veterinary offices,
restaurants, small motor repair, automotive repair,
automotive body work, and similar undertakings.
[4] Home occupations may include, but are not limited to, art
studios, music studios (limited to one student at a time),
professional services, dressmakers, beauty shops and
barber shops (limited to one chair only), and building
crafts (carpentry, electrical, painting and plumbing) when
the residential use is limited to office and indoor storage
facilities in keeping with the intent of this section.
[5] The nature of the home occupation shall not change the
outward characteristics of the home as a residential unit.
No outdoor storage may occur.
[6] The use is conducted entirely within the living unit in an
area that does not exceed 25% of the dwelling unit's floor
area exclusive of the garage floor areas or the floor areas
of accessory structures; use of the garage or accessory
structures for home occupation activities is not permitted.
[7] One sign no larger than six square feet located flat on the
principal structure is allowed.
[8] Home occupations shall not operate before 8:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m.
[9] Any retail sales shall consist primarily of items made on
the premises. No more than 25% of on-premises sales shall
be from items not made on the premises.
[10]No more than one home occupation per dwelling shall be
permitted.
[11] The use does not create undue noise, vibration, dust,
odors, smoke, television or radio interference, heat,
radiation or other nuisance. The use does not involve the
storage of hazardous, flammable or combustible liquids or
materials, other than those customarily found in a dwelling
(and of no greater intensity or duration than that
customarily associated with a residence).
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:624
(b) When a home occupation is permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, such approval shall be open to review if the home
occupation does not continue to meet all the conditions
outlined above or is deemed to have become noncompliant.
The special exception to operate a home occupation may be
revoked by the Board upon a public finding of noncompliance.
(17) Residence as a secondary use. This special exception is specifically
designed to allow residential uses in the C-1 District on upper
floors. In addition to meeting other applicable regulations set forth
in this chapter, such uses shall:
(a) Provide for two separate means of ingress and egress for each
dwelling unit.
(b) Provide at least 500 square feet of usable space per dwelling
unit. Nonfamily households shall not exceed four persons.
(c) Provide for off-street parking for occupants, on lot or within
400 feet of the proposed dwelling. The provision of adequate
off-street parking shall be mandatory to maintain a secondary
residence use.
(18) Gasoline service stations, automobile sales and service. Shall be
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(a) Any fuel pumps shall be at least 30 feet from the front lot line
and at least 30 feet from a side lot line.
(b) No vehicles will be parked or stored along the front property
lines.
(c) Any lot line abutting a residential district or residential use
shall be screened using screen plantings.
(d) There shall be no outdoor storage of new or used parts, scrap
parts, unlicensed vehicles, tires, vehicles which lack current
Pennsylvania inspection stickers, or parts of vehicles. The
overnight parking of customer vehicles and the storage of DEP/
EPA-approved trash containers shall be permitted.
(19) Personal care boardinghome for adults, group homes and adult day
care. The purpose of such homes is to provide residences for
individuals in a homelike setting. Consequently, it is essential to
maintain an exterior appearance that is in harmony with
surrounding residences. In addition, such uses shall meet the
following conditions:
(a) There shall be no sign or exterior display larger than six square
feet indicating the name of the home or its use.
(b) At least one additional on-lot parking space shall be provided
for each two guests.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:625
(c) No home shall admit more than four guests/clients at any one
time.
(d) The type of home, along with any required Building Code,
county and/or state certifications, shall be presented to the
Board.
(e) All group homes shall present evidence of proper certificates/
permits and adequate staffing for twenty-four-hour caregiving.
(20) Day-care facilities. Day-care facilities (see Article II) shall be
allowed as a special exception, providing the following criteria are
met:
(a) Any outdoor play area shall be effectively screened from
abutting properties.
(b) For all new construction, and where feasible for existing
structures, circular driveways shall be provided to deliver and
pick up children off public streets. These facilities are intended
for the safety of the children and the protection of the
neighborhood. In any event, the operator of said facility shall
demonstrate how dropoff and retrieval of children shall occur
in a safe manner.
(c) One parking space for each employee shall be required.
(d) Such facilities must be licensed or registered (as appropriate)
by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. They shall
also meet all City Building Code requirements.
(21) Bed-and-breakfast residence. A bed-and-breakfast residence may
be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in
all residential and commercial districts specified in this chapter. All
applicants for a bed-and-breakfast residence must own and occupy
the building where said use will occur as their principal residence.
Primary use of the building shall remain residential. The following
conditions shall also be observed:
(a) The quarters to be utilized by the guests or the occupants of
the premises shall not be permitted in any accessory structure.
(b) The use by guests shall be temporary only.
(c) No more than two rooms shall be used for guest occupancy.
(d) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room or
rooms designated for guests.
(e) Serving of meals to paying guests shall be limited to breakfast
only.
(f) Each room that is designated for guest occupancy must be
provided with a minimum of one single-station smoke detector.
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:626
(22) Shopping centers. Shopping centers are structures erected for
three or more principal permitted uses within a business district.
Any additions to existing shopping centers shall also follow this
process. Such uses must provide the following:
(a) Site plan, showing:
[1] The intended development, with the location of each
structure and its proposed use.
[2] Relationship to surrounding development (within 100
feet).
[3] Utility installation (at a minimum, sanitary sewers,
electric, gas, cable).
[4] Illumination plan. (Note: Lights may not produce glare on
adjoining properties.) (See § 310-31.)
[5] Parking lot plan, including ingress and egress (see also
Article IV).
[6] Drainage plan.
(23) Convenience stores. The purpose of this use is to allow such retail
operations in an urbanized environment. Such uses shall:
(a) Provide all parking as required by this chapter on lot.
(b) Provide screen planting along lot lines which abut residential
uses.
(c) All compressors shall be so enclosed as to baffle their sound
from surrounding residential uses.
(d) All dumpsters and/or garbage/trash storage areas shall be
enclosed on three sides.
(e) Gas/diesel pumps shall be at least 30 feet from all lot lines.
(f) A covered canopy over pump islands shall be permitted up to
an additional 10% of lot coverage.
(24) Eating and drinking places – drive-through. These restaurants are
distinguished from other restaurants due to the quick turnover of
customers and the drive-through lanes which generate greater
traffic.
(a) All lots shall be at least 20,000 square feet in size and at least
80 feet wide.
(b) All parking areas shall be designed for easy ingress and egress.
In no event shall vehicles be required to back onto a public
right-of-way.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:627
(c) Drive-through windows or outside order stations shall be set
back from the street with stacking room for at least six
vehicles.
(25) Salvage yards. All salvage yards established after the existing date
of this chapter must comply with these regulations. Those already
established shall comply with Subsection A(25)(a), (b), (d) and (h)
within six months of the effective date of these regulations.
(a) The manner of storage of salvage shall facilitate access for
firefighting equipment and ensure the safety of surrounding
properties. As such, there shall be at least 10 feet of open
space between any storage area and any lot line.
(b) Salvage yards shall be enclosed by fencing at least eight feet
high, which fencing shall provide an opaque visual screening
from surrounding properties.
(c) No salvage yard shall abut a residential use or district.
(d) No garbage or organic waste shall be stored on the premises.
(e) The minimum lot size shall be one acre.
(f) Side yards shall be at least 20 feet.
(g) There shall be no storage of junk or salvage material in the
front yard area on either a temporary or permanent basis.
(h) For fire and safety purposes, salvage piles shall not exceed 20
feet.
(26) Conversion dwellings. The purpose of conversion dwellings is to
allow for the conversion of older, larger single-family homes into
multifamily units. To be allowed to convert from a single family into
duplex or multifamily units, the following criteria must be met:
(a) All units must have separate kitchen and bathroom facilities as
well as living/sleeping spaces.
(b) Each unit shall have a minimum size of 500 square feet
exclusive of common spaces.
(c) All required parking shall be accommodated on lot, and no
parking in the front yard area, between the street and the
structure, shall be permitted (see § 310-23B).
(d) All other City building codes must be met.
(27)Kennels and veterinary offices.
(a) Must be at least 50 feet from any neighboring property line.
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:628
(b) Outdoor runs and facilities for animal keeping and care shall
be constructed for easy cleaning and shall be adequately
screened from neighboring properties.
(28) Parking lots. When in its opinion the best interest of the community
will be served thereby, the Board may permit, temporarily or
permanently, the use of land in the R-2 Residential District for a
parking lot, provided that:
(a) The lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger
automobiles of employees, customers or guests of the person
or firm controlling and operating the lot, and such person or
firm shall be responsible for its maintenance.
(b) No charge is to be made for parking on the lot.
(c) The lot is not to be used for sales, repair or servicing of any
kind.
(d) Entrances to and exits from such lots are to be located so they
will not detract from the appearance of residential districts.
(e) No advertising signs or storage of any materials are to be
permitted on the lot.
(f) All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by
barrier, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Board.
(g) Said parking areas shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete
surfacing, provide adequate drainage, and shall have bumper
guards where needed.
(h) If lighting is provided, it shall be arranged to reflect away from
the residential area and from any public street or highway.
(i) The parking lot and that portion of the driveway back to the
building line shall be adequately landscaped by shrubs, trees,
hedges or some other appropriate means.
(j) The Board shall impose such other conditions as deemed
necessary to protect the character of the residence district.
(29) Neighborhood grocery stores. The purpose of these businesses is
for the convenience of neighborhood residents to do limited
shopping for necessary household staples. The operation of said
business shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided for employees of the store.
(b) The availability of short-term parking at the site of the store
must be provided to ensure a quick turnover of the customers.
(c) Maximum size of the structure shall be 2,500 square feet.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:629
(30) Conversion restaurant dwelling. The purpose of conversion
restaurant dwelling is to allow for the conversion of older,
architecturally and/or historically significant homes in the City into
specialized eating establishments that take advantage of the
ambiance and novelty of fine dining in a classic residential setting.
To allow for this type of conversion, the following criteria must be
met:
(a) The total area of the principal structure to be utilized as the
restaurant facility shall be at least 3,000 square feet.
(b) Shall provide all parking and loading/unloading requirements
as required by this chapter. Additionally, off-street parking
shall be provided for all employees of the restaurant.
(c) Shall be located on a public street with a minimum cartway of
20 feet.
(d) Any modifications to the dwelling to accommodate the
conversion to a restaurant facility shall not change the outward
characteristics of the home as a residential unit and shall
preserve the character of adjoining residential uses.
(e) All parking areas that abut residential uses shall be screened.
(f) Any outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties.
(g) Must meet all City Building Code requirements.
(h) All necessary licenses or permits to operate the restaurant
issued by local, state or federal agencies shall be presented to
the Board, and any required licenses, certificates or permits
shall be a condition for approval.
(i) One sign no larger than six square feet may be utilized on the
property to advertise the location of the restaurant.
(j) The facility will not operate any carry-out, delivery or drive-in
service.
(k) There shall be no service or consumption outside the structure.
(31) College housing. In addition to the criteria established in § 310-8,
Definitions, the following conditions must be met:
(a) The owner/developer must furnish a plan of the proposed
development at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing for
the special exception.
(b) The plan must contain a detailed list of any deviations from the
normal site development requirements for the district.147
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:630
(c) Solid waste/bulk trash containers shall be located in the rear
yard area and be screened from view on all sides by materials
specified in § 310-8 (in the definition of "screening").
(d) All parking areas shall be off-street and conform to the
conditions and regulations of Subsection A(28), Parking lots, of
this section.
(e) There shall be one parking space provided for each resident of
the dwelling.
(f) The entire length of the perimeter lot lines not abutting public
rights-of-way shall contain a continuous, view-restrictive
screen at least six feet in height designed to obscure the view
of the complex to non-college-housing residential uses. Such
screens shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth. The screen's
length shall be comprised of trees, shrubs, or a combination
thereof. A minimum of 50% of the screen's length shall be of
evergreen plant material. A minimum of two canopy trees shall
be planted for each 100 feet of perimeter length. All plant
material shall be six feet in height at the time of planting and
placed to provide view restrictions. Walls, earth mounds and
fences, or a combination thereof, may be included with the
plant material to complement and provide variety to the screen
but may not be exclusively used for screening. Special
consideration shall be given to form, color, texture, density,
growth habits and maintenance requirements. Grass or other
living ground cover shall be planted, mulched and maintained
on all portions of the landscape screen not occupied by other
landscape material. All required plant material which dies shall
be replaced. A screening plan must be provided at the time the
applicant appears before the Board.
(32) Gallery use. In an effort to encourage and provide for flexibility in
the use of the City's wealth of older architecturally significant
homes located in its medium-density residential district (R-2), a
gallery use has been created to allow for the development of art
studios, music studios, and other cultural- and arts-related uses in
the area. The uses delineated herein shall only be allowed in this
district, and said uses shall meet the following criteria:
(a) Any home that is used for a gallery use shall be occupied as a
legal residence by either the owner and/or his tenant(s).
(b) Gallery uses shall include art studios, music studios, and
businesses featuring handcrafted, cultural- or art-related
items, as well as other related uses.
147. Editor's Note: See the Lot, Yard and Height Area and Bulk Requirements Table attached to
this chapter.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:631
(c) The gallery use shall only be located on the first floor of the
residence.
(d) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
for customers of the gallery business, which may be waived if
suitable evidence is presented that the neighborhood will not
be adversely affected by granting such a waiver.
(e) There shall be no more than one outside employee allowed to
work on the premises, other than a family member living in the
gallery residence.
(f) No exterior modifications shall be made to the gallery
residence that will change the historic and residential nature
of the home.
(g) One sign no larger than six square feet may be installed on the
property designating the gallery use, which shall adhere to the
standards listed in § 310-24E of this chapter, a rendering of
which shall accompany the application for the special
exception under this section.
(h) Any retail sales shall consist of items made primarily on the
premises, with no more than 40% of the on-premises sales
coming from items not made on the premises.
(i) The gallery use shall not cause undue intrusion on the
neighborhood, including traffic, noise or other disturbances,
and should such disturbances result in complaints by the
neighborhood against the gallery use, the granting of the
necessary special exception shall be reviewed by the granting
body at a public hearing on the matter.
(j) Gallery uses shall not operate before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00
p.m.
(33) Bottle clubs.
(a) Bottle clubs shall not be located within 500 feet from the
nearest church, school or other institution of learning or
educational facilities, library, park or playground.
(b) All parking shall be provided in accordance with Article IV of
this chapter.
(c) No person shall consume or display or allow consumption or
display of intoxicating beverages on the premises of a bottle
club between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m.
(prevailing time).
(34) Adult-oriented businesses. In order to protect the health, welfare
and safety of all residents of the City and particularly the children
of our community, the City by virtue of the conditions established
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:632
below intends to minimize and control the adverse secondary
effects of adult-oriented businesses that legally locate in the areas
allowed by this chapter. This section is not meant to restrict the
protected constitutional rights of businesses or individuals related
to adult entertainment activities, materials or locations, but rather
to regulate adult-oriented businesses in a socially responsible
manner so that the public is minimally exposed to the secondary
effects of these businesses.
(a) No adult-oriented business shall be located within 500 feet of
another adult-oriented business.
(b) No adult-oriented business shall be located within 500 feet of a
public or private school, day-care center, library, park or
playground, church or other religious facility.
(c) No adult-oriented business shall be located within 250 feet of a
residential district zoning boundary.
(d) The buffer zone distances identified above shall be measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
topography, from the nearest point on the property line of the
adult-oriented business location to the nearest point on the
property line of the other land use.
(e) All adult-oriented businesses must obtain an adult-oriented
business license from the City prior to the commencement of
such businesses.
(35) Commercial recreation (indoor).
(a) All activities shall be kept indoors, and there shall be no
exterior display, exterior loudspeakers or other disruptive
display.
(b) The consumption of alcohol by adults of legal age shall be
limited. No liquor with an alcohol content higher than 12%
shall be permitted.
(c) All parking shall meet the criteria of this chapter.
(d) If this use abuts a residential district or residential use then,
along the yard abutting such district or use, screening, as set
forth in § 310-19C of this chapter, shall be required.
(e) Hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. prevailing time.
(36) Communication towers/antennas.
(a) Antennas mounted on an existing public utility tower, existing
building or other existing structure shall be treated as a
permitted use subject to the conditions of Subsection A(36)(b).
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:633
Separate stand-alone towers constructed as new shall be
treated as special exceptions and referred to the Zoning
Hearing Board for review and approval under Subsection
A(36)(c).
(b) Regulations governing communication antennas and
communication equipment buildings:
[1] Building-mounted communication antennas shall not be
located on any single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling. Omnidirectional or whip communication
antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height and seven
inches in diameter.
[2] Directional or panel communication antennas shall not
exceed five feet in height and three feet in width.
[3] A communication equipment building shall be subject to
the height and setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
[4] The owner or operator of communication antennas shall be
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate antennas.
(c) Standards for communication towers as special exceptions:
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission to operate a
communication tower, if applicable, and communication
antennas.
[2] Access shall be provided to the communication tower and
communication equipment building by means of a public
street or easement to a public street. The easement shall
be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to
a width of at least 10 feet with a dust-free, all-weather
surface for its entire length. A communication tower may
be located on a lot occupied by other principal structures
and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot meeting the
minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district.
[3] The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height
of the communication tower is the minimum height
necessary to perform its function.
[4] The foundation and base of any communication tower shall
be set back from any residential district at least 100 feet
and shall be set back from any other property line (not
lease line) a minimum of 50 feet.
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:634
[5] The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped
to screen the foundation and base and communications
equipment building from abutting properties.
[6] The communication equipment building shall comply with
the required yard and height requirements of the
applicable zoning district for any accessory structure.
[7] The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license; the name, address
and emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communication tower; and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence covering the communication tower and
communication antennas.
[8] All guy wires associated with guyed communication towers
shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and
shall be located within a fenced enclosure.
[9] The site of a communication tower shall be secured by a
fence with a minimum height of eight feet to limit
accessibility by the general public and provide an opaque
visual screening form surrounding properties.
[a] No signs or lights shall be mounted on a
communication tower, except as may be required by
the Federal Communications Commission, Federal
Aviation Administration, or other governmental
agency.
[10] If a communication tower remains unused for a period of
12 consecutive months, the owner or operator shall
dismantle and remove the communication tower within six
months of the expiration of such twelve-month period.
[11] One off-street parking space shall be provided within the
fenced area.
(37) Child day-care centers shall be permitted, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) For all new construction and where feasible for existing
structures, circular driveways shall be provided to deliver and
pick up children off public streets or safe entrances shall be
provided from parking lots. These facilities are intended for the
safety of the children and the protection of the neighborhood.
In any event, the developer shall demonstrate how pickup and
delivery shall occur in a safe manner. Guidelines for design are
as follows:
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:635
[1] Dropoff points will be designed so children do not have to
cross either a street or a parking lot to enter the facility.
[2] Provisions for at least three vehicles at the dropoff point
will be provided.
(b) Any outdoor play area shall be effectively screened from
abutting properties.
(c) One parking space for each employee shall be required and at
least one space for every 10 children to be accommodated.
(d) A separate entrance and exit drive will be provided. Drives
shall be at least 30 feet apart.
(e) All outdoor lighting must use fully shielded fixtures and shall
be aimed away from nearby residences.
(f) Such facilities must be licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare and meet all local and state
building code requirements for such operations.
(38) Institutional Overlay District. All uses within the Institutional
Overlay District shall adhere to the following regulations, as
appropriate, and apply as defined herein.
(a) Level I is a development or use where change is minimal in
nature.
[1] The characteristics of such change are:
[a] The conversion of an existing structure to a college
use.
[b] A new structure footprint of less than 2,000 square
feet.
[c] A change in the footprint of an existing structure of
either an increase of 100% or 500 square feet.
[d] A low density of use – less than five employees, and
expected visitors of less than 10 per day.
[2] Criteria for approval. Level I is a permitted use, with
conditions. The following criteria shall apply:
[a] Use shall be restricted to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
[b] Parking for staff shall be 0.75 spaces per employee
and two additional spaces for any use expecting
visitors. (Note: A credit of up to two spaces may be
awarded for available on-street parking.)
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:636
[c] Any parking area of four or more vehicles shall
provide screening as defined by this chapter.
[d] Lighting shall conform to § 310-31 of this chapter.
[e] Signs no larger than 16 square feet shall be allowed to
identify use.
(b) Level II.
[1] Level II development shall include:
[a] A new structure with a building footprint in excess of
2,000 square feet but less than 10,001 square feet.
[b] The conversion or expansion of an existing structure
to a footprint in excess of 2,000 square feet but less
than 10,000 square feet.
[2] Level II developments are special exceptions and fall
under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The
following criteria shall be required:
[a] A brief narrative of the proposed use of the structure
(such use shall be consistent with the Venango College
mission), including estimated number of students and
faculty use.
[b] A plot plan, showing:
[c] Setbacks.
[d] Parking areas with access/egress shown, screen
planting to be provided.
[e] Landscaping.
[f] Drawings (these need not be detailed architectural
drawings; outlines of structures with drawings/photos
of the proposed exterior finish and windows will
suffice).
(c) Level III: Level III developments are a conditional use and shall
include all developments that are larger than a Level II
development. The following shall be provided:
[1] A narrative description of the project, its proposed use,
and its role in the College's mission. Included will be the
estimated number of students, faculty and staff to use this
facility or complex.
[2] Architectural drawing, showing:
[a] Building footprint.
§ 310-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16
1:637
[b] Parking areas with access and egress, as well as
copies of the status of any required PennDOT HOP
permits*. There shall be one parking space for each
faculty and staff member, at least two visitor parking
spaces, and 0.5 spaces per student.
[c] Landscaping. All areas abutting residential uses shall
provide view-restrictive screening as set forth by
Subsection A(30)(f) of this chapter.
[d] Design. No style of design is mandated; however, the
design should be compatible with nearby structures.
* Copies of any access or traffic impact studies
shall also be provided.
Yard and Setbacks
Level I Follow the INST-1 zoning
Level II
Lot size: At least 12,000 square feet
Height: 35 feet
Width: 60 feet
Level III
Lot size: At least 35,000 square feet
Height: 35 feet, plus 1 foot for every
additional foot of yard distance
Width: 60 feet
All setbacks: 25 feet
§ 310-16 OIL CITY CODE § 310-16
1:638
ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Regulations
§ 310-17. Nonconforming uses and structures.
The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming uses and
structures. It is the intention of the City of Oil City that all legal
nonconforming uses and structures shall be able to continue; however, all
changes in such uses shall only be as allowed in this article.
A. Any nonconforming use may be continued or may be changed to a use of
the same or a more restrictive classification. The nonconforming use
may not be extended or expanded unless to a conforming use, except as
permitted by the Board in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Any nonconforming structure or building or sign which has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or any other means may be reconstructed
and used as before, if such reconstruction is performed within one year
of discontinuance of use and if the restored building covers no greater
area and contains no greater cubic content. If approved by the Board, a
reconstructed structure or building may exceed its original lot coverage
and cubic content but must meet the minimum yard requirements of the
district in which the structure is located, and it must meet the off-street
parking and loading requirements of this chapter.
C. In the event that any nonconforming use, conducted in a structure or
otherwise, ceases for whatever reasons for a period of one year, such
nonconforming use shall not be resumed, and any further use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The nonconforming use of a structure or building may be extended
throughout those parts which were arranged or designed for such use
at the time of adoption of this chapter. A nonconforming building or
structure may, with the approval of the Board, be extended, enlarged or
replaced if such expansion does not occupy an area greater than 50%
more than the structure occupied prior to such expansion, enlargement
or reconstruction. Furthermore, such activities must meet the minimum
yard regulations and height restrictions of the district and all off-street
parking and loading requirements.
E. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size or designated use of any development,
building, structure or part thereof for which official approval and
required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of this
chapter and where construction is complete within six months from the
date of issuance of the permit.
F. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be
permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
§ 310-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17
1:639
§ 310-18. Existing lots of record.
§ 310-19. Application of yard regulations.
G. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another of a different classification, this
article shall also apply to any uses or structures which thereby become
nonconforming.
A. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter and held
in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots
may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located even though its lot area
and width are less than the minimum required by this chapter.
However, such lot must comply with the yard, height and coverage
standards of the zoning district wherein it is located. Any multifamily
use must meet the appropriate density standards of the zoning district.
Where two or more adjacent lots of record with less than the required
area and width are held by one owner on or before the date of
enactment of this chapter, the request for a permit shall be referred to
the Zoning Hearing Board, which may require replatting to fewer lots
which would comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter.
B. The size of any existing lot of record shall not be reduced so that the
area or dimensions of the lot are smaller than those required by this
chapter.
A. Where a structure exists on an adjacent lot and is within 150 feet of the
proposed structure, and the existing structure has a front yard less than
the minimum depth required, the minimum front yard shall be the
average depth of the front yard of the existing structure on the adjacent
lot and the minimum depth required for the district; where structures
exist on both adjacent lots, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be
the average depth of the front yards of the existing adjacent structures.
B. All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and
whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports, balconies or
platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum
front, side or rear yards except as noted in this subsection, Subsection
C or D. Overhangs of up to 18 inches will be allowed (see illustration).
Steps to exterior doors will be permitted (see illustration). A chimney
may project not more than two feet into a required yard. Bay windows
and balconies may project not more than two feet into a required yard.
Mechanical devices such as air conditioners and heating units may
project into setback areas in all districts.
§ 310-17 OIL CITY CODE § 310-19
1:640
Sketch Plan Defining Zoning Ordinance Area and Bulk
Regulation Terms
C. Fences.
(1) In residential districts, a wall or fence less than six feet six inches
in height and paved terraces without walls, roofs or other
enclosures may be erected within the limits of any rear yard.
Retaining walls and fences required for screening under this
chapter are not subject to the six-foot-six-inch-high limitation.
Fences may be permitted in front yard areas [between the setback
line and the front lot line and in the side yard area(s)], provided
they are no higher than four feet and do not obstruct the required
free-sight triangle at intersections.
(2) Any fence, hedge or enclosure that is not of a "see-through" nature
and obstructs vision and is located within five feet of a driveway or
alley where the driveway or alley intersects a front property line, or
is located within 15 feet from a point where two front property lines
intersect, shall not exceed a height of 30 inches above the top of the
curb.
§ 310-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-19
1:641
§ 310-20. Temporary structures.
Temporary structures in conjunction with construction work shall be
permitted only during the period that the construction work is in progress.
Permits for temporary structures shall be issued for a six-month period.
§ 310-21. Height limitations.
When the following conditions are met, height limits may be increased:
(3) In commercial and industrial districts, a wall or fence may be
erected to a maximum height of eight feet in front, side and rear
yards for screening and security purposes.
(4) Fences shall be constructed in accordance with City building codes.
The use of barbed wire, or similar materials designed for security
purposes, shall be permitted in an industrial or commercial district,
provided that a detailed plan regarding its use is submitted to the
City's Zoning Officer for approval.
D. Swimming pools shall be permitted in rear yards only, provided that the
pool is located not less than 10 feet from any side yard line and 10 feet
from the rear yard line. (See also § 310-26.)
E. Through lots shall follow existing development patterns. Where other
through lots exist nearby, the orientation of development (designation
of front and rear yard) shall follow existing usage. Where no other
through lots exist nearby, both frontages shall be considered front
yards.
F. For corner lots, the short frontage shall be considered the front yard,
the long frontage shall be considered a side yard. Where frontage
measurements are equal, the dominant orientation of surrounding
properties shall determine the front yard.
G. Ramps that are constructed or installed for accessibility to structures
for handicapped or disabled persons, and that are required to meet
ADA standards, shall be exempt from all setback conditions.
A. Structure height in excess of the height permitted above the average
ground level allowed in any district may be increased, provided all
minimum front, side and rear yard depths are increased by one foot for
each additional foot of height; however, such increase of height shall be
limited to no more than 10 additional feet.
B. The following structures are exempt from height regulations, provided
they do not constitute a hazard: communication towers, church spires,
chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, silos,
standpipes, elevated water tanks, derricks and similar structures.
§ 310-19 OIL CITY CODE § 310-22
1:642
§ 310-22. Performance standards.
No use of land or structure in any district shall involve any element, or
cause any condition, that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any
other property or person in the City. Furthermore, every use of land or
structure in any district must observe the following performance
requirements:
A. Fire protection. Fire-protection and firefighting equipment acceptable
to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
material is carried on.
B. Electric disturbance. All sources of electromagnetic radiation shall
demonstrate compliance with appropriate regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission. No activity shall cause electromagnetic
interference adversely affecting radio, television or other
communication equipment in the neighboring area. For the purpose of
these regulations, electromagnetic interference shall be defined as
electromagnetic disturbances which are generated by the use of
electrical equipment other than planned and intentional sources of
electromagnetic energy which interfere with the proper operation of
electromagnetic receptors of proper design.
C. Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of
volume or frequency shall be muffled or otherwise controlled, except
for fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for public safety
purposes.
D. Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emissions permitted shall be
determined by the use of the Standard Ringleman Chart issued by the
United States Bureau of Mines. No smoke darker than No. 2 will be
allowed.
E. Odors. In any district, except the Industrial District, no malodorous gas
or matter, including animal waste, shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
F. Air pollution. No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other
substances shall be permitted which is harmful to health or to animals,
vegetation or other property.
G. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected
glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
H. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which carries
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
I. Water pollution. The discharge of all wastewater shall be in accordance
with the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the City of Oil City and comply with any and all
applicable regulations of the United States. Surface water discharge
§ 310-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22
1:643
§ 310-23. Off-street loading and parking.
Off-street loading and parking space shall be provided in accordance with
the specifications in this section in all districts, whenever any new use is
established or an existing one is enlarged. Because of its developed nature
and the location of service alleys, on-street and public parking, off-street
loading and parking requirements shall not apply in the C-2 Downtown
Business District.
shall be acceptable under the provisions of Pennsylvania Act 537 and
other state and City regulations, as the same may be amended from
time to time.
J. No vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted
through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at
or at any point beyond the lot line.
A. Off-street loading. Every use which requires the receipt or distribution,
by vehicles, of material or merchandise shall provide off-street loading
berths in accordance with its size, per the following table. Current or
future uses in the C-2 Downtown Business District shall not be required
to provide loading spaces.
Use First Space Second Space
(Note: All figures are given in gross feet of floor area for each listed
use.)
Industrial
Manufacturing 5,000 40,000
Warehouse 5,000 40,000
Storage 10,000 25,000
Commercial
Wholesale 10,000 40,000
Retail 10,000 40,000
Service establishments 10,000 40,000
Restaurants 10,000 25,000
Office buildings 10,000 100,000
Hotels 10,000 100,000
Residential
Apartments 25,000 100,000
Institutional
Schools 10,000 100,000
Hospitals 10,000 100,000
Nursing homes 10,000 100,000
Public buildings
§ 310-22 OIL CITY CODE § 310-23
1:644
Use First Space Second Space
Auditoriums 10,000 100,000
Arenas 10,000 100,000
Funeral homes 10,000 100,000
(1) Size and access. Each off-street loading space shall be not less than
10 feet in uniform width and 40 feet in length. It shall be so
designed so the vehicles using loading spaces are not required to
back onto a public street or alley. Such spaces shall abut a public
street or alley or have an easement of access thereto.
B. Off-street parking.
(1) Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of
not less than 162 square feet, being at least 18 feet long with a
uniform width of nine feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and
shall be in usable shape and condition. Except in the case of a
single-family dwelling, no parking area shall contain less than three
spaces. Parking areas shall be designed to provide sufficient
turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back onto
public streets. Where an existing lot does not abut on a public or
private street, alley or easement of access, there shall be provided
an access drive leading to the parking or storage areas or loading
spaces. Such access drive shall not be less than 10 feet wide.
Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to well-defined
locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted access along a
street. Specifically, single-lane driveways shall be at least 10 feet
wide but shall not exceed 12 feet in width; double drives (for
ingress and egress) may be up to 24 feet wide. Reasonable radius
flares at street or alley entrances/exits shall be permitted. There
shall be at least 15 feet between driveways at the street line and at
least five feet between a driveway and a fire hydrant, catch basin or
street intersection radius.
(2) Parking within yards.
(a) In residential districts or in other districts where the primary
use of the property is for residential purposes, parking areas
shall only be permitted in the rear or side yards or in driveway
areas in the front yard that are constructed in accordance with
§ 310-23B(7). No motor vehicle may be parked upon any
premises zoned for residential use unless within a garage or
upon a concrete, paved or compacted, crushed stone driveway
leading directly from the street. The entrance to the driveway
from the street shall only be allowed where a local or state
curb cut permit has been approved. In no case will parking be
allowed upon any unimproved surface. As used in this section,
the term "unimproved surface" includes, but is not limited to,
grass and dirt surfaces. In other districts where the primary
§ 310-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-23
1:645
use of the property is either for commercial or industrial
permitted uses, parking shall also be allowed in the front yard
subject to § 310-23B(5).
(b) Notwithstanding the above, should the configuration of the
existing lot and improvements constructed thereon not allow
any option for off-street parking, property owners may request
a variance from the Zoning Hearing Board to construct an offstreet
parking area in the front yard. In addition to the
stipulations contained in § 310-45I, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall take the following into account when reviewing requests
for variances under this section:
[1] Whether there are any options for parking elsewhere on
property owned by the applicant;
[2] The general availability of on-street parking in the
neighborhood; and
[3] Any hazardous traffic condition that may result if a
variance is approved.
(c) If a hardship-based variance is approved, the front yard
parking area shall meet all the requirements stated above
regarding curb cuts and surface materials. Minimum width and
depth of the surface shall be nine feet and 18 feet, respectively,
and shall be constructed perpendicular to the adjoining street.
At no time shall the parking area be constructed in a position
whereby it is situated directly parallel with the front of any
portion of the primary residence located on the lot.
(3) Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street
parking spaces required is set forth below. Where the use of the
premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar
uses shall apply. If no similar uses are mentioned, the parking
requirements shall be one space for each two proposed patrons
and/or occupants of that structure. Where more than one use exists
on a lot, parking regulations for each use must be met. No parking
shall be required of existing or future uses in the C-2 Downtown
Commercial District except as required in § 310-16.
Parking
Parking Use Required Parking Spaces
Auto sales and service 1 for each 250 square feet GFA
Service stations 1 for each 250 square feet GFA
Single-family dwelling
and duplex
2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily dwelling 2.5 per dwelling unit*
Mobile home parks 2.0 per each space
§ 310-23 OIL CITY CODE § 310-23
1:646
Parking
Parking Use Required Parking Spaces
Hotels and motels 1 per guest room**
Funeral establishments 25 for the first parlor; 10 for each
additional parlor
Hospitals 1 per each bed**
Nursing homes 1 per each 3 beds
Churches 1 per each 4 seats
Schools 1 per each teacher and staff
1 for each 4 classrooms, plus
1 for each 4 high school students
Sports arenas, stadiums,
theaters, auditoriums,
assembly halls
1 per each 3 seats
Community buildings,
social halls, dance halls,
clubs and lodges
1 space for each 50 square feet of
public floor area
Roller rinks 1 space for each 200 square feet GFA
Bowling alleys 5 per alley
Banks and offices 1 for each 250 square feet GFA
Medical office and
clinics
8 spaces per doctor
Dental offices 5 spaces per doctor
Retail stores 1 per each 250 square feet GFA
Fast-food/drive-in
restaurants
1 per each 50 GFA**
Furniture stores 1 per 400 square feet GFA
Food supermarkets 1 per each 250 square feet GFA
Trailer and monument
sales
1 per each 2,500 square feet GFA
Restaurants, taverns and
nightclubs
1 for each 2.5 patron seats
Swimming pool (public) 1 for each 3 lockers
Industrial and
manufacturing
establishments,
warehouses, wholesale
and truck terminals
1 space per employee on the largest
shift
§ 310-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-23
1:647
* Multifamily units devoted to the elderly shall only be
required to provide 0.25 parking spaces per unit. Such uses
must supply adequate proof they will be dedicated to elderly
tenants and shall be required to follow normal parking
standards if they revert to nonelderly use.
** Plus one space per employee and staff on major shift.
Note: GFA means gross floor area.
(4) Location and parking. Required parking spaces shall be located on
the same lot with the principal use. The Zoning Hearing Board may
permit parking spaces to be located not more than 400 feet from
the lot of the principal use when the Board finds that it is
impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the principal
use. [See also § 310-16A(28).]
(5) Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than
five vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively
screened (see definition of "screening") on any side which adjoins a
residential district or use. In addition, there shall be a planting
strip of at least five feet between the front lot line and the parking
lot. Such planting strip shall be suitably landscaped and
maintained.
(6) Minimum distance and setbacks. No off-street loading or parking
area for more than five vehicles shall be closer than five feet to any
adjoining property line containing a dwelling, residential district,
school, hospital or similar institution.
(7) Surfacing. All off-street parking, loading and driveway areas shall
have a concrete, paved or a compacted crushed stone (six inches'
minimum depth) surface, graded with positive drainage to dispose
of surface water. If the installed surface is compacted crushed
stone, the surface shall have a topcoat of crushed stone, crushed
brick or washed gravel not to exceed 1 1/2 inches. The edges of the
driveway shall be delineated by a stone, brick or timber border that
is structurally sufficient to confine the stone to the driveway area.
In addition, at no time should the crushed stone show weeds or
grass growing through the surface. Parking areas larger than
10,000 square feet shall submit a plan, including drainage
provisions, to the City for approval. Lots shall be designated to
provide for orderly and safe loading and parking.
(8) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or
loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from
the adjoining premises of any residential district or use and away
from roads or highways.
(9) Parking of vehicles used in vocational/avocational pursuits.
Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to prohibit the occupant
of the residential property from parking a truck or bus owned and/
§ 310-23 OIL CITY CODE § 310-23
1:648
§ 310-24. Signs.
No signs shall be erected containing information which implies that a
property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of
this chapter.
or used by the occupant in his vocational or avocational pursuits
on the occupant's property at times when said truck or bus are not
used in said vocational or avocational pursuits; providing, however,
that truck-tractor and/or semitrailers shall not be parked in the
open air any closer than 150 feet from the nearest residence on a
neighboring property.
(10) Outdoor storage of utility or cargo trailers. There shall be no
permanent outdoor storage of utility or cargo trailers in any
district, except for temporary periods to afford the loading and
unloading of these trailers in commercial or industrial districts.
"Temporary" shall be defined for purposes of this section to mean
for a period not to exceed seven days. A special permit may be
granted by the Zoning Officer for longer periods not to exceed 30
days in length. At no time shall these types of trailers be allowed to
remain in any district as long-term or permanent storage facilities.
(11) Outdoor storage of recreation vehicles, watercraft and trailers. All
types of licensed and unlicensed camping or hauling trailers of any
variety, all outboard and inboard motorboats, and all self-contained
recreation vehicles or motor homes shall only be parked in the rear
half or portion of a lot according to the original recorded depth of
the lot. In no case shall any such vehicle or vessel described above
be located or parked for any period of time in the front half 50% of
the lot.
(12) Portable storage units. These units are intended for the temporary
storage of household goods during moving or remodeling. Units
must be off the public right-of-way and set back at least 15 feet. The
use of trailers, either former mobile homes or semi-rigs, for storage
is not permitted in any district in the City. The City shall issue
permits for such units on a thirty-day basis with up to one thirty-day
renewal. After that time, the units will be regarded as structures.
They shall be placed on a permanent foundation, shall meet all yard
requirements of this chapter and be inspected for conformance
with the Uniform Construction Code. If not in conformity with that
code, they shall be brought into compliance, or such structures will
be considered in violation of this chapter.
A. The following sign regulations shall be observed in all districts.
(1) The following signs shall be permitted in all districts, and no permit
shall be required to erect such signs.
§ 310-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-24
1:649
(a) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a
civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, a
sale or event by a commercial business, and yard/garage sale
signs, provided such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and shall be removed immediately upon the completion of
the campaign, drive or event.
(b) Signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is erected, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed six square feet and not more than one such sign
shall be placed on the property unless such property fronts on
more than one street, in which case one sign may be erected on
each street frontage.
(c) Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects,
engineers, builders and artisans erected and maintained on the
premises where the work is being performed, provided that the
area of such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet, and provided
that such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work.
(d) No-trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing or
hunting on the premises, provided that the area of such sign
shall not exceed two square feet.
(2) No signs shall be permitted within street lines or on any public
property or right-of-way except signs placed on awnings/canopies/
marquees and those of a duly constituted governmental body,
including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices. No signs shall
be placed upon utility poles or trees within the public right-of-way.
(3) Directional and information signs, not exceeding four square feet in
area per use, premises or establishment, and used for the direction
and protection of the public, shall be permitted in all nonresidential
districts.
(4) No sign shall project more than 12 inches from the building facade
to which it is attached, except that signs may project at 90° angles
in commercial districts as provided in Subsection C(4) of this
section.
(5) In residential and industrial districts, signs will be permitted in the
front yard up to the front yard line, except where such signs would
interfere with pedestrian or traffic visibility. Signs shall not project
over or onto any public right-of-way.
(6) Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights or may be illuminated
by shielded floodlights. No red, green or amber lights shall be
permitted, and lighting shall be screened from adjacent properties.
No flashing lights shall be permitted.
§ 310-24 OIL CITY CODE § 310-24
1:650
(7) All signs, including temporary signs, shall be constructed of
durable material and kept in good condition and repair.
(8) Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with
conforming signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or
repaired, providing such repainting or repairing does not exceed
the dimensions of the existing sign. (See also § 310-17B.)
(9) Political signs.
(a) Such signs shall be permitted in all districts but shall not be
permitted to be erected on public land or public right-of-way.
They shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. All signs that are
erected prior to an election must be removed within seven days
after such election, and in the event they are not, the City shall
remove them or cause them to be removed, and such removal
costs shall be billed to the candidate, including any costs for
collection thereof.
(b) In order to insure removal of political signs, the candidate for
political office or his/her designee shall sign an affidavit
stipulating his acknowledgment of the requirements of this
section prior to the erection of any signs. This affidavit will be
available in the office of the City Clerk during normal business
hours.
(10) Signs which are integrated into the material on awning/canopies/
marquees shall be allowed, provided that:
(a) The awnings/canopies/marquees that contain signs cover a
display window or main entrance/exit to the structure.
(b) The sign(s) contain only the name, monogram or street address
of the business being advertised; no trademarks or product
names shall be used in the sign unless such is included in the
registered name of the business. For live or motion-picture
theaters, the sign may contain information pertaining to
performances and public notices.
(c) All sign lettering placed on any awning/canopies shall not be
larger than two feet in height and 20 feet in length. Lettering
placed on theater marquees may extend up to 24 feet in length.
(d) The lowest portion of the marquee shall be a minimum of nine
feet zero inches above the sidewalk elevation. The marquee
shall project to no more than three feet from the street side of
the street curb; nor shall the marquee project more than 10
feet from the building to which it is attached.
(11) Electronic signs. This section regulates the use of electronic signs
within the City in order to minimize the impact of such signs that
§ 310-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-24
1:651
may distract drivers and be detrimental to neighboring properties.
Such signs may be used according to the following provisions:
(a) Each message displayed on an electronic sign must be static or
depicted for a minimum or eight seconds, and the screen must
completely fade out before a new message is displayed.
(b) There shall be no more than one second between messages.
(c) The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner that causes
undue distraction, confusion or hazard to vehicular traffic.
(d) Any one electronic sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in size.
For marquee signs only, electronic signs shall not exceed 80
square feet in size.
(12) Sidewalk signs. Properties located within the C-1 and C-2 Districts
may display sidewalk signs under the following provisions:
(a) One sidewalk sign is permitted for each business.
(b) Sidewalk signs may be displayed only during the business's
hours of operation.
(c) The maximum size of each display face of a sidewalk sign is
seven square feet.
(d) There must be at least four feet of clear sidewalk for
pedestrians.
(e) Signs may be up to 42 inches high and two feet wide.
(13) Permitting. All temporary signs (see § 310-8, Specific terms) shall
require a sign permit. Failure to acquire a permit shall be a
violation of this chapter and subject the individual, group or
corporation to penalties as delineated in § 310-35.
B. In residential districts, the following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Home occupation or nameplate sign displaying the name and
address of the occupant or the profession or activity of the
occupant of a dwelling unit, provided that not more than one such
sign shall be erected for each permitted use, and provided that the
area of each such sign shall not exceed six square feet. Each such
sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such building or may be
erected on an ornamental pole in the front yard but not within 10
feet of a street line.
(2) Sign, bulletin board, announcement board or identification sign for
schools, churches, hospitals or other principal uses and buildings
other than dwellings on the same lot therewith for the purpose of
displaying the name of the institution and its activities or services,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 32 square
§ 310-24 OIL CITY CODE § 310-24
1:652
feet and not more than one such sign shall be erected on any one
street frontage.
C. In commercial districts, the following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Signs directing patrons, members or audiences to temporary
exhibits, shows or events, provided that such signs shall not exceed
six square feet; shall be removed within two weeks after the date of
the exhibit, show or event; shall not be posted earlier than two
weeks before the date of the exhibit, show or event.
(2) Wall signs, provided that the total of such sign shall be limited to
10% of the wall upon which it is mounted. Signs may be illuminated
or nonilluminated. Wall signs shall be at least 10 feet from ground
level. Such signs shall not extend more than 12 inches from the
main wall of the building.
(3) Special temporary promotional devices, signs or displays such as
banners or pennants and portable message boards shall remain on
display for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Portable
message boards shall not exceed 16 square feet. Such signs shall
require a temporary sign permit.
(4) Blade signs attached to a wall which project in such a manner that
the faces of the sign form an angle of 90° with the wall shall be
permitted in commercial districts, subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the wall.
(b) Only one such sign shall be permitted per public entrance.
(c) Such signs shall be nonglaring and nonmoving.
(d) There shall be a minimum height from the curb level to the
bottom of the sign of seven feet and a maximum height from
the curb level to the top of the sign of 10 feet.
(e) Signs shall have a maximum area of nine feet on each face.
(5) Pole signs. May be illuminated or nonilluminated. The area per sign
face shall not exceed 75 square feet in surface area per face. No
more than two sign faces shall be permitted. There shall be at least
10 feet of clearance between ground level and the bottom of the
sign face.
(6) Ground signs. Shall not exceed 32 square feet in size and may be
illuminated or nonilluminated.
(7) Shopping centers (multitenant identification signs). One directorytype
sign shall be permitted for a shopping center which identifies
the name of the shopping center and the tenants of the facility.
Such a sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in overall size per sign
§ 310-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-24
1:653
§ 310-25. Steep slope areas.
Any development of slopes of more than 15% must be submitted on a
plan prepared by a registered engineer or architect showing how the
development will treat the slope problem. The Zoning Officer shall refer the
plan to the City Engineer or a consulting engineer for review and advice
before issuing any permit. Development on these slopes also must comply
with the Oil City Stormwater Ordinance and Floodplain Ordinance.148
face. In addition, some 12 square feet for each tenant name may
be used on the directory sign. Tenants will be allowed signs on or
in the shopping center, in accordance with Subsection C(2), Wall
signs.
(8) Multitenant building. Where more than one tenant exists in a
building, each tenant shall be allowed a sign consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
D. In the industrial district, advertising signs and business signs are
permitted, provided that such signs shall not exceed an aggregate area
of 350 square feet.
E. Maintenance, repair and removal. All signs shall be constructed in a
workmanlike fashion using durable materials. Signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand wind forces and in accordance with
appropriate mechanical and electrical standards and codes. Every sign
permitted by this chapter shall be kept in good condition and repair.
When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of failing, or is otherwise
deemed unsafe by the Zoning Officer, or if any sign shall be unlawfully
installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm using same shall,
upon written notice by the Zoning Officer, forthwith in the case of
immediate danger, and in any case within not more than 10 days of the
date of the notice, make such sign conform to the provisions of this
chapter or shall remove it. If within 10 days of the date of the notice the
order is not complied with, the Zoning Officer shall be permitted to
remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner
and/or the user of the sign.
F. Obsolete sign. Any sign that no longer advertises or identifies a use
conducted on the property on which said sign is erected must have the
sign covered or removed within 30 days after written notification from
the Zoning Officer, and upon failure to comply with such notice, the
Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and
any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building,
structure or ground on which the sign is located.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 274, Stormwater Management, and Ch. 170, Flood Damage
Prevention, respectively.
§ 310-24 OIL CITY CODE § 310-26
1:654
§ 310-26. Swimming pools.
All outdoor swimming pools, spas or hot tubs shall adhere to the provisions
of the City's current Building Code, as administered by the Code
Enforcement Office of the City of Oil City.
§ 310-27. Flood hazard areas.
The City of Oil City has adopted an ordinance regulating development
within floodplains. All development within designated areas is required to
follow the regulations contained in Chapter 170, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 310-28. Individual mobile homes.
Such uses must meet all yard and lot requirements of this chapter for
the district where they will be installed. Individual mobile homes shall be
permitted on individual lots only if they meet the following conditions:
§ 310-29. Adaptive reuse of surplus properties for residential uses.
A. Be placed upon a perimeter foundation with a footer below the
frostline.
B. Have permanent approved hookups to sanitary sewer and water.
C. Unit shall be permanently installed and meet all local and state building
codes.
D. There shall be no trailer hitch attached to the mobile home once
installation is completed.
A. Specific intent. It is the finding of the City that, from time to time,
various structures located throughout the City become abandoned,
surplus or obsolete by virtue of the fact that such structures cannot be
economically utilized for their previous use. In addition to the general
goals stated in this chapter, the purpose of the section is to allow for
residential reuse of those obsolete, surplus or abandoned structures.
The adaptive reuse will deter or prevent the deterioration of the stable
neighborhood by permitting the reuse of obsolete, surplus or
abandoned structures, by preventing such structures from becoming
substandard or dilapidated and thus a hazard or danger to the
community. In addition, the adaptive reuse will promote the positive
aspects of a neighborhood by supplementing the housing requirements
of its residents and will generally increase the tax base of the City.
B. Designation of project.
(1) An owner or developer of any commercial, industrial, public or
quasi-public structure that has become abandoned, surplus or
obsolete may submit an application to the Zoning Hearing Board
for a permit granting an adaptive reuse to convert said structure to
a multifamily residential complex consisting of at least five units.
§ 310-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-29
1:655
(2) The adaptive reuse of said structure may be accomplished in
residential, commercial and industrial districts. In all cases,
regardless of the district, the area and bulk regulations of the R-2
District shall apply, subject to the power and authority of the
Zoning Hearing Board to grant or refuse further variance
thereunder.
C. Procedure.
(1) If the owner or developer of an obsolete, surplus or abandoned
structure that is or was being used for commercial, industrial,
public or quasi-public purposes wishes to convert such structure to
a multifamily residential use, and:
(a) The multifamily residential use is not a use by right in the
particular zone in which it is located; and/or
(b) The conversion of the property to residential multifamily use
will not meet all the area and bulk requirements for apartment
units as required by the R-2 District and area and bulk
regulations of this chapter, then the owner or developer of the
property shall file a written application to the Zoning Hearing
Board, which application shall include:
[1] A legal description or sketch of the property which is the
subject of the adaptive reuse; and
[2] A statement of the current zoning use and/or area and bulk
regulations which cannot be met for the proposed
multifamily residential project; and
[3] A statement of the manner in which the proposed project
meets the intent of this section.
(2) The City Planning Commission shall have the opportunity to review
the application and shall have a thirty-day period from the date of
filing of said application to make recommendations to the Zoning
Hearing Board regarding the proposed project.
D. Permit granting for adaptive reuse use standards. The Board shall grant
or refuse the permit for the adaptive reuse under the following
conditions:
(1) The proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from
the use of neighborhood property or from the character of the
neighborhood and that the use of property adjacent to the area
included in the proposed project is adequately safeguarded.
(2) The proposed change will serve the best interests of Oil City, the
convenience of the community and the public welfare.
(3) The effect of the proposed project upon the efficient and
economical extension of public services and facilities, such as
§ 310-29 OIL CITY CODE § 310-29
1:656
§ 310-30. Storage.
In commercial and industrial districts all storage shall be completely
screened from view from any public right-of-way and any residential district
that abuts the district. Screening shall consist of evergreen planting or an
architectural screen. All organic rubbish or storage shall be contained in
airtight, vermin-proof containers that shall also be screened from view from
any public right-of-way, business or abutting residential district.
§ 310-31. Lighting.
Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be
arranged so as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises of any
residential district or use and away from roads or highways. Fully shielded
fixtures are required.
§ 310-32. Clothes lines.
The use of clothes lines shall be permitted in residential districts only.
However, this use shall be limited to the side and rear yards of the
residential property. No clothes lines shall be permitted to be installed in
public water, sewers, police and fire protection, and public schools,
will be minimal.
(4) The proposed project assures the harmonious design of buildings;
planting and maintenance as a sight or sound screen; the
minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements; adequate
standards of parking and sanitation.
(5) The proposed project is suitable with respect to the probable
effects upon area traffic and access situations.
E. Area and bulk standards. Since the end use for any project being
considered under this section is multifamily residential, the area and
bulk regulations for multifamily apartment units as set forth in the R-2
District shall serve as the standards for the project. In those cases
where the subject property or structure cannot meet these standards,
the Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance(s) from the standards,
if such variance(s) does not injure or materially detract from the use of
the neighboring properties. Any variance(s) granted under this section
shall be the minimum variance(s) necessary to make possible the
reasonable reuse of the abandoned, surplus or obsolete structure.
F. Off-street parking regulations. At least one off-street parking space
shall be required for each dwelling unit; except in the case of housing
for the elderly, at least one parking space for every two dwelling units
shall be required.
G. Additional standards. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the
authority to impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as
are necessary to assure that the intent of this chapter is complied with.
§ 310-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-32
1:657
the front yard area. Clothes lines that were installed prior to the effective
date of this chapter must be relocated to either the side or rear yard areas.
§ 310-32 OIL CITY CODE § 310-32
1:658
ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 310-33. Zoning Officer.
§ 310-34. Zoning permits.
A zoning permit application shall be obtained at least 30 days prior to the
start of the project.
A. The Zoning Officer*, who shall be appointed by the City Council, shall:
(1) Administer literally and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (See
also § 310-35.)
(2) Issue zoning permits.
(3) Maintain a permanent file on all zoning permits and applications as
public records.
(4) Take in and review applications and issue such other permits, do
inspections and have such other duties as assigned.
(5) Receive all applications for appeals, special exceptions and
conditional uses and refer same to the proper bodies.
B. In addition, the Zoning Officer shall review all applications for
completeness and reject, in writing with cause given, any incomplete or
incorrect application.
* According to state law, the Zoning Officer cannot hold an elective
office in the City and shall demonstrate knowledge of zoning (see
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Section 614).
A. A zoning permit shall be obtained before any person may:
(1) Occupy or use any vacant land;
(2) Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
moved or enlarged;
(3) Change the use of a structure or land to a different use; or
(4) Change a nonconforming use.
B. Applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by an application
provided by the City and such other information as the Zoning Officer
may require for administration of this chapter, together with a filing fee
as periodically established by the City.
C. All permits and certificates which are granted by the Zoning Officer or
those granted as special exceptions, on appeal to the Board or as a
conditional use shall be exercised promptly. If the use and/or the work
§ 310-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-34
1:659
§ 310-35. Violations and penalties.
so authorized are not initiated within one year from the date of permit
or certificate, then such certificate or permit shall be null and void.
A. Enforcement notice. When it appears to the Zoning Officer that a
violation has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall send an enforcement
notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of
the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notice regarding the
parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record. The enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the City intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation by address and tax parcel
number(s).
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of receipt of notice.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions. These sanctions
shall include a filing for additional fines (see "enforcement
remedies" below) and a refusal to issue any other permits on this
subject property.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the City, the
Zoning Officer of the City, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real
property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a
landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the City
at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy
of the complaint on the City Council of the City of Oil City. No such
action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 310-34 OIL CITY CODE § 310-35
1:660
§ 310-36. Method of appeal.
Any person or City official aggrieved or affected by any decision of the
Zoning Officer may appeal to the Board within 30 days, as provided by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and by the rules of the Board,
by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
§ 310-37. Liability.
C. Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not more than
$500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred
by the City as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the City may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation, and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments,
costs and reasonable attorney's fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to the City. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or entity
other than the City and its Zoning Officer the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. The Zoning Officer, or designee, charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the
duties described in this chapter, shall not be personally liable for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or
by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit
brought against the Zoning Officer or employee in the enforcement of
any provision of such ordinance or other pertinent laws or ordinances
implemented through the enforcement of this chapter or enforced by
the enforcement agency shall be defended by the City until final
termination of the proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom
shall be assumed by the City.
B. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any
building or parcel of land for any damages to persons or property
caused by defects, nor shall the enforcement agency of the City be held
§ 310-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-37
1:661
as assuming any such liability by reason of the reviews of permits
issued under this chapter.
§ 310-37 OIL CITY CODE § 310-37
1:662
ARTICLE VI
Zoning Hearing Board and Conditional Uses
§ 310-38. Creation.
There is hereby created a Zoning Hearing Board, herein referred to as the
"Board," consisting of five residents of the City appointed by the Council
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.149
Said Board shall perform all the duties and exercise all powers prescribed
by said code and as herein further provided. The City Council shall also
appoint up to one alternate member of the Board.
§ 310-39. Appointment.
The terms of office of the Board shall be five years and shall be so fixed
that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board
shall promptly notify the City Council of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term. Members of the Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office
in the City, nor be a member of the Planning Commission.
§ 310-40. Removal of members.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by a majority vote of the City
Council, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of
the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the
vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 310-41. Organization of Board.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of
any hearing or the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than
the majority of all the members of the Board, but when any member is
disqualified to act in a particular matter, an alternate member shall be
seated. The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership
to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further
action by the Board as provided in Section 908 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.150 The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms
for its procedure, consistent with City ordinances and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and
shall submit a report of its activities to the City Council annually.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 310-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-42
1:663
§ 310-42. Expenditures for services.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by City Council, the Board may
employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and
other technical and clerical services.
§ 310-43. Legal counsel.
Where legal counsel is desired, an attorney, other than the City Solicitor,
shall be used.
§ 310-44. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
Article IX of the Municipalities Planning Code and the following
requirements.
A. Notice of hearings shall be given to the public by public notice as set
forth in the Municipalities Planning Code in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county. Such notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at
the hearing. Written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning
Officer and to any person who has made timely request for the same.
Written notices shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to
the notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The City Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. The first hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of receipt of
the applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing shall be held within 45
days of the prior hearing unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in
writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation
of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the
request of the applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall assure that
the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100
days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application
shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application
within 100 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the
applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief, provided the persons
opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional
§ 310-42 OIL CITY CODE § 310-44
1:664
hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written
consent or consent on the record by the applicant and City, be granted
additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application,
provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional
hearings for rebuttal.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer.
The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be
made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision or findings by
the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the City, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, except that advice from the Board's Solicitor is exempt
from this restriction; shall not take notice of any communications,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
§ 310-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-44
1:665
§ 310-45. Board's functions and jurisdiction.
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where application is contested or denied,
each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on
any provisions of this chapter or the Municipalities Planning Code or
any rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied
on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the
light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer,
and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final,
the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the
parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of
findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days
after the report of the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under
Section 916.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code, where the Board
fails to render the decision within the period required by this chapter or
the Municipalities Planning Code, or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing as required by Article IX of the
Municipalities Planning Code, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has
been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
Board to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the Board
shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days in the same
manner as provided in Section 908(9) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.151 Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board no later than the last day of
the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise a brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the governing body pursuant to Sections 609.1
and 916.1(a)(2) of the Municipalities Planning Code.152
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(9).
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2), respectively.
§ 310-44 OIL CITY CODE § 310-45
1:666
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed
from is the initial zoning ordinance of the City and a zoning hearing
board has not been previously established, the appeal raising
procedural questions shall be taken directly to court.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the City Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance and
Flood Hazard Ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to Section 910.2 of the Municipalities Planning
Code153 and § 310-45I of this chapter.
F. Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or the floodplain
ordinance.
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Municipalities Planning Code.154
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or City Engineer
in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to development not involving
Article V or VII applications of the Municipalities Planning Code.
I. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application
and may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The
Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 310-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-45
1:667
§ 310-46. Parties appellant before Board.
Appeals under § 310-45 and proceedings to challenge the Zoning Ordinance
under § 310-45 may be filed with the Board, in writing, by the landowner
affected, any officer or agency of the City, or any person aggrieved.
Requests for a variance under § 310-45 may be filed with the Board by any
landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located;
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare; and
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purpose of this chapter.
J. Special exceptions.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide requests for such special
exceptions in accordance with the standards and criteria of this
chapter. In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and the Zoning
Ordinance in this chapter.
(2) When this chapter requires certificates, licenses, permits or similar
documents and when, in the Board's opinion, such documents will
be issued in a matter of time, the Board may issue a conditional
approval based upon the final issuance of such documents.
§ 310-45 OIL CITY CODE § 310-47
1:668
§ 310-47. Time limitations; persons aggrieved.
No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later than
30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
approved by an appropriate City officer, agency or body if such proceeding
is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner, unless
such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason
to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded
to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge
of his predecessor in interest. See also Section 914.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.155
§ 310-48. Stay of proceedings.
Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 913.3 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code156 and during its pendency
before the Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged
ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body,
and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or
any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating
that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by
a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning
Officer or other appropriate agency or body. See also Section 915.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.157
§ 310-49. Conditional uses.
Certain uses, as specified by this chapter, are conditional uses to be granted
or denied by the City Council. The Planning Commission is to advise the
Council relative to conditional uses. In general, the City Council is to be
governed by the specific criteria set forth by this chapter, the general intent
of the ordinance, the welfare of the community and the recommendations
of the Planning Commission in rendering its decision. The City Council may
attach reasonable conditions to its decision. Specific procedures for action
follow:
A. Where the City Council, in this chapter, has stated conditional uses to
be granted or denied by the City Council pursuant to express standards
and criteria, the City Council shall hold hearings on and decide requests
for such conditional uses in accordance with such standards and
criteria. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council or the
Council may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a
hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the
findings shall be made by the City Council. However, the appellant or
the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the City, may, prior to
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10913.3.
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10915.1.
§ 310-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-49
1:669
the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Council
and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
In granting a conditional use, the City may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Act
and this chapter.
B. Decision or findings.
(1) The City Council shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the City
Council. Where the application is contested or denied, each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions
based thereon, together with any reasons thereof. Conclusions
based on any provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code or of
any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(2) Where the City Council fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing as provided in Section 908(1.2) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the decision shall
be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless
the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension
of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the City Council to meet or
render a decision as herein above provided, the City Council shall
give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as
required by the public notice requirements of this Act. If the City
shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no
decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day
following its date.
§ 310-49 OIL CITY CODE § 310-49
1:670
ARTICLE VII
Amendments and Certain Notices
§ 310-50. General.
The City Council may introduce and/or consider amendments to this chapter
and to the Zoning Map, as proposed by a member of the Council, the
Planning Commission, or by a petition of a person or persons residing or
owning property within the City.
§ 310-51. Petitions.
Petitions for amendments shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, and the
petitioners, upon such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee
in accordance with a fee schedule fixed by the Council's resolution.
§ 310-52. Referral.
Any proposed amendment presented to the City Council without written
findings and recommendations from the City of Oil City Planning
Commission and the Venango County Planning Commission shall be
referred to those agencies for their review and recommendations prior
to the public hearing by the Council. The Council shall not hold a public
hearing upon such amendments until required reviews and
recommendations are received or the expiration of 30 days from the date
that such proposed amendments were submitted to the City of Oil City and
the Venango County Planning Commission. (Note: Under the provisions of
Section 304 of the Municipalities Planning Code, as Venango County has an
adopted Comprehensive Plan, it has 45 days to respond to the request for
review before the proposed action.158)
§ 310-53. Action.
A. Before acting upon a proposed amendment, the City Council shall, as
required by law, hold a public hearing thereon. Public notice of such
hearing is required and shall contain a brief summary of the proposed
amendment and reference to the place where copies of the same may
be examined, and shall be published in accordance with the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. If the proposed
amendment involves a change to the Zoning Map, notice of the public
hearing shall be posted at the affected tract in accordance with Section
609 of the Municipalities Planning Code at least one week prior to the
date of the hearing.159
B. In addition to the requirements that notice be posted where the
proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the City at least 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10304.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 310-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-53
1:671
§ 310-54. Curative amendments.
§ 310-55. Provision for optional notices.
In accordance with the provisions of Act 39 of 2008 and Section 108 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the City of Oil City may
publish a notice of municipal action. This notice shall include amendments
to this chapter or certain decisions that have been entered under this
chapter. Typically, these would be the approval of conditional uses or special
exceptions. Such notices shall include, among other items, any amendments
to this chapter or the Zoning Map, decisions concerning conditional uses
and special exceptions or any other decision as defined by Sections 107 and
108 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.165 Such notices are
intended to set limits on the time for certain challenges.
estate tax bills are sent for all property located within the area being
rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession of the
City. Notice shall include the location, date and time of the public
hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the
requirements of this subsection. Prior to the adoption of an amendment
to this chapter, a notice under Section 610 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code is required.160
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map, or any provision
thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the City
Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247), as amended.161
The City Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days. As
with other proposed amendments, the curative amendment shall be
referred to the City of Oil City Planning Commission and the Venango
County Planning Commission at least 30 days before the hearing is
conducted by the Council. Public notice shall be given in accordance
with applicable provision of the Municipalities Planning Code. The
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with instructions as set forth
by Section 916.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.162 The findings,
actions and considerations of the Council shall be in accordance with
Section 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.163
B. The City may institute a municipal curative amendment in accordance
with Section 609.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code.164
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10610.
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
164. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10107 and 10108.
§ 310-53 OIL CITY CODE § 310-55
1:672
A. Content of a notice of municipal action relating to this chapter.
(1) Municipal ordinance number, name and brief statement of the
content of the ordinance.
(2) Address of City Hall and time when the ordinance can be read or
viewed by the public.
B. Content of a notice of a decision entered under this chapter. Said notice
shall contain:
(1) The name of the applicant or owner of the subject property.
(2) Street address; location of property.
(3) The type of decision and the file or docket number of the decision.
(4) A brief description of the nature of the decision.
(5) The date of the decision.
(6) Address and business hours of City Hall where the decision can be
read by the public.
C. Statement of purpose. Notices provided under this section shall contain
the following statement:
The publication of this announcement is intended to provide
notification of the adoption of an ordinance or entering a decision
and that any person claiming a right to challenge the validity of the
ordinance or decision due to procedural questions or alleged defects
in the process of enacting, adoption or procedures must bring a legal
action within 30 days of the publication of the second notice on this
matter. (See Section 1002.1-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.166)
D. Notice. This notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
publication once each week for two successive weeks. The dates of
publication shall be included in the notice.
E. Proof of publication. The City shall obtain and keep in its records a
proof of publication of the notice.
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11002.1-A.
§ 310-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-55
1:673

ARTICLE VIII
Planned Residential Development
§ 310-56. Planned residential development.
Purpose. The purpose of the planned residential development regulations is
to encourage the flexibility in the design and development of land in order
to promote its most appropriate use; to encourage grouping of housing and
a mixture of housing types in alternative patterns and in a variety of ways;
to facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets and utilities;
and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas. Planned
residential developments are permitted in the R-1 District.
A. Minimum development size. No planned residential development may
include less than five acres of contiguous land.
B. General standards. The planned residential development must meet all
of the following general standards:
(1) The planned residential development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter's statement of community
development objectives.
(2) The planned residential development is an effective and unified
treatment of the development possibilities on the project site, and
the development plan makes appropriate provision for the
preservation of streams and stream banks, wetlands, wooded
cover, rough terrain, and similar areas.
(3) The planned residential development shall be planned and
developed to harmonize with any existing or proposed development
in the area surrounding the project site.
(4) Connection to the Oil City sanitary sewer system shall be required.
(5) Connection to the Oil City water system will be required.
C. Applicable districts and uses permitted. Planned residential
developments may be approved in the R-1 Residential District and may
include the following additional uses: multiple-family dwellings and
related uses. Such additional uses shall be allowed only to the extent
that the City finds them to be compatibly and harmoniously
incorporated into the design of the planned development. (Mobile
homes and mobile home parks are excluded from the planned
residential development district.)
D. Calculations of project densities. The number of dwelling units which
may be constructed within the planned residential development shall be
determined by dividing the gross project area by the required lot area
per dwelling unit which is required in the R-1 District.
E. Increase in density. It is recognized that the expense of complying with
the approval process contained in the planned residential development
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:675
regulations may discourage developers from seeking approval of a
planned residential development project. At the time the outline or
preliminary development plan is filed, the applicant may apply for an
increase in the densities permitted by the zone in which the planned
residential development is to be constructed. If it gives its approval to
the planned residential development, the City Council may authorize
the developer to increase permitted densities by an amount up to 10%.
Additional increase in density may be granted up to 27%, providing:
(1) If common open space is developed to more intense usable open
space providing facilities for active outdoor recreation, such as
playgrounds, playground equipment, picnic facilities, ball fields
and equipment, or other similar improvements to the open space,
an additional ten-percent increase in density may be permitted.
(2) If item (1) above is developed and unique indoor-outdoor buildings,
to be used for recreation or other similar activities of the residents
of the development, such as swimming pools, club houses, or other
similar buildings, are provided, then an additional seventeenpercent
increase in density may be permitted.
F. Lot size and spacing of buildings.
(1) The location of all structures shall be as shown on final plans. The
proposed location and arrangement shall not be detrimental to
existing or prospective adjacent dwellings or to the existing or
prospective development of the neighborhood. There shall be no
minimum lot size, no minimum or maximum percentage of lot
coverage and no minimum lot width in the planned residential
development. However, every single-family dwelling shall have
access to a public street, court, walkway or other area dedicated to
public use. No dwelling and no addition to any dwellings shall be
erected within a distance of less than the height of the highest
adjacent building.
(2) Vehicular access to dwellings by means of adequate service drives
and/or emergency entrances shall be provided in all cases where
dwellings do not front on a public street or where the City deems
necessary for public safety.
G. Perimeter requirements. The requirements of this section apply only to
structures located within 200 feet of the perimeter of a planned
residential development. If topographical or other barriers do not
provide adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the planned
residential development, the Planning Commission may require either
or both of the following:
(1) Structures located on the perimeter of the planned residential
development must be set back by a distance sufficient to protect
the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses, in no case less
than the height of the buildings.
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § 310-56
1:676
(2) Structures located on the perimeter of the planned residential
development must be permanently screened in a manner which is
sufficient to protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing
uses.
H. Common open space required.
(1) The development plan will contain areas to be allocated for
common open space which satisfy the standards governing the
usability and quality of common open space that is contained in this
chapter.
(2) No open area may be accepted as common open space under the
provisions of this chapter unless it meets the following standards:
(a) A minimum of three acres of common open space shall be
provided, including usable and scenic green space for the first
10 acres plus one acre for each additional five acres or fraction
thereof of gross project area.
(b) The location, shape, size and character of the common open
space must be suitable for the planned residential
development.
(c) Common open space must be suitably improved for its
intended use, but common open space containing natural
features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The
building, structures and improvements which are permitted in
the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which
are authorized for the common open space and must conserve
and enhance the amenities of the common open space having
regard to its topography and unimproved condition.
(d) The development schedule which is part of the development
plan must coordinate the improvement of the common open
space, the construction of buildings, structures and
improvements in the common open space, and the construction
of residential dwellings in the planned residential
development.
(e) If the final development plan provides for buildings, structures
and improvements in the common open space of a value in
excess of $10,000, the developer must provide a bond in the
estimated amount of the improvements assuring that the
buildings, structures and improvements will be completed. The
City Council shall release the bond or other assurance when
the buildings, structures or improvements have been
completed according to the development plan.
I. Conveyance and maintenance of common space. All land shown on the
final development plan as common open space must be conveyed under
one of the following options:
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:677
(1) It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain
the common open space and any buildings, structures or
improvements which have been placed on it; in which case the
general public must have use of the open space.
(2) It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture
establishing an association or similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned residential development. The common
open space must be conveyed to the trustees subject to covenants
to be approved by the City which restrict the common open space
to the uses specified on the final development plan and which
provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a
manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
(a) No common open space may be put to any use not specified in
the final development plan unless the final development plan
has been amended to permit that use. However, no change of
use authorized under Subsection C may be considered as a
waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open
space areas, and all rights to enforce these covenants against
any use permitted are expressly reserved.
(b) If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency,
either one of the following methods of enforcement must be
provided:
[1] The legal right to develop the common open space for the
uses not specified in the final development plan must be
approved by the City.
[2] The restrictions governing the use, improvement and
maintenance of the common open space must be stated as
conditions to the conveyance of the common open space;
the fee title to the common open space to vest in a public
agency in the event of a substantial default in the stated
conditions.
(c) If the common open space is not conveyed to the City or a
public agency approved by the City, the covenants governing
the use, improvement and maintenance of the common open
space shall then be enforceable by the City, and the instrument
of conveyance shall so provide.
(d) It is the purpose and intent of these regulations that the City
shall have the authority and powers to require the adequate
maintenance of common open space as set forth by Article VII
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
J. Application for tentative approval of planned residential development.
In order to provide an expeditious method for processing a
development plan for a planned residential development under the
provisions of this chapter, and to avoid the delay and uncertainty which
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § 310-56
1:678
would arise if it were necessary to secure approval by a multiplicity of
procedures of a plat of subdivision as well as approval of a change in
the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the property, it is hereby
declared to be in the public interest that all procedures with a planned
residential development and the continuing administration thereof shall
utilize the following provisions:
(1) An application for tentative approval of the development plan for a
planned residential development shall be filed by or on behalf of the
landowner.
(2) The application for tentative approval shall be filed by the
landowner in such form, upon the payment of such a reasonable fee
as is specified by the City. The application shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer.
(3) All planning, zoning and subdivision matters relating to the
platting, use and development of the planned residential
development and subsequent modifications of the regulations
relating thereto, to the extent such modification is vested in the
City, shall be determined and established by the City Council with
the advice of the Planning Commission.
(4) The provisions shall require only such information in the
application as is reasonably necessary to disclose to the City of Oil
City:
(a) The location, size and topography of the site and the nature of
the landowner's interest in the land proposed to be developed;
(b) The density of land use to be allocated to parts of the site to be
developed;
(c) The location and size of the common open space and the form
of organization proposed to own and maintain the common
open space;
(d) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of
buildings and other structures;
(e) The feasibility of proposals for water supply and the disposition
of sanitary waste and stormwater;
(f) The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public utilities;
(g) The provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and
width of proposed streets and public ways;
(h) The required modifications in the municipal land use
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property;
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:679
(i) The feasibility of proposals for energy conservation and the
effective utilization of renewable energy sources; and
(j) In the case of development plans which call for development
over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times
within which applications for final approval of all sections of
the planned residential development are intended to be filed,
and this schedule must be updated annually, on the
anniversary of its approval, until the development is completed
and accepted.
(5) The application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development shall include a written statement by the landowner
setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, a planned residential
development would be in the public interest and would be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality.
(6) The application for tentative approval shall be forwarded to the Oil
City Planning Commission for its review and comments. The
Planning Commission shall have 35 days from the date of filing to
complete its review and make its recommendations to the City
Council.
(7) All applications for tentative approval shall be forwarded to the
Venango County Planning Commission for its study and
recommendations in accordance with Section 704 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.167
K. Public hearings.
(1) Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this
chapter, a public hearing pursuant to public notice of said
application shall be held by the City of Oil City in the manner
prescribed in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) The City Council may continue the hearing from time to time and,
where applicable, may refer the matter back to the Planning
Commission for additional review; provided, however, that in any
event the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 60
days after the date of the first public hearing.
L. The findings.
(1) Tentative approval.
(a) The City Council, within 60 days following the conclusion of the
public hearing provided for in this part, shall, by official
written communication to the landowner, either:
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10704.
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § 310-56
1:680
[1] Grant tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted;
[2] Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions
not included in the development plan as submitted; or
[3] Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
(b) Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted. In the event, however, the tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written
communication of the City notify such City Council of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case the City
shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the
development plan. In the event the landowner does not, within
said period, notify the governing body of his refusal to accept
all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan,
with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
(2) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings
of fact related to the specific proposal and set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects
the development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(a) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of
the City of Oil City;
(b) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including, but not limited to, density, bulk and use,
and the reason why such departures are or are not deemed to
be in the public interest;
(c) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space
in the planned residential development, the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and
purpose of the common open space as related to the proposed
density and type of residential development;
(d) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment;
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:681
(e) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
planned residential development to the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be established; and
(f) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents of the planned residential development in the
integrity of the development plan.
(3) In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the City may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final
approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final
approval of each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the
consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not be
less than 12 months and, in the case of developments over a period
of years, the time between applications for final approval of each
part of a plan shall be not less than 12 months.
M. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(1) The official written communication provided for in this part shall be
certified by the City Secretary of the City Council and shall be filed
in his office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner.
Where tentative approval has been granted, it shall be deemed an
amendment to the Zoning Map, effective upon final approval, and
shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
(2) Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of
the planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as
submitted, or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of
the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not be modified or
revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the City pending an
application or applications for final approval without the consent of
the landowner, provided an application or applications for final
approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of
years, provided that applications are filed within the period of time
specified in the official written communication granting tentative
approval.
(3) In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval
and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect
to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the governing
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § 310-56
1:682
body in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file
application or applications for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval
shall be deemed to be revoked, and all that portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not
been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto, as they may be amended from time to time, and
the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and in the records of
the City Secretary of the City Council.
N. Application for final approval.
(1) An application for final approval may be for all the land included in
a development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to
the Zoning Officer of the municipality designated by the ordinance
within one year of the official written communication granting
tentative approval. The application shall include any drawings,
specifications, covenants, easements, performance bond, and such
other requirements as may be specified by this chapter, as well as
any conditions set forth in the official written communication at the
time of tentative approval. A public hearing on an application for
final approval of the development plan, or the part thereof
submitted for final approval, shall not be required, provided the
development plan or the part thereof submitted for final approval is
in compliance with the development plan theretofore given
tentative approval and with any specified conditions attached
thereto. The submission shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer
and the Planning Commission for compliance prior to being
forwarded to the City Council. This review is to take place in 35
days.
(2) In the event the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by the ordinance and the official
written communication of tentative approval, the City shall, within
45 days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.
(3) Refusal.
(a) In the event the development plan as submitted contains
variations from the development plan given tentative approval,
the City may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45
days from the filing of the application for final approval, so
advise the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in
said notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are
not in the public interest. In the event of such refusal, the
landowner may either:
[1] Refile his application for final approval without the
variations objected; or
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:683
[2] File a written request with the approving body that it hold
a public hearing on his application for final approval.
(b) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply
for final approval or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the
landowner shall fail to take either of these alternative actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public hearing shall be held
pursuant to public notice within 30 days after request for the
hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed in this part for public
hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the City shall by official
written communication either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of
final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising
under this section, be in the form and contain the findings
required for an application for tentative approval set forth in
this chapter.
(4) A development plan or any part thereof which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the City and shall be
filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
before any development shall take place in accordance therewith.
Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in
such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion, in
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,168 of said planned
residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be,
that has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of
said development plan or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be
made except with the consent of the landowner. Upon approval of a
final plat, the developer shall record the plat in accordance with the
provisions of Section 513(a) and post financial security in
accordance with Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.169
(5) In the event that a development plan or a section thereof is given
final approval, and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such
plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved and shall
so notify the City, in writing; or in the event the landowner shall fail
to commence and carry out the planned residential development in
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10513(a) and 10509, respectively.
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § 310-56
1:684
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code after final approval has
been granted, no development or further development shall take
place on the property included in the development plan until after
the said property is reclassified by enactment of any amendment to
the City of Oil City Zoning Ordinance in the manner prescribed for
such amendments in Article VII.
O. Enforcement. All enforcement procedures under this section shall be
consistent with Section 712.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.170
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10712.2.
§ 310-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-56
1:685
DERIVATION TABLE
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1986 Code to 2015 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2015 Code
Part 1, Administrative Review
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Ordinances Enacted During
Codification
NI
Ch. 5, Administration of Government Repealed by Ord. No. 2767;
see now Ch. 4
Ch. 6, Agreement, Penn Prime Trust Ch. 45, Art. II
Ch. 11, City Funds, Deposit of Ch. 19
Ch. 14, Civil Service Board Ch. 23
Ch. 15, Council of Governments, Oil
Region
Ch. 45, Art. I
Ch. 17, Council Procedures Ch. 28
Ch. 24, Health, Board of Ch. 36
Ch. 29, Library
Art. I, Establishment; Library
Commission
Ch. 49, Art. I
Art. II, Administration of Library Ch. 49, Art. II
Ch. 35, Municipal Authorities
Art. I, Oil City General Authority Ch. 11, Art. II
Art. II, Oil City Parking Authority Ch. 11, Art. III
Art. III, Joint Solid Waste Authority Ch. 11, Art. IV
Ch. 41, Pension Funds and Plans
Art. I, Comprehensive Municipal Pension
Trust Fund
Ch. 55, Art. I
Art. II, Police Pension Fund Ch. 55, Art. II
Art. III, Firemen's Pension Fund Ch. 55, Art. III
Art. IV, Employee's Pension Plan Ch. 55, Art. IV
Ch. 46, Redevelopment Authority Ch. 11, Art. I
§ 310-56 OIL CITY CODE § DT-1
1:686
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2015 Code
Ch. 51, Shade Tree Commission Repealed by Ord. No 2782;
see now Ch. 290
Part II, General Legislation
Ch. 60, Alarm Systems Ch. 88
Ch. 61, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Open Containers Ch. 92, Art. I
Ch. 67, Bicycles Ch. 98
Ch. 71, Building Construction
Art. I, Uniform Construction Code Repealed by Ord. No. 2777
Art. II, International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
Ch. 110, Art. I
Ch. 74, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 115
Ch. 78, Cemeteries Ch. 120
Ch. 82, Curfew Ch. 126
Ch. 87, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 130
Ch. 88, Dogs and Other Animals Ch. 134
Ch. 91, Eating and Drinking
Establishments
Ch. 138 (reserved chapter)
Ch. 95, Electrical Standards Ch. 142
Ch. 97, Energy Conservation Ch. 150
Ch. 99, Excavations Ch. 154
Ch. 101, Fees Ch. 160
Ch. 103, Fire Prevention Ch. 166
Ch. 105, Flood Damage Prevention Superseded by Ord. No. 2821;
see now Ch. 170
Ch. 107, Fuel Gas Ch. 174
Ch. 108, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Ch. 268, Art. I
Ch. 111, Gas, Oil and Water Lines
Art. I, Installation in Streets Ch. 179, Art. I
Art. II, Extending Lines in Streets to
Sidewalks
Ch. 179, Art. II
Art. III, Obtaining Line and Grade Ch. 179, Art. III
Ch. 113, Insurance
Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims Ch. 189, Art. I
Ch. 117, Mechanical Code Ch. 200
Ch. 121, Oil and Gas Wells Ch. 212
Ch. 126, Peace and Good Order Ch. 221
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:687
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2015 Code
Ch. 129, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 225
Ch. 132, Plumbing Ch. 230
Ch. 135, Poles and Wires
Art. I, Regulation and Inspection Ch. 233, Art. I
Art. II, Erection of Poles Restricted Ch. 233, Art. II
Ch. 138, Posters and Signs Ch. 183
Ch. 141, Property Maintenance Repealed by Ord. No. 2740;
see now Ch. 238, Art. I
Ch. 146, Real Estate Registry Ch. 242
Ch. 148, Recycling Ch. 268, Art. II
Ch. 149, Rent Withholding Ch. 250
Ch. 152, Sewers
Art. I, Sewer Use Ch. 255, Art. I
Art. II, Sewer Rents Ch. 255, Art. II
Ch. 154, Skateboards Ch. 259
Ch. 156, Snow Removal Ch. 278, Art. II
Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Water From Eaves and
Downspouts
Ch. 278, Art. I
Art. II, Sidewalk Maintenance in C-2
District
Ch. 278, Art. III
Art. III, Parking Restrictions Ch. 278, Art. IV
Ch. 166, Taxation
Art. I, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax
Repealed by Ord. No. 2742;
see now Ch. 285, Art. IX
Art. II, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 285, Art. III
Art. III, Mercantile License Tax Ch. 285, Art. IV
Art. IV, Earned Income Tax Ch. 285, Art. I
Art. V, Residence Tax Ch. 285, Art. II
Art. VI, Property Assessment Ch. 285, Art. VII
Art. VII, Property Tax Exemptions Ch. 285, Art. VIII
Art. VIII (Reserved) Omitted
Art. IX, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 285, Art. V
Art. X, Per Capita Tax Ch. 285, Art. VI
Ch. 173, Vehicles and Traffic
Art. I, Metered Parking Ch. 295, Art. I
Art. II, Oil City Parking Garage Ch. 295, Art. II
§ DT-1 OIL CITY CODE § DT-1
1:688
Chapter/Title From 1986 Code Location in 2015 Code
Art. III, Nonmetered Parking Ch. 295, Art. III
Art. IV, Relief Street Parking Lot Ch. 295, Art. IV
Art. V, One-Way Streets Ch. 295, Art. V
Art. VI, Justus Street Parking Lot Ch. 295, Art. VI
Art. VII, Speed Limits Ch. 295, Art. VII
Ch. 176, Vehicles, Motorized
Art. I, Operation on City Property Ch. 298, Art. I
Art. II, Engine Braking Ch. 298, Art. II
Ch. 180, Water Ch. 303
Ch. 184, Zoning Ch. 310
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition List.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2710 1-10-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2711 2-28-2005 Metered parking
amendments
Ch. 295, Art. I
2712 5-9-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 160
2713 5-23-2005 Justus Park parking lot Ch. 295, Art. VI
2714 5-23-2005 Water amendment Ch. 303
2715 5-23-2005 Sidewalk vacation NCM
2716 9-12-2005 Employee's Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. IV
2717 11-30-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
nonmetered parking
amendment
Ch. 295, Art. III
2718 12-22-2005 2006 appropriations NCM
2719 12-22-2005 2006 municipal taxes NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:689
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2720 12-22-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
amendment; business
privilege tax amendment;
mercantile license tax
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2742; Ch. 285,
Arts. III and IV
2721 12-22-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 255, Art. II
2722 12-22-2005 Water amendment Ch. 303
2723 1-30-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
speed limits
Ch. 295, Art. VII
2724 2-14-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2725 4-10-2006 Property tax exemptions Ch. 285, Art. VIII
2726 9-11-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2740
2727 11-13-2006 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
for multimunicipal
planning
NCM
2728 12-28-2006 2007 appropriations NCM
2729 12-18-2006 2007 municipal taxes NCM
2730 12-11-2006 Employees' Pension Plan Ch. 55, Art. IV
2731 12-18-2006 Business privilege tax
amendment; mercantile
license tax amendment
Ch. 285, Arts. III and
IV
2732 12-18-2006 Water amendment Ch. 303
2733 12-18-2006 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 255, Art. II
2734 2-12-2007 Rental property: rental
occupancy registration
Ch. 246, Art. I
2735 3-26-2007 Incurrence of
nonelectoral debt
NCM
2736 6-11-2007 Emergency services: cost
recovery
Ch. 146, Art. I
2737 6-25-2007 Solid waste: collection
and disposal of garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment; recycling
amendment
Ch. 268, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 OIL CITY CODE § DL-1
1:690
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2738 6-25-2007 Pensions: Employees'
Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. IV
2739 7-9-2007 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2740 7-9-2007 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 2778
2741 10-22-2007 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2742 11-28-2007 Taxation: local services
tax
Ch. 285, Art. IX
2743 12-17-2007 Appropriations NCM
2744 12-17-2007 Tax levy for 2008 NCM
2745 12-17-2007 Tax levy for 2008 NCM
2746 12-17-2007 Water amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2770
2747 12-17-2007 Water amendment Ch. 303
2748 12-17-2007 Taxation: mercantile
license tax amendment
Ch. 285, Art. IV
2749 1-28-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2750 1-28-2008 Adult-oriented
businesses
Ch. 84
2751 2-25-2008 Council amendment Ch. 28
2752 6-9-2008 Blighted Property Review
Committee
Ch. 15
2753 6-23-2008 Taxation: property tax
exemptions amendment
Ch. 285, Art. VIII
2754 7-14-2008 Council amendment Ch. 28
2755 8-18-2008 Incurrence of
nonelectoral debt
NCM
2756 11-10-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 160
2757 12-17-2008 Appropriations NCM
2758 12-17-2008 Tax levy for 2009 NCM
2759 12-17-2008 Tax levy for 2009 NCM
2760 12-17-2008 Recycling amendment;
Sewers amendment
Superseded by Ord.
Nos. 2769, 2780
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:691
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2761 12-17-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2793
2762 4-6-2009 Council amendment Ch. 28
2763 3-16-2009 Incurrence of
nonelectoral debt
NCM
2764 4-20-2009 Outdoor wood-burning
appliances
Ch. 216
2765 6-15-2009 Rental property: rental
housing permits
Ch. 246, Art. II
2766 Number not used
2767 6-15-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2793
2768 6-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
nonmetered parking
amendment
Ch. 295, Art. III
2769 6-29-2009 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2770 6-29-2009 Water amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2791
2771 10-19-2009 Nuisance Properties:
disorderly houses
Ch. 208, Art. I
2772 12-14-2009 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment;
Recycling amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2780
2773 12-14-2009 Sewers: sewer rents
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2814
2774 12-14-2009 Appropriations NCM
2775 12-14-2009 Tax levy for 2010 NCM
2776 12-14-2009 Tax levy for 2010 NCM
2777 3-15-2010 Construction codes,
uniform
Ch. 110, Art. II
2778 3-15-2010 Property maintenance:
adoption of standards
Ch. 238, Art. I
2779 5-3-2010 Blighted Property Review
Committee amendment
Ch. 15
2780 6-21-2010 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment;
recycling amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2808
§ DL-1 OIL CITY CODE § DL-1
1:692
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2781 7-12-2010 Incurrence of
nonelectoral debt
NCM
2782 9-27-2010 Trees Ch. 290
2783 9-27-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 160
2784 9-27-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
metered parking
amendment
Ch. 295, Art. I
2785 10-11-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2786 11-15-2010 Arts and Culture
Commission
Ch. 7
2787 2-10-2011 Outdoor wood-burning
appliances amendment
Ch. 216
2788 12-13-2010 Appropriations NCM
2789 12-13-2010 Tax levy for 2011 NCM
2790 12-13-2010 Tax levy for 2011 NCM
2791 12-13-2010 Water amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2809
2792 12-6-2010 Library: establishment;
Library Commission
amendment
Ch. 49, Art. I
2793 12-13-2010 Administration of
government
Ch. 4
2794 1-27-2011 Water amendment Ch. 303
2795 2-10-2011 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 88
2796 2-10-2011 Construction codes,
uniform amendment
Ch. 110, Art. II
2797 3-10-2011 Abandoned or vacant
property
Ch. 80
2798 3-10-2011 Stormwater management Ch. 274
2799 4-14-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2822
2801 5-12-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
2802 7-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
metered parking
amendment
Ch. 295, Art. I
2803 11-17-2011 General obligation bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:693
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2804 10-13-2011 Pensions: Police Pension
Fund amendment
Ch. 55, Art. II
2805 12-15-2011 Tax levy for 2012 NCM
2806 12-15-2011 Appropriations NCM
2807 12-15-2011 Tax levy for 2012 NCM
2808 12-15-2011 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2820
2809 12-15-2011 Water amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2815
2810 12-15-2011 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2811 5-17-2012 Taxation: tax exemption
for improvements to
deteriorated dwellings
Ch. 285, Art. X
2812 8-9-2012 Water amendment Ch. 303
2813 12-13-2012 Tax levy for 2013 NCM
2814 12-13-2012 Sewers: sewer rents
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2827
2815 12-13-2012 Water amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 2825
2816 12-13-2012 Tax levy for 2013 NCM
2817 12-13-2012 Appropriations NCM
2818 3-28-2013 Rental property: rental
housing permits
amendment
Ch. 246, Art. II
2819 5-23-2013 Taxation: property tax
exemptions amendment
Ch. 285, Art. VIII
2820 6-24-2013 Solid waste: collection
and disposal of garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment; recycling
amendment
Ch. 268, Art. I; Ch.
268, Art. II
2821 12-19-2013 Floodplain management Ch. 170
2822 12-19-2013 Zoning Ch. 310
2823 12-19-2013 Tax levy for 2014 NCM
2824 12-19-2013 Appropriations NCM
2825 12-19-2013 Water amendment Ch. 303
2826 12-19-2013 Tax levy for 2014 NCM
§ DL-1 OIL CITY CODE § DL-1
1:694
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2827 12-19-2013 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2828 2-27-2014 Public, Educational and
Governmental Access
Channel Advisory Board
Ch. 53
2829 4-24-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
open containers
amendment
Ch. 92, Art. I
2830 4-24-2014 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 134
2831 6-26-2014 Property Maintenance:
Adoption of Standards
Amendment
Ch. 238, Art. I
2832 8-14-2014 Pensions: Police Pension
Fund Amendment
Ch. 55, Art. II
2833 12-18-2014 Tax Levy for 2015 NCM
2834 12-18-2014 Appropriation NCM
2835 12-15-2014 Tax Rate for 2015 NCM
2836 1-22-2015 Blighted Property Review
Committee Amendment
Ch. 15
2837 5-28-2015 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2838 7-9-2015 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2839 Bond NCM
2840 12-17-2015 Council Amendment Ch. 28
2841 12-17-2015 Appropriation NCM
2842 12-17-2015 Tax Rate for 2016 NCM
2843 12-17-2015 Tax Levy for 2016 NCM
2844 12-17-2015 Water Amendment Ch. 303
2845 12-17-2015 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2846 12-17-2015 Solid Waste: Collection
and Disposal of Garbage,
Rubbish and Refuse
Amendment; Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 268, Art. I; Ch.
268, Art. II
2847 5-12-2016 Street Vacation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:695
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2848 8-11-2016 Abandoned or Vacant
Property Amendment
Ch. 80
2849 12-15-2016 Appropriation NCM
2850 12-15-2016 Tax Rate for 2017 NCM
2851 12-15-2016 Tax Levy for 2017 NCM
2852 12-15-2016 Water Amendment Ch. 303
2853 12-15-2016 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
2854 2-23-2017 Tax Levy for 2017 NCM
2855 11-16-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 295
2856 Not yet codified
2857 12-14-2017 Appropriations NCM
2858 12-14-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
2859 12-14-2017 Tax Levy for 2018 NCM
2860 12-14-2017 Water Amendment Ch. 303
§ DL-1 OIL CITY CODE § DL-1
1:696

ZONING
310 Attachment 1
City of Oil City
Zone standards
Zoning District
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Front Yard
Minimum Side Yard
Minimum Rear Yard
Maximum Height
Maximum Lot Coverage
R-1 Residential 7,500 50 25 10 40 35 20%
R-1A Residential 5,000 50 25 5 25 35 35%
R-1B Residential 4,000 50 25 5 25 35 35%
R-2 Single-family 5,000 50 25 5 25 35 35%
R-2 Two-family dwelling 6,000 50 25 5 25 35 35%
R-2 Multifamily 3,000 50 25 20 30 45 35%
RLB Residential Limited Business 5,000 50 25 5 25 35 35%
C-1 Commercial 6,000 60 25 0 20 40 55%
C-2 Commercial 4,000 40 0 lot line 0 0 60 80%
I-1 Industrial 10,000 100 10 0 50 40 55%
INST-1 Institutional 7,500 50 25 10 40 35 30%

NOTES:
* Accessory building may be placed in the rear yard but shall be at least five feet from the rear and side lot lines.
1 Measured at the building setback line.
2 See also Article IV.
310 Attachment 1:1 05 - 01 - 2015
OIL CITY CODE
3 Must meet the requirements of the underlying district as well as meet the standards of § 310-16A(36).
310 Attachment 1:2 00 - 00 - 0000