BUILDING PERMIT
ORDINANCE
OF
PEACH BOTTOM
TOWNSHIP
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE ERECTION, MOVING, PLACEMENT,
CONSTRUCTION AND ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES IN
PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP, YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, TO BE CITED
AS THE "BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE OF PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP".
The following ordinance regulating the erection, moving, placement, construction and
enlargement of buildings, structures and other development in Peach Bottom Township, York
County, Pennsylvania, to be cited as the "Building Permit Ordinance of Peach Bottom
Township" is hereby ordained and enacted by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania."
SECTION 1. Requirement
A. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, association or corporation to cause or permit
any building or structure with a value in excess of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
(including materials, labor, foundation, etc.) to be erected, moved, placed, constructed or
enlarged within Peach Bottom Township, or development as hereinafter defined to occur
within the flood-prone area of Peach Bottom Township, unless a permit to do so shall
first be secured as provided herein and unless such erection, movement, construction,
placement, enlargement or development is done in strict accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance, with the application submitted pursuant to Section 3 of this ordinance
and with the permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. The "value" of various structures
shall be established by a schedule which schedule shall be set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The value of other structures shall be based upon
reasonable cost.
Irrespective of other provisions of this section with respect to a movable agricultural
building or structure on account of which a permit was issued to place it at its original
location, such building or structure may be moved to a different location without a new
permit provided the new location is in conformance with all setback and other
requirements established by the township zoning ordinance, is in accordance with all of
the provisions of the township subdivision and land development ordinance, and with all
other applicable township ordinances and any applicable federal or state laws.
B. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, association or corporation to occupy or use any
building or structure for which a permit was required to construct, erect, move, place or
enlarge without first securing a Certificate of use and Occupancy pursuant to Section 7 of
this ordinance and Section 405 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, association, or corporation to dig, construct,
erect, or place a pond, pool, or artificial lake designed to contain water or other liquid
substance, which liquid substance will when filled be eighteen (18) inches or more in
depth and more than twelve (12) feet from side to side at its longest measurement, unless
a permit to do so shall first be secured as provided herein, and such pond, pool or
artificial lake is dug, constructed, erected, or placed in strict accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance, with the application submitted pursuant to Section 3 of this
-3-
ordinance, and with the permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. The location of such
pond, pool, or artificial lake must be in compliance with the requirements set forth in the
Township zoning ordinance.
D. It shall be unlawful to make any encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind to
any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action
have been notified by the Township and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development shall be notified by the Township prior to
any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
SECTION 2. Definitions - Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
A. Accessory Use or Structure - a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
B. Basement - any area of a building which is below ground level on all sides.
. C. Building - a combination of materials to form a structure that is safe and stable and
adapted to permanent or continuous use or occupancy for public, residence, business,
agriculture, manufacturing or storage purposes. This definition shall include all
manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation or storage.
D. Completely Dry Space - a space which will remain totally dry during flooding;
the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
E. Development - any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets,
and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling
operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
F. Essentially Dry Space - a space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the
passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable
to the passage of water.
G. Flood - a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
H. Floodplain Area - a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
I. Floodproofing - any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
-4-
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
J. Floodway - the designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge flood
waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the floodway shall be
capable of accommodating a flood of the one hundred (100) year magnitude.
K. Historic Structure - any structure that is:
1. listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
3. individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
4. individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior
or
b. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
L. Identified Floodplain Area - the floodplain area specifically identified in this Ordinance as
being inundated by the one hundred (100) year flood.
M. Land Development - any of the following activities:
1. the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
a. a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a
lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
b. the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
-5-
2. a subdivision of land.
N. Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
O. Manufactured Home Park - a parcel of land under single ownership, which has been
planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for
non-transient use.
P. New Construction - structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
September 30, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
Q. One Hundred Year Flood - a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one
hundred (100) years (i.e. that has one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although
the flood may occur in any year).
R. Owner - the person, persons, partnership, corporation or other entity owning the land on
which any construction is proposed to occur.
S. Person - an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation,
firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
T. Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle which is (I) built on a single chassis; (ii) not more than
400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
U. Regulatory Flood Elevation - the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
V. Repetitive Loss - flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a one hundred (100) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each
such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market
value of the structure before the damages occurred.
W. Structure - a combination of any materials which are erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or under it and shall include, but not be limited to, houses, buildings, stadiums,
observation or radio towers, sheds, coal yards, swimming pools, trailers, mobile homes,
and all other buildings or units designed and/or utilized as residences, part or full-time, for
human beings. This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location over or in land or water whether or not affixed to land.
-6-
X. Subdivision - the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or
any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Y. Substantial Additions to Manufactured Home Parks - any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision,
where such repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads will
equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the
repair, reconstruction, or improvement is started.
Z. Substantial Damage - damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50)
percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
AA. Substantial Improvement - any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage (or "repetitive loss"
when a repetitive loss provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
1. any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
2. any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
BB. Uniform Construction Code (UCC) - the statewide building code adopted by The
Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all
municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department
of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code
adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code
(IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the Commonwealth
floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
SECTION 3. Application Requirements - all applications for building permits shall be made in
writing by the owner or authorized agent on forms supplied by the Zoning Officer and shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer. The application shall include:
-7-
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
C. The name and address of the contractor, if known.
D. A general description of the proposed work, its location, including address and estimated
cost, and the existing use and occupancy of all parts of all buildings and structures located
on the parcel.
E. A drawing showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of all
buildings or structures existing thereon, the location of all wells and sewage disposal
systems located thereon and the size and location of all buildings or structures proposed to
be erected, moved, placed, constructed or enlarged.
F. Two (2) copies of building specifications and plan, if applicable.
G. The number, location and design of parking and loading spaces.
H. All other applicable plans and data required by the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
I. The building permit application fee.
J. Engineering details in the event construction is proposed to occur in a flood plain area and
any other information deemed necessary and specifically required by the Zoning Officer.
K. A breakout of the flood related cost and the market value of the building before the flood
damage occurred, if applicable.
L. An erosion and sediment control plan which has been approved
1. by Peach Bottom Township if less than one (1) acre of ground surface area is to be
disturbed; or
2. by the York County Soil Conservation District if more than one (1) acre of ground
surface area is to be disturbed.
M. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any
identified floodplain area, applicants for building permits shall provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Zoning Officer to determine that:
1. all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and
ordinances;
2. all utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
-8-
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
3. adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
4. applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent
information as may be required by the Zoning Officer to make the above
determination:
a. a completed Building Permit Application Form; and
b. a plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one (1) inch
being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
(1) north arrow, scale, and date;
(2) topographic contour lines, if available;
(3) all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) the location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and
other improvements, including the location of any existing or
proposed subdivision and land development;
(5) the location of all existing streets, drives, and other access ways;
and
(6) the location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining
to the floodway, and the flow of water including direction and
velocities.
c. plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn
at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) the proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood;
(3) if available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with
a one hundred (100) year flood;
(4) detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures; and
-9-
(5) supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code,
Chapter 401-405 as amended, and Sec. 1612.5.1, Section 104.7 and
109.3 of the 2006 IBC and Section R106.1.3 and R104.7 of the
2006 IRC.
d. the following data and documentation:
(1) documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an FE (Special Floodplain Area), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the elevation of the one hundred (l00) year flood more
than one (1) foot at any point.
(2) a document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the
one hundred (100) year flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of
flood proofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure and/or the development.
(3) detailed information needed to determine compliance with Section
8(F)(3)(f), Storage, and Section 8(F)(5), Development Which May
Endanger Human Life, including:
(a) the amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in Sections 8(F)(3)(f) and 8(F)(5)
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
(b) a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design
of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the
dangerous materials or substances listed in Section 8(F)(5)
during a one hundred (100) year flood.
(4) the appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development."
(5) where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
SECTION 4. Requirements of Permit - no building permit shall be issued unless sufficient
-10-
information is provided to enable the Zoning Officer to determine that:
A. Proper surface drainage of the land is provided. If the permit is to construct a building or
structure pursuant to an approved subdivision or land development plan showing storm
water management facilities, the Zoning Officer must insure that the storm water
management facilities proposed by such subdivision or land development plan are in
fact installed. If proposed storm water management facilities are not shown on an
approved subdivision or land development plan, the applicant must prepare a storm
water management plan sufficient to meet the requirements of Section 712 of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, which requirements are
incorporated herein by reference and any storm water management facilities required by
such plan must be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 806 of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, which requirements are
incorporated herein by reference. This storm water management plan must provide for
management of increased storm water flow resulting from construction of proposed
buildings, structures and driveways. At the minimum all buildings with a footprint of
at least four hundred (400) square feet shall have roof water drained into storm water
pits sized so that there is at least one (1) cubic foot of retention area for each two (2)
square feet of ground coverage.
B. On properties 10 acres or greater, the applicant may elect to use another method to prevent
runoff. The purpose is to capture water on property and aid in ground water recharge. In
the event the Zoning Officer determines there is sufficient land area to prevent
stormwater runoff, alternative methods can be utilized as approved by the Zoning
Officer and maintained by the property owner of record.
C. In the event the Zoning Officer determines that professional engineering review of the
applicant’s proposal is required, he shall refer the applicant’s proposal to the Township
engineer for review. All costs of such review shall be paid by the applicant prior to
issuance of a permit.
D. The proposed construction, erection, moving, placement or enlargement will conform to
proper line and grade of street.
E. A permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of the Township "Sewage Permit
Ordinance", and that all other provisions of the Sewage Permit Ordinance, the
"Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act" of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, and
any regulations adopted thereunder have been complied with if the application is to
construct or place a dwelling or other structure for which a permit is required pursuant
to the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act" of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as
amended, the regulations adopted thereunder or by the Township "Sewage Permit
Ordinance".
F. The proposed building or structure and/or sewage disposal system will conform to all
setback and other requirements established by the Township "Zoning Ordinance" and
shall be in accordance with all provisions of the Township "Zoning Ordinance", the
-11-
Township "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance" and all other applicable
Township ordinances and any applicable federal and state laws.
G. A permit has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of the "Peach Bottom Township
Driveway Ordinance" if the application is to construct or place a dwelling or
commercial establishment and the twenty-five (25) feet most proximate to the improved
portion of the Township street or road has been improved in accordance with the
requirements of Section V(A) of the "Peach Bottom Township Driveway Ordinance".
H. A highway occupancy permit has been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation if the application is to construct or place a building or structure which
will require access to a road or street under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
SECTION 5. Violation of Other Ordinances - no permit shall be issued to construct, erect, move,
enlarge or place any building or structure upon a tract of ground if that tract of ground was
conveyed to applicant in violation of the Township Subdivision or Zoning Ordinances, if a
portion of the original tract has been conveyed by the applicant in violation of the Township
Subdivision or Zoning Ordinances or if there is, with respect to the tract of ground on which the
applicant proposes to erect, construct, move, enlarge or place any building or structure, any other
violation of the Township Subdivision or Zoning Ordinances.
SECTION 6. Permit Procedures:
A. Zoning Officer Review - prior to issuance of any permit, the Zoning Officer shall review
the application. If the specifications set forth by the applicant in his application for a
building permit are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and all other
applicable statutes, and all necessary permits required by Federal and State laws have been
obtained, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit to the owner of the property where the
proposed construction is to occur. The Zoning Officer shall take action on all applications
and render a decision thereon either approving or disapproving the same within ninety
(90) days after the application is filed. Any rejection shall set forth in addition to the
reasons for such rejection, the manner in which the application can be corrected and/or
modified in order to obtain approval.
If no decision is rendered on the application within ninety (90) days, the application shall
be deemed to be approved and the permit shall be deemed to have been granted
immediately, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
B. After the issuance of a building permit by the Zoning Officer, no changes of any kind shall
be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the Zoning
Officer. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Zoning Officer for consideration.
C. Life of a Permit - any construction requiring a building permit under this Article shall be
-12-
completed within twelve (12) months from date of issuance of a permit. However, the
right to proceed with construction may be extended for not more than two additional nine
(9) month periods with payment of a renewal fee established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for each such extension, provided that construction or change pursuant to said
permit has commenced within the initial twelve (12) month period and provided that the
application for renewal is made within thirty (30) days following the permit expiration. If
construction has not commenced within the initial twelve (12) month period or in the
event the applicant fails to apply for an extension within thirty (30) days following the
date of a letter addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application,
notifying the applicant of the expiration of the permit in order to obtain an extension, the
applicant must reapply for a building permit, pay a new application fee, and meet any
additional requirements of Township ordinances enacted in the intervening period.
Amended June 7, 2010, July 5, 2017
If construction has not been completed within the initial twelve (12) month period and the
two (2) nine (9) month extensions, the permit may not be renewed without specific
approval by the Township Board of Supervisors and the payment of a fee by the applicant,
said fee as shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. In the event the
applicant should not seek a permit renewal, or in the event an application for permit
renewal should be refused, the applicant shall cause all buildings or structures which have
not been completed to be removed from the property within sixty (60) days of permit
expiration and, in addition, shall within such sixty (60) day period remove any fully
constructed accessory buildings if a permit to construct, erect, move, place or enlarge such
building was issued simultaneously with or after issuance of the permit to construct, erect,
move, place or enlarge the principal building.
D. Posting of Permit - upon notification to the Zoning Officer of the commencement of work,
the applicant shall also post in a conspicuous spot a copy of the placard issued by the
Zoning Officer at the time of permit approval. Such posting shall signify that the site is
open to the Zoning Officer for his inspection during the entire construction period and
such permit shall remain posted until the completion of the final inspection by the Zoning
Officer pursuant to granting a Certificate of Use and Occupancy.
E. Zoning Officer Inspection and Revocation - the Zoning Officer shall make on-site
inspections to determine compliance with the terms of all applicable Township ordinances
and with statements and plans submitted by the applicant with the building permit
application. If the Zoning Officer notes any instances of non-compliance he may either:
1. order corrective action to be taken and schedule a subsequent inspection to verify
that the required corrective action has been taken; or
2. order construction to cease and desist until corrective action is taken and
inspection is made by the Zoning officer to determine if the corrective action is
satisfactory. Any verbal orders by the Zoning Officer shall be followed promptly
by written orders signed by the Zoning Officer.
-13-
3. if the applicant fails to comply with orders issued by the Zoning Officer pursuant
to subsections 1 or 2, or the Zoning Officer determines that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by the applicant, the Zoning Officer shall revoke
the permit and report such revocation to the Board of Supervisors.
SECTION 7. Completion of Construction - upon completion of the construction, erection,
placement, enlargement or moving authorized by the building permit, the applicant must notify
the Zoning Officer and apply for a Certificate of Use and Occupancy. No structure shall be used
or occupied until a Certificate of Use and Occupancy is issued pursuant to this section and section
405 of the Township Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning officer shall inspect the property. He shall
issue a Certificate of Use and Occupancy only after finding:
A. that if the application is to use the structure as a dwelling or for another purpose for which
a sewage permit is required pursuant to the provisions of the Township "Sewage Permit
Ordinance", an operating sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the sewage
permit has been installed and is properly functioning;
B. that all conditions of the building permit have been complied with;
C. that all storm water management facilities required by Section 4(A) of this ordinance have
been installed.
D. that in the event access to the structure is provided by a driveway leading from a road
maintained by the Township, such driveway has been installed and all requirements of the
Township "Driveway Ordinance" have been complied with;
E. that in the event access to the structure is to be provided by a driveway leading from a
road not maintained by the Township, such driveway has been installed and the driveway
as installed will not interfere with proper surface drainage, will not divert surface water
from the gutter at the edge of the road onto the travelable surface of the road and will not
cause such additional water to flow from the lot onto the road so as to damage the road;
F. that all requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance and all other relevant Township ordinances have been
complied with;
G. that all damage occurring to any public or private road as a result of the construction
activity has been repaired and such public or private road has been restored to as good a
condition as prior to the commencement of construction activity;
H. that any earth exposed by reason of such construction activity has been stabilized or, in the
alternative, adequate measures have been taken to ensure such stabilization, which
measures may include the posting of a cash bond to enable the Township to take such
measures if the applicant fails to achieve the required stabilization in a timely manner.
Stabilization shall at a minimum require that the site be seeded, mulched or otherwise
protected from accelerated erosion; and
-14-
I. that if the application is to use the structure as a dwelling or if the structure has a foot print
greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet and is in a subdivision or land development
having a storm water management plan, a Registered Surveyor or Engineer has provided
to the Township verification that the established final grading
1. will divert storm water away from the dwelling or other structure;
2. that the storm water management plan for the lot will function as designed;
3. that storm water will flow to the intended storm water management facility - pit,
inlet, basin, etc; and
4. that the actual final grades are the grades shown on the plan as designed final
grades or are preconstruction grades if the plan did not show grade changes.
The above requirement may be waived by the Township Board of Supervisors if it
determines that it is apparent from visual inspection that the results required by this
section have been achieved.
SECTION 8. Floodplain Areas - the following special regulations for flood-prone areas shall
apply:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Peach Bottom Township subject to the
one hundred (100) year flood, which is identified as Zone A (Area of Special Flood
Hazard) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 25, 2009 and the
accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
1. FW (Floodway Area) - the areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE Zone in the
Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in
the Flood Insurance Study.
2. FF (Flood-Fringe Area) - the remaining portions of the one hundred (100) year
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study,
where a floodway has been delineated.
The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one hundred (100)
year flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood
Insurance Study.
3. FE (Special Floodplain Area) - the areas identified as Zone AE in the Flood
-15-
Insurance Study, where one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been
provided, but no floodway has been delineated.
4. FA (General Floodplain Area) - the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which
no one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided. When available,
information from other Federal, State, and other acceptable sources shall be used
to determine the one hundred (100) year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if
possible. When no other information is available, the one hundred (100) year
elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified
floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the Township.
C. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need
for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
D. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Township Engineer and any party aggrieved by this
decision or determination may appeal to the Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
E. WARNING - The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering
methods of study. Larger floods may occur, flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
Ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
F. Technical Provisions - Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area, shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the
provisions contained in this Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
1. Special Requirements for FW, FE and FA Areas:
-16-
a. With any FW (Floodway Area, the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights on adjacent property
shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
b. Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area), no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the one
hundred (100) year flood on adjacent property.
c. Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area) or FA (General Floodplain Area),
the following provisions apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless it can be established that the floodway is of
lesser distance, in which case new construction can occur outside
the floodway; and
(2) Any new construction or development, which would cause any
increase in flood heights on adjacent property shall be prohibited
within any floodway area.
2. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements:
a. Residential Structures
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 IBC (Sec. 1612.4,1603.1.6 and 3403.1) and in the
2006 IRC (Sec. R323.1.4, R323.2.1, and R323.2.2) and ASCE 24 (Sec. 2.4
and 2.5, Chap. 5) and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be
utilized.
b. Non-residential Structures
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or
-17-
substantial improvement of a non-residential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely
or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(2) Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated to at least one and one half (1-1/2) feet above
the one hundred (100) year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in
a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1
or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication
entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with
some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for
such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above referenced standards.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications contained
in the IBC (Sec. 1603.1.2, 1603.1.6, 1605.2.2, 1606.5, 1612.5.1 and
3403.1. and ASCE 24 (Secs. 2.4 and Chap. 7) and 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
c. Space below the lowest floor - partially or fully enclosed space below the
lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
d. Accessory structures - structures accessory to a principal building need not
be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum,
with the following requirements:
(1) the structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools,
material, and equipment related to the principal use or activity;
(2) floor area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet;
(3) the structure will have a low damage potential;
(4) the structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
(5) power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least one and one-half
(1-1/2) feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation;
(6) permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited;
-18-
(7) sanitary facilities are prohibited; and
(8) the structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) a minimum of two (2) openings having a net total area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space;
(b) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade; and
(c) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
3. Design and construction standards - the following minimum standards shall apply
for all construction and development proposed within any identified floodplain
area:
a. Fill - if fill is used, it shall:
(1) extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line
from all points;
(2) consist of soil or small rock materials only - Sanitary Landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) be no steeper than one (1) vertical to three (3) horizontal feet unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Zoning Officer; and
(5) be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties. The provisions contained in the 2006 IBC (Sec. 1801.1
and 1803.4) shall be utilized.
b. Drainage facilities - Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey
-19-
the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system
shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. The provisions
contained in the 2006 IBC (Appendix G40 1.5) shall be utilized.
c. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems
(1) all new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
(2) sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
(3) no part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all State
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) the design and construction provisions of the UCC and 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401-405 as amended) and contained in the 2006 IBC
(Appendix G. Secs. 401.3 and 401.4), the 2006 IRC (Sec. 323.1.6),
the ASCE 24-98 (Sec. 8.3), FEMA #348, Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages and The International Private
Sewage Disposal Code (Chapter 3) shall be utilized.
d. Other utilities - all other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to
minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
e. Streets - the finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one
(1) foot below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
f. Storage - all materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times
of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not
listed in Section 8(F)(5), Development Which May Endanger Human Life,
shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
g. Placement of Buildings and Structures - all buildings and structures shall be
designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction
to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon
the flow and height of flood water.
-20-
h. Anchoring
(1) all buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(2) all air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
(3) The design and construction requirements of the UCC pertaining to
this subsection as referred to in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as
amended) and contained in the 2006 IBC (Secs. 1605.2.2,
1605.3.1.2, 1612.4 and Appendix G501.3), the IRC (Sees. R301.1
& R323.1.1) and ASCE 24-98 (Sec. 5.6) shall be utilized.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the Regulatory
Flood Elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant"
material.
(5) The provisions of the UCC pertaining to this subsection and
referenced in the 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) and
contained in the 2006 IBC (Secs. 801.1.3, 1403.2, 1403.4, 1403.6
and 1404.2), the 2006 IRC (Secs. R323.1.7 & R501.3) and ASCE
24-98 (Chapter 6).
j. Paints and adhesives
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the Regulatory Flood
Elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
-21-
(2) Adhesives used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing
material.
(4) The standards and specifications contained in 34 PA Code
(Chapters 401-405, as amended) the 2006 IBC (Secs. 801.1.3,
1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2006 IRC (Sec. R323.1.7.)
k. Electrical components
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above
the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(3) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and referenced in
the UCC and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405) as amended and
contained in the 2006 IBC (Sec. 1612.4), the IRC (Sec. R323.1.5),
the 2000 IFGC (Secs. R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24
(Chapter 8) shall be utilized.
l. Equipment
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
(2) The provisions pertaining to the above provision and referenced in
the DCC and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended and
contained in the 2006 IBC (Sec. 1612.4), the 2006 IRC (Secs.
R323.1.5) the 2000 IFGC (Secs. R301.5 and RI601.3.8) and ASCE
24 (Chapter 8) shall be utilized.
m. Fuel Supply Systems - all gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
4. Uniform Construction Code Coordination - the Standards and Specifications
contained 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended and not limited to the
following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and sub-sections
of this ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the
-22-
requirements of this ordinance.
International Building Code (IBC) 2006 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. 801,
1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612,3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2006 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE10l, Appendix E and Appendix J.
5. Development which may endanger human life
a. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic
Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved
structure which:
- will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances; or,
- will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of
the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises;
or,
- will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances;
Shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
1. Acetone
2. Ammonia
3. Benzene
4. Calcium carbide
5. Carbon disulfide
6. Celluloid
7. Chlorine
8. Hydrochloric acid
9. Hydrocyanic acid
10. Magnesium
11. Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
12. Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
13. Phosphorus
14. Potassium
15. Sodium
16. Sulphur and sulphur products
17. Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
-23-
18. Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
b. Within any floodplain area, the following shall be prohibited:
(1) Any structure of the kind described in Subsection “a” above;
(2) The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) hospitals
(b) nursing homes
(c) jails or prisons
(3) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, or
substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
6. Special requirements for manufactured homes
a. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
b. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and
any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one
and one half (1-1/2) feet or more above the elevation of the one
hundred (100) year flood.
(3) anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(4) installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2006
International Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision
thereto shall apply and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405.
(5) consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
-24-
2006 IBC (Appendix G, Sec. 501.1-3) and the 2006 IRC (Sec.
R323.2, R323.3, R102.7.1, and Appendix AE1O1, 604 and 605) or
the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA Code Chapter
401-405, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the units(s) proposed
installation.
G. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Area - The provisions of this Ordinance do
not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of this
section shall apply.
1. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
a. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation of
the one hundred (100) year flood on adjacent property.
b. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any FE area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the one hundred (100) year flood
elevation on adjacent property.
c. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
d. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind
that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance
e. The requirements of 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405, as amended and the
2006 IRC (Secs. RI02.7.1, RI05.3.1 and Appendices E and J) or the latest
revision thereof and the 2006 IBC (Sees. 101.3, 3403.1 and Appendix G)
or the latest revision thereof shall also be utilized in conjunction with the
provisions of this section.
H. The provisions of this ordinance supersede any conflicting provisions in any other
ordinances which may be applicable to existing floodplain areas.
However, the provisions of any other ordinances shall remain in full force
and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive than
-25-
those of this ordinance. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply.
SECTION 9. Construction Procedures
A. When any portion of any public or private road is used under any permit, it will be the
responsibility of the permittee to ensure that a sufficient number of red lanterns are
conspicuously placed on said public or private road every night from dark to sunrise to
render the said public or private road safe.
B. The permittee shall throughout the construction process ensure that any damage
occurring to any public or private road as a result of the construction activity and/or of
moving equipment or supplies over such public or private road is repaired and such
public or private road is restored to as good a condition as before such damage within
twenty-four (24) hours following the occurrence of such damage.
C. The permittee must ensure that at all times adequate measures are taken to prevent any
erosion from the construction site in compliance with Phase II of Federal Requirements.
SECTION 10. Permit Fees
A. For a permit for the erection, construction, enlargement, movement or placement of a
building or structure, the fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, the fee schedule shall be based upon the value of a structure or building to
be constructed, erected, enlarged, moved or placed (including materials, labor,
foundation, etc.):
B. In the case of a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another,
the fee shall be charged according to the rate schedule based on estimated value of new
construction of a building or structure in its completed condition after removal.
C. Irrespective of the provisions of said paragraph (A) hereof, the fee for the erection,
construction, enlargement, movement, or placement of a building or structure for
agricultural use on a farm shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
D. For a Certificate of Use and Occupancy – the fee shall be established be resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. In addition a fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for each inspection in addition to the initial inspection.
E. In addition to the above, the owner shall pay all costs incurred in the review of the design
of storm drainage facilities required by Section 4(A) of this Ordinance as well as the cost
of all other reviews which may be required by this ordinance or by the Zoning Ordinance.
In order to insure payment of engineering review fees, the Township may require an
escrow in an amount established by the Township Engineer. In addition, prior to issuance
of a use certificate, the applicant shall pay the cost of inspecting storm water and other
-26-
facilities once constructed. In connection with such inspections, a charge shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each inspection by the
Township Zoning Officer and the reasonable cost of each inspection by the Township
Engineer.
F. In the event erection, construction, enlargement, movement or placement of a building or
structure shall have begun prior to the issuance of a permit, or in the event a building or
structure shall have been occupied prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Use and
Occupancy, there shall be paid in addition to the fees set forth above a late charge which
shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. In the case of a dwelling
which is occupied or used prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy, a
late charge shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be
adequately assessed for every day of use and occupancy. The "late charge" or "late
charges" imposed by this paragraph shall not be in lieu of the penalties provided by
Section 11 of this Ordinance.
G. In the event any check paying the fees set forth in this section is dishonored upon deposit
thereof, any permit or certificate issued for which such check was part or full payment
shall be void and shall not be reinstated until the Township has received payment in full
of all sums represented by such check plus an additional administrative charge
established by resolution of the board of Supervisors.
SECTION 11. Penalties - Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, be
subject to a penalty in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each and every
offense. Each and every day that erection, construction, enlargement, movement, placement or
development continues, or that the building or structure remains erected, constructed, enlarged,
moved or placed without first securing a building permit, or that a building or structure is used or
occupied without first securing a Certificate of Use and Occupancy, or there is otherwise any
violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION 12. Previous Violations - No person, firm, association or corporation which has been
in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subsequently issued a permit to
erect, move, enlarge, construct or place any building or structure of any kind until the previous
violation has been cured. For purposes of the interpretation of this section the person, firm,
association or corporation applying for a permit, hereinafter referred to as "applicant", shall be
considered the identical person, firm, association or corporation as the one in violation,
hereinafter referred to as "violator", if at least twenty percent (20%) of the ownership equity in
both the applicant and the violator can be attributed to the same person, firm, association or
corporation. For purposes of this section, a person, firm, association or corporation shall have
attributed to him:
A. All of the equity, stock or partnership share owned by a corporation in which he and his
spouse own at least fifty (50%) percent of all of the outstanding voting stock;
-27-
B. With respect to a corporation in which he and his spouse own less than fifty percent
(50%) of the outstanding voting stock, the same percentage of the ownership equity,
stock, or partnership share that the voting stock owned by him and his spouse bears to the
entire outstanding voting stock of the corporation;
C. All of the equity, as tenants in common, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety, owned by
him and his spouse;
D. All of the equity owned by a partnership in which the value of the partnership shares
owned by him and his spouse is at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of all of the
partnership shares; or
E. With respect to a partnership in which the value of the partnership shares owned by him
and his spouse is less than fifty percent (50%) of all the partnership shares, the same
percentage of ownership equity which the value of the partnership's shares owned by him
and his spouse to the value of all the partnership shares.
For purposes of this section, "he" shall be interpreted to refer to the masculine, feminine
and the neuter.
SECTION 13. Burden of Proof - It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that the applicant
is not the same person, firm, association or corporation as the violator.
SECTION 14. Variances - If compliance with any of the requirements of this Ordinance
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township in accordance with following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within
any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood
elevation on adjacent property.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within
any FE area that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the one hundred (100) year flood elevation on adjacent property.
C. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
D. In granting any variance, the Township shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and
safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.
E. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing that:
-28-
1. the granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.
2. such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
F. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall consider, at a minimum, the
following:
1. that there is good and sufficient cause.
2. that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
3. that the granting of the variance will (I) neither result in an unacceptable or
prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, (ii) nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or
victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Township. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included
in the annual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one hundred (100) year flood.
No variance may be granted to permit any uses prohibited by Section 8(F)(5).
SECTION 15. The grant of a permit shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty
of any kind by the Township or by any official or employee thereof as to the practicality or
safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the Township, its officials or
employees.
SECTION 16. If any section, subsection or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a Court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance
as a whole, or any part thereof, it being the intent of the Supervisors that the remaining portions
of the Ordinance shall be of full force and effect.
SECTION 17. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Building Permit Ordinance of
Peach Bottom Township" and shall become effective the day of , 2009.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this day of , 2009, by the Board
of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
-29-
ATTEST: PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
By:
Secretary Chairman
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF PEACH BOTTOM REGULATING AND
RESTRICTING OUTDOOR FIRES WITHIN PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP, YORK
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION
THEREOF.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED BY THE Board of Supervisors of Peach
Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION I. PURPOSE –
It is hereby declared that the purpose and intent of this ordinance is to promote the
general health, welfare and safety of the residents of Peach Bottom Township by
regulating the outdoor burning of materials and substances in Peach Bottom
Township so as to preclude negligent and unsafe practices in the conduct of such
burning in order to protect the lives and property of residents of the Township.
SECTION II. PRACTICES -
Outdoor fires other than those fully contained within a non-flammable barrel,
drum or other similar container shall be subject to the following regulations:
(a) No fire or burning shall occur within forty (40) feet of a building, within forty (40)
feet of a wooded area or within forty (40) feet of flammable materials or substances
such as petroleum products, accumulation of leaves, except that this shall not
preclude the owner of a dwelling from having a fire in an outdoor grill or hibachi for
cooking purposes within forty (40) feet of a dwelling.
(b) No fire shall be permitted to burn except between 12:00 p.m. and sunset
weekdays and between sunrise and sunset on weekends and holidays except
that this shall not preclude extended hours of burning in case of a large burning
project is such extended hours are specifically approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
(c) No fire shall be permitted to burn unless a person eighteen (18) years or older is
present to regulate and control the burning during the entire time the fire is in
existence. It is the intent of this provision that no fire shall be left unattended.
(d) Anyone proposing to start a large fire should call 911 before starting such fire.
SECTION III. NON-BURNABLE MATERIALS AND SUBSTANCES –
(a) No wet garbage, paint, paint cans, plastic or other materials which smolders or emits
offensive odors shall be burned in any fire. It is the intent of this ordinance to
permit the burning only of readily combustible or flammable materials such as dry
leaves, brush, paper, charcoal, wood, corn cobs and other such materials that
normally do not smolder or emit offensive odors or smoke; provided, however,
wood may be burned in a smoldering fire in an enclosed structure for the purpose of
smoking meat or fish.
(b) No hazardous waste materials or containers of such material shall be burned in any
fire.
SECTION IV. PENALTIES –
Any person, partnership, association, or corporation burning any materials or substances
or permitting any materials or substances to be burned on his property in violation of any
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of Three Hundred
($300.00) Dollars, which penalty may be collected by suit or summary proceeding
brought in the name of the Township before any District Justice. Each day during which
such person, partnership, association, or corporation shall be deemed a separate offense.
There shall be presumption that any fire occurring on property in Peach Bottom
Township has occurred on such property with the permission of the owner or owners of
such property.
SECTION V. This ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township Outdoor
Burning Ordinance.”
ORDAINED AND ENACTED BY THE Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania this 4th day of March, 1996, amended the 7th day
of November 2005














AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND USE OF
HOLDING TANKS WITHIN THE LIMITS OF PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP,
AUTHORIZING THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; PROVIDING FOR FEES; AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach
Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION 1. This Ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township Holding
Tank Ordinance.”
SECTION 2. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation to erect,
construct, or install any holding tank of any kind within the limits of Peach Bottom Township or
to permit to be erected, constructed or installed on property owned by him any holding tank
within the limits of Peach Bottom Township unless such person, firm, association or corporation
has a permit for such holding tank issued pursuant to this ordinance and unless all provisions of
such permit, all the requirements of this ordinance and all the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, and the regulation issued pursuant thereto respecting the erection,
construction, installation and use of the holding tank have been complied with.
SECTION 3. For purposes of this ordinance, holding tank shall be construed to mean a
watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Chemical toilet – a toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
(b) Retention tank – a holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a water
carrying system.
(c) Privy – a holding tank designed to retain sewage where water under pressure is
not available.
SECTION 4. Irrespective of the provisions of Section 2 of this ordinance
(a) a privy may be installed at a construction site without a permit provided a permit
has been issued to permit construction at such site and the privy is removed upon
expiration of the permit or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy
permitting use of the structure or facility being constructed, whichever first
occurs.
(b) a privy may be installed without a permit at a place of public gathering or
entertainment provided that the privy is removed within twenty (20) days of
installation. A privy may not again be installed on such property until at least
twenty (20) days following such removal.
SECTION 5. All applications for a “permit” under this ordinance shall be made to the
Peach Bottom Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. The application for a permit for a
holding tank shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property on which the holding tank is
to be located and shall include a statement as to who has been contracted to be responsible for the
removal of the material to be placed in the holding tank and the place where such material is to
be ultimately deposited. The applicant shall submit with the application an agreement executed
on forms supplied by the Sewage Enforcement Officer signed by the individual, firm, or
corporation which is to be responsible for the removal of the contents of the holding tank and by
the individual, firm, or corporation which is to be the ultimate point of disposition of the contents
of the holding tank, agreeing that they will remove and accept such materials as may be deposited
in the holding tank during such period as the holding tank continues to be located on the
premises of the applicant.
The agreement executed by the individual, firm, or corporation responsible for the
removal of the contents of the holding tank shall also obligate such individual, firm, or
corporation to forward to the township Sewage Enforcement Officer a copy of the York County
Solid Waste and Refuse Authority Septage Manifest (hereinafter “Manifest”) within three (3)
days following each time such individual, firm, or corporation removes contents for the holding
tank. Such individual, firm, or corporation shall at the time of forwarding the manifest to the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer inform the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
whether any violations of any of the provisions of this ordinance regarding the holding tank were
observed during the removal process.
In the event the individual, firm or corporation obligated to remove the holding tank contents
intends to terminate the agreement because of nonpayment by the permit holder or for other
costs, such individual, firm, or corporation shall inform the township Sewage Enforcement
Officer in writing by certified mail of such intention and all obligations of such individual, firm,
or corporation shall cease thirty (30) days following receipt by the township Sewage
Enforcement Officer of notification. Following such receipt of such notification, the township
Sewage Enforcement Officer shall notify the permit holder by certified mail that unless a new
agreement is entered into with another individual, firm, or corporation to assume responsibility
for removal of the contents of the holding tank in accordance with the provisions of this section
of this ordinance and presented to the township Sewage Enforcement Officer within such thirty
(30) day period, the permit for such holding tank shall be revoked. If such agreement is not
presented to the township Sewage Enforcement Officer within such thirty (30) day period, the
township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall revoke the permit upon the expiration of such thirty
(30) day period. The permit holder must cause the holding tank to be removed from the property
within ten (10) days from the date of revocation of the permit.
SECTION 6. Permits pursuant to this ordinance may be issued by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer only when proper application is made meeting the requirements of Section
5 hereof, the fees required pursuant to Section 8 are paid, and the amounts required by Section 9
to be paid into the escrow fund are paid, and the application meets the criteria of either
subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section.
-3-
(a) The permit is for temporary use and will be for a period of not more than ninety (90)
consecutive days. A permit issued pursuant to this subsection may not be
renewed, nor may a new permit be issued to locate a holding tank on the same
tract of land for which a permit was previously issued without at least six (6)
months having expired between the date of removal of the previously permitted
holding tank and the date of application for another holding tank.
(b) For other than temporary use under subsection (a) of this section, when all
three of the following circumstances are present:
(1) The permit is for use in connection with an existing dwelling or place of
business which the Sewage Enforcement Officer finds cannot be properly
served by an on-site sewage disposal system within the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the regulations issued pursuant
thereto, or is for use in connection with a school.
(2) The dwelling or place of business, or school was not originally constructed
or placed in violation of the “Building Permit Code” or other Township
Ordinance.
(3) The proposed holding tank will be located at such a place where there will
be suitable access for the vehicle necessary to remove the contents of the
holding tank when required.
SECTION 7. No application shall be approved unless both the individual, firm, or
corporation designated as being responsible for the removal of the contents of the holding tank
and the individual, firm, or corporation designated as being the owners of the ultimate disposal
site for the contents of the holding tank shall be approved by both the Township and by the
Department of Environmental Protection. The Township may reject the individual, firm, or
corporation designated as being responsible for the removal of the contents of the holding tank
and/or the individual, firm, or corporation designated as being the ultimate recipient of such
contents for any reasonable cause including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Such individual, firm, or corporation has not been approved by the Department of
Environmental Resources.
(b) Such individual, firm, or corporation in the past has failed to remove contents
from a holding tank on a timely basis after being notified to do so.
(c) Such individual, firm, or corporation has in the past failed to deposit contents of a
holding tank in the approved disposal facility for such contents.
(d) Such individual, firm, or corporation has in the past deposited septic tank affluent
or other such material in locations other than those approved by the Pennsylvania
-4-
Department of Environmental Protection such as in the woods or in a stream or in
a field except in a manner specifically approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 8. The applicant shall submit with the application a filing fee required by
Section 7 of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance.
SECTION 9. The applicant shall in addition submit to the Township the sum which is
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors which shall be held in escrow by the
Township. Any sum remaining in the escrow fund not deducted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 13 of this ordinance shall be returned to the applicant upon the removal of the holding
tank.
SECTION 10. No property shall be permitted to have its sewage needs served by a
“retention tank” unless the capacity or the combined capacity of the retention tank or retention
tanks serving such property is at least two thousand (2,000) gallons. No property which is served
by water under pressure shall be permitted to have its sewage needs served by a “retention tank”
unless the capacity or combined capacity of the retention tank or retention tanks serving such
property is at least two thousand (2,000) gallons.
SECTION 11. All “retention tanks” shall be built of concrete, shall be watertight and
must be installed in a manner which insures that they will not flow when empty due to hydraulic
action of ground water and/or storm water runoff.
SECTION 12. No “retention tank” may be installed unless it is equipped with a sound
alarm system which will give warning when the tank is filled to within seventy-five (75%)
percent capacity. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for there to be present on any property a
“retention tank” if the sound alarm has been shut off or been tampered with or render
inoperative. In the event that Sewage Enforcement Officer finds that the sound alarm system on
any “retention tank” has been tampered with or rendered inoperative, he shall revoke the permit
issued pursuant to this ordinance and all amounts remaining in the escrow fund after payment of
the inspection fee and payment of the cost of removal of the contents of the holding tank shall be
forfeited to the Township. The holding tank shall be removed within ten (10) days from the date
of revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this ordinance.
SECTION 13. The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall:
(a) Install, erect, or construct only such holding tank as shall be in compliance with
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
issued pursuant to the Sewage Facilities Act.
(b) Notify the individual, firm, or corporation designated in the application as the
individual, firm, or corporation responsible for the removal of holding
tank contents at such time that the tank is filled to within seventy-five (75%) per
-5-
cent of capacity.
(c) Permit only the individual, firm, or corporation designated in the application to
remove holding tank contents.
(d) Supply to the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer a record of the pumping of
the holding tank each time the tank is pumped, which record shall disclose
the name of the entity doing the pumping and the amount of contents
pumped.
SECTION 14. Duties Following Permit Issuance
(a) Duties of Permit Holder
Each owner of a permit permitting a holding tank to serve the sewage needs of the
property of such permit holder shall within ten (10) days next following the
sending of notice of an intent to inspect by the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer make arrangements with the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer for
the inspection of the holding tank located on such permit holder's property. A
notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been sent if it is deposited in the U.
S. mail addressed to the permit holder and sent to the address given by the permit
holder at the time of application for such permit or any more recent address
provided to the Township by the permit holder. At the time of the scheduled
inspection, the permit holder shall make the holding tank and the alarm accessible
for inspection by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. It shall be a
violation of this provision if any permit holder given notice as above provided
fails to contact the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer and arrange for
inspection of the holding tank within ten (10) days from the date of such notice
and it shall be a further violation if such permit holder fails to make the holding
tank and alarm system available for inspection at the date of the scheduled
inspection.
At or prior to the inspection of the holding tank the permit holder shall pay to
Peach Bottom Township a fee established by the Board of Supervisors as an initial
inspection fee.
In the event the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, at the time of any
inspection, finds the holding tank to be filled in excess of seventy-five percent
(75%) of capacity the permit holder shall within ten (10) days following such
inspection cause the holding tank to be pumped. In the event the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer finds the required alarm system not functioning as
designed, the permit holder shall within ten (10) days following the inspection
cause the required alarm system to be repaired so that it functions as designed. In
the event the Sewage Enforcement Officer finds that the holding tank is filled in
excess of seventy-five percent (75%) of capacity or that the required alarm system
-6-
is not functioning as designed, the permit holder shall within five (5) days
following such inspection pay to the Township an initial inspection fee as shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors which may be reduced by
any sums previously paid on account of such inspection. Upon completion of the
pumping and/or repair as may be applicable, the permit holder shall make
arrangements with the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer for a second
inspection of the holding tank located on such permit holder's property. At or prior
to the second inspection of the holding tank, the permit holder shall pay to Peach
Bottom Township as a second inspection fee, a fee as shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
In the event the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer finds the holding tank is
filled to more than eighty-five percent (85%) capacity and arranges for removal of
the contents of the holding tank, the holder of the permit shall reimburse the
Township for the cost of removal of the contents within ten (10) days of being
billed therefore and if the Sewage Enforcement Officer revokes the permit for the
holding tank the permit holder shall remove the holding tank within ten (10) days
of revocation and cause all improved premises whose sewage needs are served by
such holding tank to be vacated.
(b) Duties of Sewage Enforcement Officer
Following issuance of a permit pursuant to this Ordinance, the Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall from time to time inspect the holding tank but not less
frequently than once a year. In the event the Sewage Enforcement Officer finds
that the holding tank is filled to more than eighty-five percent (85%) of capacity,
the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall promptly make arrangements to have the
contents of the holding tank removed and the cost of such removal paid from the
fund held in escrow. In the event the permit holder fails to reimburse the
Township and the escrow fund for the cost of such removal within ten (10) days
of being billed therefor, the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall in addition revoke
the permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance and any and all amounts remaining in
the escrow fund shall be forfeited to the Township.
SECTION 15. Any individual, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof before the district Magistrate be
subject to a penalty in the amount of One Thousand and 00/100 ($1,000.00) Dollars for each and
every offense. Each and every day that a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance
occurs and each and every day that a holding tank remains erected, constructed, or installed
without a permit having been issued or after a permit has been revoked shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION 16. No individual, firm, association, or corporation which has been in violation
or any of the provisions of this ordinance shall subsequently be issued a permit to erect,
-7-
construct, or install a holding tank until the previous violation has been cured.
For purposes of the interpretation of this section, the individual, firm, association, or
corporation applying for a permit, hereinafter referred to as “applicant”, shall be considered the
identical individual, firm, association, or corporation as the one in violation, hereinafter referred
to as “violator”, if at least twenty (20%) per cent of the ownership equity in both the “applicant”
and the “violator” can attributed to the same individual, fir, association, or corporation. For
purposes of this section, an individual, firm, association or corporation shall have attributed to
him:
(a) All of the equity, stock, or partnership share owned by a corporation in which he
and his spouse own at least fifty (50%) per cent of all of the outstanding voting
stock.
(b) With respect to a corporation in which he and his spouse own less than fifty
(50%) per cent of the outstanding voting stock, the same percentage of the
ownership equity, stock, or partnership share that the voting stock owned by him
and his spouse bears to the entire outstanding voting stock of the corporation.
(c) All of the equity, as tenants in common, joint tenants or tenants by the entirety,
owned by him and his spouse.
(d) All of the equity owned by a partnership in which the value of the partnership
shares owned by him and his spouse is at least fifty (50%) per cent of the value of
all of the partnership shares.
(e) With respect to a partnership in which the value of the partnership shares
owned by him and his spouse is less than fifty (50%) per cent of all the
partnership shares, the same percentage of ownership equity which the value of
the partnership shares owned by him and his spouse to the value of all
partnership shares.
SECTION 17. It shall be the burden of the “applicant” to prove that the applicant is not
the same individual, firm, association, or corporation as the “violator”.
SECTION 18. For the purpose of this section, “he” and “him” shall be interpreted to refer
to the masculine, the feminine, and the neuter.
SECTION 19. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clauses, or phase of this
ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect; and, to this end,
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
SECTION 20. This ordinance shall become effective (5) days after enactment.
-8-
ATTEST: PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
________________________________ By:_________________________________
Secretary Chairman
Date: February 1, 2010


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF PEACH BOTTOM REGULATING THE
OPERATION OF OFF-ROAD VEHICLES WITHIN PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP AND
PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
WHEREAS, the operation of off-road vehicles within Peach Bottom Township creates a public
nuisance by -
(1) creating loud noises disturbing the peaceable and quiet enjoyment of property by citizens of the
township;
(2) creating dust which blows onto property of citizens of the township disturbing the peaceable and
quiet enjoyment of property by those citizens and endangering the health of such citizens; and
(3) creating dangerous conditions on public and private roads of the township because such vehicles
are often operated by minors without sufficient training to operate such vehicles safely and resulting
in the endangering of such operators as well as the operators of other vehicles lawfully being
operated on the public and private roads of the township; and
WHEREAS, Peach Bottom Township has determined that there is a need to regulate the operation
of off-road vehicles so as to minimize the adverse impact of such operation upon the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Peach Bottom Township; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township finds that the operation of offroad
vehicles except in compliance with the terms of this ordinance constitutes a nuisance.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of
Peach Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
Section 1 - Purpose
It is hereby declared that the purpose and intent of this ordinance is to promote the general health,
welfare and safety of residents of Peach Bottom Township by regulating the operation of off-road
vehicles so as to minimize the adverse impact of such operation upon the lives and property of
citizens of the township.
Section 2 - Definitions
In this ordinance the following terms have the meanings indicated. Any term not defined in this
ordinance shall have its generally accepted meaning.
(a) Off-road Vehicle - All motorized vehicles designed or redesigned or otherwise being used for
recreational use including, but not limited to, motorcycles, all terrain vehicles (ATVs), go-carts,
pocket rockets or snowmobiles;
(b) Person - Any individual group of individuals, a partnership, firm, association or either any other
entity which may own either property or an off-road vehicle;
(c) Property Owner - Any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate within Peach Bottom
Township; and
(d) Vehicle Owner - Any person who has legal or equitable titled to an off-road vehicle. If an offroad
vehicle has not been issued a "title" by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, it shall be
presumed that the owner of such vehicle is the owner of the property where such vehicle is
primarily parked or stored unless the owner of the property does not reside at the property, in which
event it is presumed that the adult individuals residing at the property are the owners of the vehicle.
Section 3 - Violations
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to operate an off-road vehicle or permit an
off-road vehicle owned by such person to be operated -
(a) On a public or private road within Peach Bottom Township unless the operator has an operator's
license issued pursuant to provisions of Chapter 15 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and
such vehicle is registered for highway operation pursuant to provisions of Chapter 13 of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code;
On a public or private road within Peach Bottom Township unless the operator has an operator's
license issued pursuant to provisions of Chapter 15 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, such
vehicle is registered for highway operation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13 of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and such vehicle is permitted by state law to be operated on the
public highways of the Commonwealth if registered and operated by a licensed operator.
(b) On private property within Peach Bottom Township if such operation occurs within three
hundred (300) feet of a dwelling not owned by the owner of the property where the vehicle is being
operated; and
(c) On private property within Peach Bottom Township without permission for such operation
having been granted by the owner of such property.
The provisions of Section 3 of this ordinance shall not apply if the vehicle is being operated within
an approved recreational facility (outdoor) in the Commercial District or is being used for
nonrecreational use such as in connection with an agricultural or business operation, for law
enforcement, fire emergency, military or other governmental purpose.
Section 4 - Penalties
Any person operating an off-road vehicle or permitting an off-road vehicle to be operated in
violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of Six
Hundred ($600.00) Dollars which penalty may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought
in the name of the township before any District Justice. Each day during which such person shall be
in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed a separate offense. There
shall be a presumption that any operation of an off-road vehicle is with the permission of the owner
of such vehicle and then shall be a further presumption that any operation of an off-road vehicle by
a person under the age of 18 is with the permission of the parents of such operator.
Section 5
This ordinance shall be known as the "Peach Bottom Township Off-Road Vehicle Ordinance".
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, York
County, Pennsylvania on the day of, 2005.
December 7, 2009
AN ORDINANCE TO CONTROL PARKING ON STREET AND ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY
WITHIN PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP, YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA TO BE
KNOWN AS THE “PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP PARKING ORDINANCE”
SECTION I. It shall be as violation of this ordinance for any person to park any motor
vehicle or for any person, partnership, corporation or association to permit any motor vehicle
owned by it to be parked on a road or street right-of-way within Peach Bottom Township unless
there is, in addition to the area taken by the parked motor vehicle, at least twenty (20) feet of
travelable surface of street or highway between the portion of such motor vehicle most proximate
to the center of the street or highway and the edge of the travelable surface of street or highway
across most proximate to the center of the highway to the point on the edge of the travelable
surface of such street or highway located across the center of the highway from the motor vehicle
but at a point most proximate to such motor vehicle.
SECTION II It shall be a further violation of this ordinance for any person to park a
motor vehicle or for any person, partnership, cooperation or association to permit a motor vehicle
owned by it to be parked or remain parked on any portion of a right-of-way of a street or
highway in Peach Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania at a time when there is ice or
snow on the travelable surface of such street or highway or any portion thereof within one
hundred (100) feet of such parked motor vehicle.
SECTION III In the event a motor vehicle is parked on a highway right-of-way in
violation of either Section I or Section II of this ordinance, the Township Board of Supervisors
shall have the right to cause the removal of such motor vehicle to a place designated by the
Township and prior to the owner of such motor vehicle regaining possession of such vehicle
such owner shall pay to the Township the costs incurred by Township in causing such removal
and storage and, in addition thereto, pay the Township the penalty prescribed by this ordinance.
SECTION IV Peach Bottom Township, its employees and contractors shall have no
liability for any damage to any motor vehicle parked in violation of this ordinance occurring to
such motor vehicle by reason of Township’s removal of such vehicle from its parking location
and/or by reason of the Township’s road maintenance and/or snow removal equipment colliding
with such motor vehicle.
SECTION V Any person, corporation, partnership or association found in violation of
any provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof by a District Magistrate, be
sentenced to pay a penalty of three hundred ($300.00) dollars. Each and every day that parking
continues in violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION VI This ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township Parking
Ordinance”.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania on the 4th day of June 1984.
Amended the 7th day of November 1994
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS IN PEACH
BOTTOM TOWNSHIP, YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AUTHORIZING THE
ISSUANCE OF PERMITS, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
THEREOF.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION I. This ordinance shall be known as the "Peach Bottom Township Driveway
Ordinance".
SECTION II. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to construct,
open, enlarge, alter, pave or resurface any driveway upon any property owned by or rented by
such person, firm, association, or corporation without having first obtained a permit therefor
from the Township Designated Official.
SECTION III. For purposes of this ordinance, "driveway" shall be construed to mean any road,
alley, lane or other entrance suitable for use by automobiles for ingress and egress onto a road
maintained by the Township. Roads or other entrances suitable only for use by tractors and other
farm machinery and not suitable for use by passenger automobiles shall not be considered
"driveways" within the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION IV. All applications for a "permit" under this ordinance shall be made to an official
designated by the Township Board of Supervisors on forms to be supplied by such Official and
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. In the event any construction, opening, enlarging, altering, paving or resurfacing of
a driveway shall have begun prior to the issuance of a permit, there shall be paid in addition to
the permit fee, a late fee established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. In the event any
check presented for the payment of any of the fees set forth in this section is dishonored upon
deposit thereof, any permit or certification issued for which such check was a part or full
payment shall be void and shall not be reinstated until the Township has received payment in full
of all sums represented by such check plus an additional administrative charges established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
SECTION V. Upon receipt of the application the Township Designated Official shall investigate
the application to determine whether the proposed location achieves compliance with the
requirements of relevant Township zoning ordinance provisions and in particular, Section 202.9
of the Township Zoning Ordinance and whether the design achieves compliance with relevant
Township Zoning Ordinance provisions and in particular, Sections 250 through 254 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance. Unless the proposal demonstrates such compliance, the permit
shall be refused.
The Township Designated Official shall then investigate the application to determine whether a
drainage pipe or other appliance which shall be installed and maintained by the property
owner and/or further grading is required in order for proper drainage to be provided. He shall
also determine whether slopes are such that in order to protect the Township street or road from
earth and/or debris, etc. washing from the driveway onto the Township street or road. If the
Township Designated Official finds that even with the installation of pipe or other appliance and
even with regrading proper drainage cannot be achieved, the permit shall be refused.
If the proposed location and design are in compliance with Township ordinances, the Township
Designated Official shall issue a permit to the applicant.
SECTION VI. The driveway must be completed consistent with the approved application within
ninety (90) days next following the issuance of the permit and must be approved by the
Township Designated Official. The driveway shall not be considered completed until the
Township Designated Official has approved it as being completed in writing. If not completed
within 90 days, the applicant may apply for an extension which will be approved or denied at the
discretion of the Township Official.
The driveway must be completed in accordance with the provisions of the application and with
the following requirements:
a. Any pipe required to be installed by the Township Designated Official must be installed at
the location specified by such Township Designated Official.
b. All exposed banks created by the installation must be stabilized so as not to erode.
c. The twenty-five (25) feet most proximate to the improved portion of the Township street
or road must be improved with six (6) inches of PA2A or 3A crusher run stone over geotextile
cloth. Prior to use and occupancy of a dwelling access by such driveway but no later than nine
(9) months of the issuance of a permit the stone base of a driveway must be covered with
three (3) inches of Superpave base 25mm mix or its equivalent and one and one-half inches
Superpave wearing course 9.5mm or its equivalent.
d. Provision must be made to prevent water running from the driveway to the existing
Township Street or road and damaging such street or road. A swale is required on any
driveway that slopes toward a street or road. The swale must follow the existing ditch line for
the entire width of the access with a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in width and three
(3) inches in depth. If the Township Designated Official finds that in order to protect the
Township street or road from earth and/or debris, etc. washing from the driveway onto the
Township street or road, the permit holder must pave some or all of the driveway in addition
to the twenty-five (25) feet most proximate to the Township street or road.
Upon the driveway being completed in accordance with the above requirements, the Township
Designated Official shall issue a final completion certificate.
SECTION VII. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a penalty in
the amount of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) for each and every offense. Each and every day
that a road, alley, lane or other entrance suitable for use by automobile or truck remains
constructed without a permit having been issued or is otherwise in violation of any provision of
this ordinance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate
and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION VIII. This ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after enactment.
Amended 9/5/13, 4/5/17, 6/6/18
PEACH
BOTTOM
TOWNSHIP
SUBDIVISION
&
LAND
DEVELOPMENT
PLAN
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I NAMES AND PURPOSES
Section 101 Name ............................................................................................... I-1
102 Purpose ......................................................................................... I-2
ARTICLE II JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY
Section 201 Jurisdiction ..................................................................................... II-1
202 Authority ......................................................................................... II-1
203 Violation ......................................................................................... II-1
ARTICLE III DEFINITIONS
Section 301 Intent ............................................................................................... III-1
302 General Usage................................................................................. III-1
303 Specific Words and Phrases ........................................................... III-1
ARTICLE IV PROCEDURE
Section 401 Pre-application Consultation .......................................................... IV-1
402 Submission of Plans ....................................................................... IV-1
402.3 Planning Commission Review of the Preliminary Plan ................. IV-1
402.4 Planning Commission Decision Concerning the
Preliminary Plan ........................................................................... IV-2
403 Referral of Plans ............................................................................. IV-2
404 Review of Plans .............................................................................. IV-2
405 Approval of Plans by the Township Board of Supervisors ............ IV-3
406 Effect of Approval of Preliminary Plan .......................................... IV-4
407 Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof Prerequisite
to Final Plan Approval .................................................................. IV-5
408 Release From Improvement Bond .................................................. IV-7
409 Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements ......................... IV-8
410 Combination of the Preliminary and Final Plans ........................... IV-8
411 Recording of the Final Plan ............................................................ IV-9
412 Resubdivision Procedure ................................................................ IV-9
413 Effect on Existing Subdivision Plans ............................................. IV-9
414 Sale of Lots and Erection of Buildings ........................................... IV-9
415 Subdivision of Land for Agricultural Purposes .............................. IV-9
416 Duties of Subdivider or Developer ................................................. IV-10
ARTICLE V PRELIMINARY PLAN
Section 501 Required Information ..................................................................... V-1
502 Required Accompanying Information ............................................ V-3
503 Feasibility Report on Sewer and Water Facilities .......................... V-4
ARTICLE VI FINAL PLAN
Section 601 Required Information ..................................................................... VI-1
602 Required Accompanying Information ............................................ VI-3
ARTICLE VII DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section 701 Application of Standards ................................................................ VII-1
702 Location of Site .............................................................................. VII-1
703 General Design Standards for Sites ................................................ VII-2
704 Street Systems - General................................................................. VII-4
705 Street Design .................................................................................. VII-5
706 Intersection Design ......................................................................... VII-8
707 Pavement Surface ........................................................................... VII-9
708 Street Verge .................................................................................... VII-9
709 Other Street Provisions ................................................................... VII-10
710 Sewage Disposal ............................................................................. VII-12
711 Water Supply .................................................................................. VII-13
712 Storm Drainage ............................................................................... VII-13
713 Other Utilities ................................................................................. VII-15
714 Monuments and Markers ................................................................ VII-16
715 Blocks ............................................................................................. VII-17
716 Lots and Lot Sizes .......................................................................... VII-17
717 Erosion and Sediment Control ........................................................ VII-19
718 Trees and Landmarks...................................................................... VII-19
719 Pollution Control………………………………………………….VII-19
ARTICLE VIIA MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section 750 Mobile Home Parks ........................................................................ VIIA-1
ARTICLE VIII GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Section 801 Subdivider's Responsibility ............................................................ VIII-1
802 Coverage of Specifications ............................................................. VIII-1
803 Street Grade .................................................................................... VIII-1
804 Cartway Paving .............................................................................. VIII-1
805 Curbs and Sidewalks ...................................................................... VIII-2
806 Storm and Surface Drainage ........................................................... VIII-3
807 Monuments ..................................................................................... VIII-4
808 Water Supply and Sanitary Sewers ................................................ VIII-4
809 Street Lights .................................................................................... VIII-5
810 Street Name Signs and Traffic Control Signs ................................ VIII-6
811 Street Trees ..................................................................................... VIII-6
ARTICLE VIII ADOPTION AND DEDICATION
Section 901 Adoption ......................................................................................... IX-1
902 Dedication ....................................................................................... IX-1
903 Payment in Lieu of Dedication ....................................................... IX-1
904 Drainage ways ................................................................................ IX-2
905 Effect of Plan Recording on Dedication and Reservations ............ IX-2
ARTICLE X ADMINISTRATION
Section 1001 Modifications .................................................................................. X-1
1002 Validity ........................................................................................... X-1
1003 Fees ................................................................................................. X-1
1004 Penalties .......................................................................................... X-2
1005 Repealer .......................................................................................... X-3
1006 Effective Date ................................................................................. X-3
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT IN PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP,
YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
WHEREAS, this Ordinance sets forth rules, regulations, and standards regulating the
Subdivision and Land Development within Peach Bottom Township, York County,
Pennsylvania, pursuant to the authority granted in Article V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247) as enacted establishing the procedure to be
followed by the Peach Bottom Planning Commission and the Peach Bottom Township
Board of Supervisors in the application and administration of said rules, regulations and
standards, and providing penalties for the violation thereof.
NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordained by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, a Township of the Second Class, York County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
I-1
?
ARTICLE I
NAME AND PURPOSE
SECTION 101 NAME
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Peach Bottom Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
SECTION 102 PURPOSE
The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the harmonious development of Peach
Bottom Township by:
a. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions within the Township.
b. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with public improvement plans.
c. Ensuring coordination of inter-municipal public improvement plans and programs.
d. Securing the protection of water resources and drainage ways.
e. Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic.
f. Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform standards
and procedures.
g. Securing adequate sites for recreation, conservation, scenic and other open space
purposes.
h. Strengthening and stabilizing the tax base of the Township.
i. Promoting the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of Peach Bottom.
I-2
?
ARTICLE II
JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY
SECTION 201 JURISDICTION
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be affected, no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid
out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of
these regulations.
SECTION 202 AUTHORITY
a. Authority of the Township Planning Commission: The Peach Bottom Township
Planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the Planning Commission, shall be
vested with the control of Subdivision and Land Development as granted by
Article V, Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
b. Authority of the Township Board of Supervisors: The Peach Bottom Township Board
of Supervisors, hereinafter referred to as the Board of Supervisors, shall be vested with
the authority to approve or disapprove all Subdivision and Land Development plans as
granted by Article V, Sections 501 and 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
c. Authority of the County Planning Commission: Plans for Subdivision and Land
Development located within Peach Bottom Township shall be submitted to the York
County Planning Commission for review and report as required by Section 502 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Said submission shall take place before
final approval of any plans by the municipality. However, if a report is not received
from the County Planning Commission within thirty (30) days after submission by the
municipality, the municipality may proceed without the report.
SECTION 203 VIOLATION
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person, partnership or corporation to
subdivide any land in Peach Bottom Township or to create any land development in Peach
Bottom Township without first having a final plan approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. It shall also be a violation of this Ordinance for any person,
partnership or corporation to lay out, construct, open or dedicate it for public use or travel
or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon any street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvement in connection therewith except in
accordance with this Ordinance.
II-1
?
ARTICLE III
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 301 INTENT
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
Ordinance, have the meaning given herein:
SECTION 302 GENERAL USAGE
a. Words used in the present tense imply the future tense.
b. Words used in the singular imply the plural.
c. The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as an individual.
d. The word "shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory; the word "may" as directory and
complied with unless waived.
SECTION 303 SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES
Agent - Any person, other than the subdivider, who, acting for the subdivider submits to
the Planning Commission and Township Supervisors subdivision plans for the purpose of
obtaining approval thereof.
Agricultural Purposes - The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the accessory
uses for packing, treating or sorting the produce and equipment and for housing and
feeding the animals and housing the equipment utilized in such farming, dairying,
pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture or animal and poultry
husbandry. The use of land for a dwelling site is not an agricultural purpose.
Alley - A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or
more properties.
Applicant - A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application
for development including his heirs, successors and assigns.
Application for Development - Every application, whether preliminary or final, required
to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not
limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
Block - An area bounded by streets.
III-1
?
Cartway - The surface of the roadway available for vehicular traffic.
Clear Sight Triangle - An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections. It is defined
by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the centerlines
of both streets.
Common Open Space - A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of
land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of the planned residential development, not including streets, offstreet
parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be
substantially free of structures but may contain such improvements as are in the
development plan as finally approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of residents.
Comprehensive Plan - The plan, or parts thereof, which have been adopted by the Peach
Bottom Township Planning Commission, showing its recommendations for such systems
as: parks and recreation facilities, water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal, garbage
disposal, transportation, highways, civic centers and other public improvements which
affect the development of the Township.
Corner Lot - A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersection.
Cost of Improvements - The amount which the Township Engineer estimates that the
Township would be required to expend in order to complete the improvements proposed
by a subdivider or land developer in a subdivision or land development plan, in the event
the subdivider or land developer fails to complete such improvements within the time set
forth in the subdivision or land development plan or otherwise agreed upon, which
estimate shall take into consideration anticipated inflation in construction costs, bid
preparation costs and other costs which the Township will incur in the event it is required
to complete the proposed improvements.
Crosswalk - A right-of-way, municipally or privately owned, at least twelve (12) feet wide,
which cuts across a block to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.
Cul-de-sac - A residential street with one end open for public vehicular and pedestrian
access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
Curb - The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the pavement and to
protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
Curb Line - The outside edge of the cartway.
Development Plan - The provisions for development of a planned residential development,
including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings
and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities.
Developer - Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
III-2
?
Double Frontage Lot - A lot fronting on two streets other than a corner lot.
Drainage Facility - Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer or other structure
designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface waters from or
carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas, or any
part of any subdivision on contiguous land areas.
Driveway - A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a street and a
parking area or garage within a lot or property.
Dwelling Unit - Any structure, or part thereof, designed to be occupied as living quarters
as a single housekeeping unit.
Easement of Access - Is defined to include any driveway or other entrance from a public or
private road. A field road providing access to agriculturally used fields and not providing
access to any residential, commercial or industrial structure is not considered an easement
of access.
Floodplain or Floodway Area - That geographic area located at the shore line or water's
edge which is subject to periodic flooding.
Frontage - The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street line upon which a lot
abuts.
Future Right-of-Way - (1) The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing
streets to accommodate anticipated future traffic loads. (2) A right-of-way established to
provide future access to or through undeveloped land.
Grade - The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of change of elevation in
feet per hundred feet.
Gutter - That portion of a right-of-way carrying surface drainage.
Half or Partial Street - A street parallel and adjacent to a property line having a lesser rightof-
way width than required for satisfactory improvement and use of the street.
Improvements - Pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, grading, street signs and plantings, and other items for the welfare of the property
owner and the public.
Land Development - Any of the following activities:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for
any purpose involving:
III-3
?
(a)A group of two or more residential or non-residential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure;
(b)The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; or
(c)A subdivision of land.
(2) Land development shall not include:
(a)The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single family
semi-detached dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such
units are intended to be a condominium;
(b) The addition of an accessory building or buildings not to be used exclusively in
connection with the agricultural use of the property containing less than 2,000
square feet of ground floor area or the addition of a building or buildings to be used
exclusively in connection with the agricultural use of the property containing less
than 10,000 square feet of ground floor area, which accessory building or buildings
is subordinate to an existing principal building." Added 8/3/09
Landowner - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee having a remaining term of not less than forty years, or other person
having a proprietary interest in land.
Location Map - A map showing the site with relation to adjoining areas.
Lot - A plot or parcel of land which is, or in the future, may be offered for sale,
conveyance, transfer or improvement as one parcel, regardless of the method in which title
was acquired.
Lot Area - The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels as shown
on a subdivision plan including any area within a street right-of-way or easement.
Lot Width - The width of the lot measured at the street right-of-way.
Marginal Access Street - Minor streets, parallel and adjacent to major traffic streets
providing access to abutting properties and control of intersections with the major traffic
street.
Multiple Dwelling Building - A building providing separate living quarters for two or more
families.
Owner - The owner of record of a parcel of land.
III-4
?
Performance Bond - An agreement by and between a contractor and a bonding company in
favor of the subdivider and the Township Board of Supervisors guaranteeing the
completion of physical improvements.
Planned Residential Development - An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to be
developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, the development plan for
which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and
required open space to the regulations established in any one residential district created,
from time to time, under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
Plan, Preliminary - A tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing
the salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
Plan, Final - A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared as for official recording, to
define property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
Plan, Record - An exact copy of the approved final plan on opaque linen of standard size
prepared for necessary signatures and recording with the York County Recorder of Deeds.
Plat - The map or final plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary of
final.
Resubdivision - Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on a plan which has been
approved by the Commission which changes, or proposes to change property lines and/or
public rights-of-way not in strict accordance with the approved plan.
Reverse Frontage Lot - A lot extending between and having frontage on a major street and
a minor street with vehicular access solely from the latter.
Right-of-Way - Land opened for use as a street, alley, or crosswalk.
Setback or Building Line - The horizontal distance between a structure and a property or
street line.
Setback, Front - The distance between the street line and the front building line
projected the full width of the lot. Commonly called "front yard."
Setback, Rear - The distance between the rear lot line and the rear building line projected
the full width of the lot. Commonly called "rear yard."
Setback, Side - The distance between the side lot line and the side building line.
Commonly called "side yard."
Street - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended primarily as a means of
vehicular and pedestrian travel. Street includes avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private. Streets are further classified as
follows:
?
a) Arterial Street; Highway - A street or road which is used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic including all roads classified as main and secondary highways by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
b)Collector Street - A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major
system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets within such a development.
c)Minor Street - A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
d)Service Drive or Alley - A minor street which is used primarily for vehicles service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
e) Private Street – A street which provides direct access to not more than three (3)
residential lots, and not offered for dedication to the Township or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; used only for traffic having a destination in the immediate area; and to
be installed and maintained by individual lot owners being served by such street in
accordance with an approved subdivision plan and road use agreement. (But not to
include mobile home parks.)
Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving new street or
easement of access, or residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
Tract - All contiguous land owned by the same land owner and all land owned by the same
land owner which is contiguous except for the presence of public or private roads and/or
the presence of lots or parcels adversed from the original tract since June 15, 1964.
Undeveloped Land - Land in parcels sufficiently large for future subdivision which is
presently in agriculture, woodland or lying fallow.
Variance - The granting of an exception to these regulations which in the opinion of the
Township will not be detrimental to the general welfare, impair the intent of those
regulations or conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
Wharf or Dock Line - A structure or group of structures built along and generally
perpendicular to the shore line of a body of water providing loading and unloading
facilities for boats.
III-6
?
ARTICLE IV
PROCEDURE
SECTION 401 PRE-APPLICATION CONSULTATION
Copies of this Ordinance shall be available on request for the use of any person who
desires information concerning subdivision and land development standards and
procedures in effect within Peach Bottom Township. Any prospective subdivider may
request a meeting with the Planning Commission to discuss and review tentative plans and
discuss the applicability of the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 402 SUBMISSION OF PLANS
Preliminary and final plans for all proposed subdivision or land developments lying within
the Township shall be submitted to the Township Secretary or designee at the Township
Office on any business day. The subdivider or developer shall submit seven (7) copies of
the preliminary or final plan as well as two (2) copies of all required supporting data
together with the required filing fee as established by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors.. Preliminary and final plans shall comply with the requirements of Articles
V and VI of this Ordinance. Plans for subdivision or land development requiring on-site
sewage disposal systems shall not be considered filed unless there is submitted with such
plans the required filing fees, the results of probe hole analyses and soil absorption tests
on each of the lots proposed in the subdivision or land development unless the location of
those tests is set forth on the proposed plan. The plan shall be placed on the agenda of the
Township Planning Commission for review at the next Planning Commission meeting
which is a least ten (10) business days following the filing of the plan. Amended 12/3/12
SECTION 402.3 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF THE PRELIMINARY
PLAN
Upon receipt of data required by this Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall review
the Preliminary Plan with reference to the following:
a. The standards and requirements of this Ordinance.
b. The recommendations of the Township Engineer.
c. The recommendations received from the York County Planning Commission.
d. The recommendations received from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
e. The recommendations received from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
f. The recommendations of affected public utilities.
g. The Comprehensive Plan of Peach Bottom Township.
?
SECTION 402.4 PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION CONCERNING THE
PRELIMINARY PLAN
Within eighty (80) days of receipt of the Preliminary Plan, the Planning commission shall
approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove said Preliminary Plan as submitted. Such
action shall take place at a regular public meeting of the Planning Commission.
The subdivider and the Township Secretary shall be notified in writing as to the action
taken by the Planning Commission. If approved conditionally, said changes and/or
additions to the Preliminary Plan shall be noted in the letter to the subdivider and
Township Secretary.
It will be necessary for the subdivider to conform to said conditions before the Final Plan
may be submitted for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
If the subdivider makes substantial changes in his Preliminary Plans after they have been
approved in preliminary form, such revised plans shall be treated as Preliminary plans
when resubmitted.
If the Preliminary Plan is disapproved reasons for such action shall be noted in the letter to
the subdivider and Township Secretary.
SECTION 403 REFERRAL OF PLANS
All plans, whether preliminary of final, shall be forwarded by the Board of Supervisors to
the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
The Township shall forward a copy of such plan to the York County Planning Commission
for review. In addition, the Township shall forward two (2) copies together with a planning
module as proposed by the subdivider or land developer to the local office of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The Township may, in its
discretion, forward a copy to the Township engineer for review.
SECTION 404 REVIEW OF PLANS
All plans, whether preliminary or final shall be reviewed by the Board of Supervisors and
Township Planning Commission with reference to the following:
The standards and requirements of this Ordinance.
The improvements, design and dedications or reservations required by this Ordinance.
Recommendations of other official agencies (County Planning Commission,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, U.S. Soil Conservation Service).
IV-2
?
SECTION 405 APPROVAL OF PLANS BY THE TOWNSHIP BOARD OF
SUPERVISORS
At a scheduled public meeting, the Board of Supervisors shall render its decision on the
plan, whether preliminary or final, and communicate its decision to the applicant not later
than ninety (90) days following the date of the regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors
or the Township Planning Commission (whichever first reviews the application) next
following the date the application is filed, provided that should the said next regular
meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the application, the said
ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the date the
application has been filed.
Final Plan approval shall not be granted until such improvements as required by this
Ordinance and shown on such final plan have been completed or guarantee posted as
required in Section 407.
The Board of Supervisors may approve the plan, whether preliminary or final, in whole or
in part, or may subject the plan to modifications or conditions, or may disapprove the plan.
The decision of the Board of Township Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the subdivider personally or mailed to him at his last known address not
later than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
If the plan is approved by the Township Board of Supervisors subject to modifications or
conditions, the applicant shall approve or reject such modifications or conditions within
five (5) days of receiving notice of such modifications or conditions either personally or in
writing. For purposes of this paragraph, notice to an individual presenting the plan on
behalf of the applicant whether such individual be the applicant himself, a relative of the
applicant, an officer of the applicant, an attorney, a surveyor, an engineer or otherwise,
shall be, notice to the applicant and such person presenting the plan on behalf of the
applicant shall be deemed to have authority to, on behalf of the applicant, accept or reject
such modifications or conditions. The failure to accept or reject such modifications or
conditions within the five (5) day period shall be considered to be a rejection of the same
and the conditional approval by the Township Board of Supervisors shall be revoked and
the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days following the expiration of
the five (5) day period of the plan rejection.
When the plan is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects
found in the plan and describe the requirements which have not been met, and in each case,
cite to the provisions of these regulations relied upon.
Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of
the application in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of
the decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
IV-3
?
From the time a plan, whether preliminary or final, is submitted as provided in this
Ordinance and while such plan is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other Township ordinance or plan shall affect the
decision on such plan adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a
decision in accordance with the provisions of the Township ordinances or plans as they
stood at the time the application was duly submitted. In addition, when a preliminary plan
has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with
the terms of the approved preliminary plan as hereinafter provided.
However, if a plan is properly and finally denied, any subsequent plan shall be subject to
the intervening change in Township regulations and shall be considered as a newly
submitted plan. When an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other Township ordinance
or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to
complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such
approval within five years from such approval. Where final approval is preceded by
preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of the preliminary approval, the terms
shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the Township ordinances or plans as
they stood at the time when the plan for such approval was duly submitted.
Before acting on any subdivision plan, whether preliminary or final, the Board of
Supervisors and/or the Planning Commission may hold a public meeting thereon after
public notice.
SECTION 406 EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
Approval of the Preliminary Plan by the Planning Commission and the Township
Supervisors constitutes conditional approval of the subdivision as to the character and
intensity of development, the general layout, and the approximate dimensions of streets,
lots, and other planned features. This approval binds the subdivider to the general scheme
shown on the Preliminary Plan.
Approval of the Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Subdivision
Plan, nor does it authorize recording of the Preliminary Plan or the sale of any lots;
however, such approval does authorize the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of
the Final Plan, installation and/or construction of improvements or posting of a bond
guarantee as specified in Article IV, Section 407 of this Ordinance.
IV-4
?
SECTION 407 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEE
THEREOF PREREQUISITE TO FINAL PLAN APPROVAL
No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been
improved as may be required by this Ordinance, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street
lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, storm water
management facilities or other improvements as may be required by this Ordinance have
been installed in accordance with this Ordinance, except that the surface courses of streets
shall not be completed until such time as ninety (90%) percent of the lots in the
subdivision have been improved by the construction of a dwelling if approved for
residential development or by the construction of the proposed commercial or industrial
structures if the lots are approved for such uses.
The subdivider or developer shall estimate the cost of the surface course separately from
the estimated cost of completing the other improvements and the estimated cost of the
surface course shall be based upon the subdivider or developer's projected time table for
completion of the development. The subdivider or developer shall deposit with the
Township a corporate bond, letter of credit, or other security acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110%) percent of the estimated cost of
the Township completing the surface course at a time ninety (90) days following the date
scheduled for completion of the same by the subdivider or developer.
In addition, at the discretion of the subdivider or developer, in lieu of completion of other
improvements required as a condition for final approval of a plan, such subdivider or
developer may deposit with the Township a corporate bond, letter of credit, or other
security acceptable to the Board of Supervisors in an amount equal to one hundred ten
(110%) percent of the estimated cost of the Township completing required improvements
at a time ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for completion of the respective
improvements by the subdivider or developer.
Annually the Township may adjust the amount of required financial security by
redetermining the estimated cost for completion of the uncompleted improvements as of
the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either the original date scheduled for
completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
Township may require the subdivider or developer to post additional security in order to
insure that the financial security equals one hundred ten (110%) percent of the estimated
cost of the Township completing the improvements at a time ninety (90) days following
the date scheduled for completion or alternatively reduce the required security so that it
equals such amount. The cost of the determination by the Township Engineer shall be paid
by the subdivider or developer. Any additional security shall be posted by the subdivider
or developer within thirty (30) days after being notified of the same.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the
financial security may request the Township to release or authorize the release from time to
time, such portions of the financial security necessary for the payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing addressed to the
IV-5
?
governing body, and the governing body shall have forty-five (45) days from the receipt
of such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the
governing body that such portion of the work has been completed in accordance with the
approved plat. Upon such certification, the Board of Supervisors shall authorize release
from the required financial security of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
as representing the value of the work completed.
The value of the work completed shall be determined by subtracting from the total amount
of security deposited, one hundred ten (110%) percent of the estimated cost of the
Township completing the uncompleted work.
At such time as ninety (90%) percent of the lots in the subdivision have been improved as
set forth above, or if at the expiration of the three (3) years from the date all of the
improvements, excepting the surface course, have been completed, less than ninety (90%)
percent of the lots have been so improved, the Township shall notify the subdivider or
developer to complete the surface course within sixty (60) days from the date of such
notice. In computing the sixty (60) day requirement, the period from October 1 to April 1
shall not be counted.
If at the time the surface course is completed, ninety (90%) percent of the lots are not
improved as set forth above, the subdivider or land developer must:
(1) Post with the Township a cash bond in an amount equal to fifteen (15%) percent of the
reasonable cost of the surface course as security to guarantee that damages to the road
or street would not occur during the completion of the improvements on the
unimproved lots in such subdivider's or land developer's subdivision. The Township
shall hold such cash bond and utilize it to pay for the repair of any damage occurring to
the road during the period between the commencement of improvements on any
particular unimproved lot and the completion of such improvements irrespective of
whether or not it can be established that the damage to the road was caused by
contractors or other persons working in and about the construction of such
improvements; or
(2) Present to the Township agreements signed by the owners of all of such unimproved
lots pursuant to which they will agree to pay to the Township the cost of repairing any
damage occurring to roads in such subdivision during the period between the
commencement of work on improvements to their lot and the completion of such
improvements irrespective of whether or not it can be established that such damage
was caused by contractors or other persons involved in the improvement of their
respective lot. Such agreements must be in recordable form and the obligations
imposed thereby must run with the land and be binding upon the then owners, their
heirs, executors, administrators and assigns.
Irrespective of the provision of this section, the subdivider or developer must within the
sixty (60) days next following the sale of a lot, or the issuance of a building permit to
permit construction on such lot, whichever first occurs.
IV-6
?
(a) Complete the pavement base (see Section 804 of this Ordinance) of the streets shown
on the Final Plan as providing the lot access to a public street or road (if the plan
provides more than one means of access to the lot in question, only one such means of
access is required to be improved pursuant to the this section).
(b) Complete all storm water management facilities which are intended by the final plan to
handle the storm water runoff from the lot.
SECTION 408 RELEASE FROM IMPROVEMENT BOND
When the subdivider has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
subdivider shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail,
of the completion of the aforesaid improvements, enclosing therewith certification by the
engineer responsible for the design of the improvements certifying that they have been
installed as designed, and shall send copies of the notice and certification to the Township
Engineer. The Township Supervisors shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid
improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the
Township Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the subdivider by
certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Township
Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof,
shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall
contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
The Township Supervisors shall notify the subdivider, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said municipal governing body with relation thereto.
If the Township Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have approval
and the Subdivider shall he released from all liability, pursuant to its performance
guarantee bond.
If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Township Supervisors, the subdivider shall proceed to complete the same and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the subdivider's right to
contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Township
Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
Where the Township accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements
following completion, the Township may require the posting of financial security to secure
structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements
in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term not
to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in Section 616 of this Ordinance
with regard to installation of such improvements and the amount of such financial security
?
shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent of the actual cost of the installation of the said
improvements.
The subdivider or land developer shall maintain all streets in the subdivision or
development in travelable condition including the prompt removal of snow there from until
such time as the streets are accepted by the Township as a part of the township highway
system.
The improvements shall not be considered completed until the measures taken in
compliance with Sections 712, 806, 717 and/or 750(s) of this Ordinance to control erosion
are in fact sufficient to prevent erosion of banks and drainage ways.
SECTION 409 REMEDIES TO EFFECT COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in this Ordinance or in accord with the approved final plat, the Township
Supervisors are hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond, or other security
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Township Supervisors may, at their option,
install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, after deducting costs of
collection, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action
brought against the subdivider, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security, and not for any other municipal purpose.
SECTION 410 COMBINATION OF THE PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLANS
In the event that an initial subdivision is four (4) lots or less, the following procedures shall
apply:
a. At a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall
submit seven (7) copies of the Final Plan which shall meet the requirements both for
preliminary plans as set forth in Section 501 and 502 of this Ordinance and for final
Plans as set forth in Section 601 and 602 of this Ordinance and shall be accompanied
by all of the certifications required by Section 602 of this Ordinance. Such plans shall
be processed in the manner provided in Sections 402, et. seq. of this Ordinance.
b. The minor or small subdivision shall not involve any street improvement and/or street
dedication. In the event such an improvement is proposed the subdivider shall comply
with the Preliminary Plan and Final Plan specifications of this Ordinance.
IV-8
?
SECTION 411 RECORDING OF THE FINAL PLAN
After approval of the Final Plan, the subdivider shall file a copy of the same with the
Recorder of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of approval. Should the subdivider
fail to record the Final Plan within such a period, the approval of the Board shall be null
and void.
SECTION 412 RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedure, rules and regulations shall
apply as prescribed herein for any original subdivision.
SECTION 413 EFFECT ON EXISTING SUBDIVISION PLANS
The regulations of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall apply to all
existing subdivision plans which may or may not have been approved by the Board of
Supervisors prior to the passing of this Ordinance. Undeveloped areas, whether laid out in
street and lots, or not, within subdivisions existing prior to the passage of this Ordinance,
shall be developed entirely in strict accordance with this Ordinance, and all of the
limitations and restrictions imposed herein shall apply to such undeveloped areas.
SECTION 414 SALE OF LOTS AND ERECTION OF BUILDINGS
No lot in a subdivision may be sold and no building may be erected in a subdivision,
unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved and where required recorded, and
until the improvements required by the Board of Township Supervisors, in connection
thereof will have either been constructed or guaranteed, as hereinabove provided.
SECTION 415 SUBDIVISION OF LAND FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES
Where a parcel of land is being subdivided and it is not intended that buildings other than
farm buildings (a farm dwelling is not farm building) be placed or constructed on any of
the lots created by the subdivision, the Plan submitted shall contain in a conspicuous
manner the following language: "This subdivision is not intended for development
purposes. No buildings, other than farm buildings, may be constructed or placed on any of
the lots/parcels shown on this Plan without first submitting a subdivision plan meeting the
then existing Township subdivision requirements.
Three copies of such Plans shall be submitted. They need not be drawn by a Registered
Engineer and need only to show the outline of the property being divided and the new
division lines being created by reasonable accurate survey showing metes and bounds
description. (This outline may be obtained from the deed).
IV-9
?
The Plan shall contain the notarized signatures of the Owner or Owners and signature
blanks for three Supervisors and three members of the Planning Commission.
The only fee required shall be the York County Planning Commission's fee. Refer to Fee
Resolution
The Plan shall further indicate to whom the property subdivided is being sold, if known,
and such information as is necessary to establish that this subdivision will not result in the
evasion of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any other Township Ordinance with
respect to the property proposed to be sold or with respect to the property being retained;
i.e., enabling a purchaser to end up with a lot in violation of the length vs. width
requirements as stated in Section 104(b) of this Ordinance or the provisions of Sections
202.8 and 202.9 of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 416 DUTIES OF SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER
It shall be the duty of the subdivider or developer to provide each purchaser of a lot in a
subdivision with a copy of the final subdivision plan.
IV-10
?
ARTICLE V
PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION 501 REQUIRED INFORMATION
The subdivider shall supply seven (7) copies (black and white prints) of the Preliminary
Plan and seven (7) copies of the supporting data. The Preliminary Plan shall be at a scale
of not more than one-hundred (100) feet to an inch and may be drawn in pencil on tracing
paper in a neat but not elaborate style. It shall show or be accompanied by the following:
a. Title block in lower right corner, giving name of subdivision, scale, date, owner's
name, engineering or surveyor's name and registration number and seal.
b. North point; signature block for three (3) Supervisors, and three (3) Planning
Commission members; explanatory notes.
c. Complete topography, showing contours at one (1) foot vertical intervals for land
slopes of less than five (5) percent, or five (5) foot vertical intervals for land slopes of
more than five (5) percent on a datum approved by the Engineer, and references to two
(2) permanent bench marks. All existing water courses, tree masses and isolated trees
more than ten (10) inches in diameter, existing buildings, public works and all
significant features within or immediately adjacent to the tract.
d. Boundary lines of tract, showing courses and distances, as plotted by deed (unless an
accurate survey has been made) and the names of the present owners of all adjacent
lands.
e. Layout of proposed street system, showing right-of-way and cartway widths; street
names; locations and names of existing streets within or adjacent to the subdivision.
f. Lines of all lots, parcels, or tracts included within the subdivision including those not
presently owned by this subdivider, but on June 15, 1964, owned by the same land
owner as the tract being subdivided; building setback lines, utility easements (may be
given in the form of a note); any areas offered to public use or reserved for special
uses.
g. Any existing easements, rights-of-way, or restrictions, over or upon the land, with
complete information regarding them.
h. Small scale key map showing the subdivision in relation to the surrounding
neighborhood and community.
V-1
?
i. Proposed drainage system, showing the location and approximate sizes, capacities and
grades of inlets, sewers, culverts and other structures, and where water will be drained
and how it will affect adjacent properties. For large areas, or subdivisions possessing
unusual topographic features, the Township Engineer may require that this be shown
on a separate drainage plan.
j. Any other public improvements necessary for the complete development of the
subdivision.
k. Type of water supply and sewage disposal facilities proposed; i.e., on lot or public. In
the event on-site water and/or sewage disposal facilities are proposed, the Plan shall
show the locations for all on-site sewage disposal systems and wells. All locations for
wells shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from and zoning district boundary.
l. The location and design of access drives on corner lots and access drives on other lots
as requested by the Board of Supervisors. Such access drives shall demonstrate the
existence of reasonable access to the property and shall not be designed so as to
unreasonably erode the public road. The design shall demonstrate compliance with
Section 709(d) of this Ordinance.
If access is to be provided by a road maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the subdivider or developer shall supply proof that a driveway permit
has been issued to permit a driveway to be completed at the proposed location, or
certification from a professional engineer that, in his best judgment, consistent with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation a permit can be issued to
permit a driveway to be completed at the proposed location.
m. Proposed location for all residential, commercial or industrial buildings.
n. Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or completely within any
of the areas identified as being subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance
Administration in March, 1981, or where such activities border on such area, the
Preliminary Plan shall include the following information:
1)The location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities and building sites, fills, floods
or erosion protection facilities.
2)The one hundred (100) year flood elevation;
3)Areas subject to special deed restrictions.
All such maps shall show contours at intervals of two (2) or five (5) feet depending on
the slope of the land and shall identify accurately the boundaries of the area identified
as being subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the aforementioned Federal
Insurance Study.
V-2
?
o. The map should be oriented so that the top of the map is due north.
p. If any lot is not to be approved as the location of a dwelling, the plan shall
conspicuously so state.
q. If the parcel proposed to be subdivided is within the agricultural district, the plan shall
include the following information in a format similar to that shown below:
Size of tract as of January 5, 1976
Number of dwellings on tract as of January 5, 1976
Number of lots adversed from tract since January 5, 1976
Number of adversed lots on land of low quality for Agricultural
use as defined in Section 202.9(f) of the Peach Bottom Township
Zoning Ordinance
Number of uses on tract other than dwellings which require
utilization of dwelling rights
If parcel being subdivided is part of a subdivided tract
number of dwelling rights allocated to the parcel by that plan
Number of dwelling rights under section 202.9(a) of the Peach
Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance available to the parcel being
subdivided
Number of additional dwelling rights under Section 202.9(e) of
the Peach Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance, if any, available
to the parcel being subdivided
Proposed allocation of available dwelling rights and additional dwelling rights
Dwelling rights Additional dwelling rights
Lot No. 1 _____________ _____________
Lot No. 2 _____________ _____________
Lot No. 3 _____________ _____________
Added 6/3/13
SECTION 502 REQUIRED ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION
The plan shall include thereon or be accompanied by:
(a) Feasibility Study on sewer and water facilities for the tract (Section 503).
(b) Tentative cross-section and center line profiles for each proposed street.
(c) Preliminary engineering designs of any new bridges or culverts proposed in the tract.
(d) A drawing of all present and proposed grades and facilities for storm water drainage.
The subdivider or land developer shall include such information as is necessary to
?
establish to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer that the proposed storm water
facilities will be sufficient to achieve compliance with the requirements of Section 712
and Section 750(s) of this Ordinance.
(e) Certification, submitted by the subdivider that the method of sewage disposal and
water supply have been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and/or by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer as required by Section
503 of this Ordinance.
(f) An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan which has been reviewed and approved by the
York County Soil Conservation District. The subdivider or land developer must pay
all fees required by the York County Soil Conservation District in order to secure such
review and approval. Review and approval of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan by the York County Soil Conservation District is not required if the preliminary
plan does not consist of over five (5) acres, or involve commercial or industrial
development, unless the Township in its discretion determines to require such review
and approval.
(g) An earth disturbance permit if the preliminary plan proposes development of over
twenty-five (25) acres or if such a permit is otherwise required pursuant to the
provision of Chapter 102, Erosion Control of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
(h) If on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed, a hydrogeological study evaluating
background nitrates utilizing either test wells or nearby wells to determine the lot size
necessary to compensate for the proposed on-lot sewage disposal systems must be
preformed. In the event the lot size directed by the hydrogelogical study is larger than
the maximum lot size permitted in the zone where the lot is proposed, the additional
land required in excess of the maximum lot size permitted in the zone in question shall
remain with the residual tract but shall be included within an easement shown on the
plan. The plan shall specifically set forth that no non-agricultural development shall be
permitted in the easement area. Added 11/6/2006
SECTION 503 FEASIBILITY REPORT ON SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES
The subdivider shall submit a feasibility report in duplicate concerning the availability
and/or adaptability of water and sewer facilities in or near a proposed subdivision. Said
report shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and be submitted in
conjunction with the Preliminary Plan for review and recommendations by the local office
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and/or by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
The feasibility report shall consist of an examination of possible connection to an existing
sewerage system and water supply system. The study shall include the distance from the
nearest public sewer system, and the capacity of the existing system to accommodate the
proposed load.
V-4
?
If connection to an existing sewerage system is not deemed feasible, the possibility of
constructing a separate sewerage system and treatment works shall be investigated. The
study shall include the location of treatment facilities, receiving stream, type and degree of
treatment and design capacity.
If either of the above methods of sewerage disposal are found to be feasible, formal
application shall be made to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Resources and a permit obtained from the Sanitary Water Board prior to
plan approval.
As part of the Feasibility Study, the subdivider shall state the type of sewage disposal
system desired for each of the proposed lots. If other than connection to a sanitary sewer
line or the installation of a conventional on-site sewage disposal system is intended on any
of the lots, that fact shall be indicated on the Plan itself. The Board of Supervisors will
approve on-site sewage disposal systems only when the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer and/or a sanitarian of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
certifies that the proposed sewage disposal system for each of the lots shown on the plan is
suitable for use on that lot and the planning module for such lot is approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. Subdivisions proposing a lot or
lots utilizing alternate on-site sewage disposal systems will not be approved by the Board
of Supervisors unless:
1) The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or a sanitarian of the Department of
Environmental Resources certifies that the proposed sewage disposal site cannot
reasonably be located so as to enable the lot to utilize a conventional on-site disposal
system; and
2) The lot itself cannot reasonably be redesigned or relocated consistent with the
Township Zoning Ordinance and other Township regulations so as to enable utilization
of a conventional on-site sewage disposal system.
As a part of the Feasibility Study, there shall be included the results of the probe hole
analyses and soil absorption tests on each of the lots as proposed in the subdivision. These
probe hole analyses and soil absorption tests shall be performed in accordance with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and shall be
certified as accurate by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer.
If connection to an existing public sewer system is proposed, the subdivider or developer
shall submit proof that he has reserved sufficient capacity in the public sewer system to
accommodate all of the sewerage that will be generated by his proposed subdivision or
land development. Added 8/3/09
If connection to an existing public water supply system is proposed, the subdivider or
developer shall submit proof that he has reserved sufficient capacity in such public water
supply system to provide such water as will be utilized by the proposed subdivision or land
development. Added 8/3/09
V-5
?
If the water supply system proposed involves the utilization of water obtained from the
tract being subdivided or developed or from a nearby tract being subdivided or developed,
or from a nearby tract of land (within two (2) miles from the tract being subdivided), as
opposed to being pumped from a reservoir or from the Susquehanna River, irrespective of
whether that water is being distributed as part of a public water supply system, the Board
of Supervisors will approve the proposed water system only if:
(1) The proposal is for residential use and the proposed unit density does not
exceed one dwelling per 32,000 square feet of area. For example, if the tract being
developed or subdivided is 100 acres in size, no further study will be required if no more
than 136 dwelling units are proposed; or
(2) The proposal is for commercial, industrial or other nonresidential use and it is
apparent to the Township that water usage will not exceed 350 gallons per day for each
32,000 squares feet of tract area and the applicant sets forth a plan or proposal pursuant to
which usage can reasonably be monitored by the Township and prohibitions of usage in
excess of 350 gallons per day for each 32,000 square feet of tract area can effectively be
enforced by the Township. All costs incurred by the Township in monitoring usage and
enforcement of the use limitations shall be paid by the water users; or
(3) A site specific water availability study performed by the Township at the
expense of the applicant establishes that the groundwater recharge on the tract in question
after development computed during drought conditions (periods when precipitation is 40
percent below normal), will exceed the anticipated water usage figures computed by using
Department of Environmental Protection figures of 3.5 persons per dwelling unit and
average daily usage of 100 gallons per person per day where residential use is
contemplated and will exceed projected water usage by at least 10 percent when
commercial or industrial uses or concentrated animal operations or concentrated animal
feeding operations or other nonresidential uses are contemplated, and that the installation
of the proposed systems will not lower the groundwater table in the area so as to endanger
or decrease the groundwater supplies available to other properties in the area of the
subdivision or land development. The study shall be conducted in the following
manner:
(1) Prior to commencement of the study, the applicant shall place in escrow with
the Township 110 percent of the funds estimated by the Township’s consultant to
be necessary in order to complete the study;
(2) In the event industrial or commercial use or other nonresidential use is
intended, the applicant shall, prior to commencement of the study, set forth the
proposed nature of the industrial or commercial use or other nonresidential use, the
number of employees and whether of not water will be used to clean up and/or to
process or otherwise in connection with the proposed use. Where a concentrated
animal operation or a concentrated animal feeding operation is contemplated, the
applicant shall set forth the type, number and size of animals proposed;
(3) The consultant shall determine the post-development recharge from the tract
during a one (1) in ten (10) year drought, or a forty percent (40%) reduction in
average annual precipitation for the study area based upon post-development grades
?
and impervious conditions. The recharge analysis shall include estimated recharge
from on-lot sewage disposal systems if same are proposed, from post-development
storm water management systems, and from proposed storm water infiltration
facilities. Recharge from storm water management facilities shall be based upon
analysis of probe holes and percolation tests performed at the depth which
represents the bottom of the proposed facilities after installation. In evaluating
recharge from infiltration facilities, the consultant shall give consideration to the
types of soils in the area where such facilities will be installed and shall recognize
that the Township does not have and will not have the capability of insuring that
such facilities are properly maintained so as to function as designed, thus giving
recognition to the fact that some of these facilities will either not function at all or
will not properly function.
In order for the consultant to accurately evaluate the impact on existing wells in the area,
the applicant shall prior to the study drill production wells with sufficient capacity to
provide for the water needs of the development during drought conditions (when rainfall
is forty percent (40%) below normal).The consultant shall assume the water needs of the
development to be 350 gallons per day per dwelling unit for residential use and a sufficient
supply to meet the estimated needs of industrial, commercial or other non-residential
development plus a ten percent (10%) reserve capacity. The applicant shall also cause to
be drilled a sufficient number of test wells in the area and/or arrange for monitoring
existing neighboring wells so that the consultant can accurately evaluate the impact of
production wells on the underground water supply. Under the supervision of the
consultant, the applicant shall cause the production wells to be pumped for seventy-two
(72) hours (constant rate test) during which time water levels in the surrounding test wells
and neighboring wells will be continuously evaluated for impact so as to enable the
consultant to determine whether or not the groundwater table in the area will be lowered so
as to adversely impact groundwater supplies to neighboring properties. The final report
shall contain pump test results of constant rate tests as 1.5 times the yield required to
supply the water needs of the development calculated as above set forth.
In the event the proposal is for commercial, industrial or other nonresidential use, the
applicant shall set forth a proposed allocation of available water supply between or among
proposed users and set forth a plan or proposal pursuant to which usage can reasonably be
monitored by the Township and prohibitions of usage in excess of the maximum permitted
by costs incurred by the Township in monitoring usage and enforcement of the use
limitations shall be paid by the water users.
Amended 3/7/05 and 10/3/05
For this purpose the subdivision or land development shall be considered to consist of all
contiguous land owned on June 15, 1964, by the same land owner as lands owned by the
applicant now proposed for subdivision or land development. Land shall be considered
contiguous even though separated by public or private roads.
V-8
?
ARTICLE VI
FINAL PLAN
SECTION 601 REQUIRED INFORMATION
The Final Plan shall conform in all important details with Preliminary Plan as previously
approved, and any conditions specified in the approval of Preliminary Plans shall be
incorporated in the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be drawn at a scale of either fifty (50)
feet to the inch or one hundred (100) feet to the inch. The maximum size of any final Plan
shall be 42 inches by 60 inches, and if two or more drawings are required, each shall be
accompanied by a key map showing the location of the various sections, and each Final
Plan shall show or be accompanied by the following:
a. Title block in lower right corner, giving name of subdivision, scale, date, owner's
name, engineer or surveyor's name and registration number and seal.
b. North point (indicate true or magnetic), signature block for three (3) Supervisors, and
three (3) Planning Commission members; explanatory notes.
c. At the discretion of the Township Engineer complete topography as stated under Item
"c" of Article V. Where topography is required it may be necessary to show it on a
separate drainage plan (see Item "i" Article V).
d. Boundary lines of the tract, showing courses and distances as found by accurate
survey; all courses permanently marked.
e. The full plan of development, including street lines, lot lines, building lines,
crosswalks, easements, and open spaces. Any limitations of the easements shall be
noted on the Plan. All streets shall be named, all lots shall be numbered, all areas not
laid out in streets or lots shall be given explanatory notes.
f. Sufficient information acceptable to the Township Engineer to determine readily the
location bearing and length of every boundary, street, lot and easement line, and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground. In the case of curved lines, the radii, lengths of
curves, and tangent bearings shall be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and
hundredths of feet, and all dimensional data shall be accurately computed to the
nearest hundredths of a foot, or 10 second arc.
g. The location of permanent reference monuments (see Article VIII, Section 807) or the
plan may indicate where such monuments will be placed after street construction has
been completed. However, streets will not be adopted until such reference monuments
have been set. The location, description and elevation of at least two permanent bench
marks shall be shown.
h. The plan must be signed by all of the owners of the land sought to be subdivided or
developed and contain a notarized statement to the effect that the applications are all
VI-1
?
the owners of the land proposed to be subdivided or developed and that the subdivision
and/or land development shown on the final plan is made with his, her or their free
consent and that it is desired to record the same.
i. Signature block for approval by the Planning Commission (five spaces) and the Board
of Supervisors (three spaces).
j. Proposed building setback lines for each street and the proposed placement of each
building, well and sewage disposal system.
k. The proposed name of each proposed street.
l. Each final plan proposing residential uses within the Agricultural District as
established by the Peach Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance must contain in
conspicuous form the following language:
"Warning: The dwelling lot or lots proposed by this subdivision plan are in the
Agricultural District. The primary use of such district is agricultural and residents
must expect things such as the smell of farm animals and the manure they produce,
toxic chemicals, slow moving agricultural machinery on local roads and other byproducts
of agricultural activity."
m. The plan shall contain a notation indicating date of review by the York County
Planning Commission.
n. The map shall be oriented so that the top of the map is due north.
o. If the parcel proposed to be subdivided is within the agricultural district, the plan shall
include the following information in a format similar to that shown below:
Size of tract as of January 5, 1976
Number of dwellings on tract as of January 5, 1976
Number of lots adversed from tract since January 5, 1976
Number of adversed lots on land of low quality for Agricultural
use as defined in Section 202.9(f) of the Peach Bottom Township
Zoning Ordinance
Number of uses on tract other than dwellings which require
utilization of dwelling rights
If parcel being subdivided is part of a subdivided tract
number of dwelling rights allocated to the parcel by that plan
Number of dwelling rights under section 202.9(a) of the Peach
Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance available to the parcel being
subdivided
Number of additional dwelling rights under Section 202.9(e) of
the Peach Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance, if any, available
to the parcel being subdivided
?
Proposed allocation of available dwelling rights and additional dwelling rights
Dwelling rights Additional dwelling rights
Lot No. 1 _____________ _____________
Lot No. 2 _____________ _____________
Lot No. 3 _____________ _____________
Added 6/3/13
SECTION 602 REQUIRED ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION
The Final Plan shall include thereon or be accompanied by:
a. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. This plan must be reviewed and approved by
the York County Soil Conservation District if the final plan is a part of a subdivision
(for this purpose the subdivision shall include all lands shown on the preliminary plan
for the lots shown on the "final plan":) consists of over five (5) acres or involves
commercial or industrial development. In other cases the Township may, at its
discretion, require such review and approval.
b. Typical cross sections and street profiles for all proposed streets. Such profiles shall
show at least the following: existing (natural) and proposed grades along the proposed
street centerline; culvert locations, invert elevations and sizes.
c. The subdivider shall submit the certifications and approvals by the Township Engineer,
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer and the Department of Environmental
Resources required by Section 503 of this Ordinance.
d. Certification from a Registered Professional Engineer employed by the Township that
the subdivider or land developer has installed all improvements to the specifications of
this Ordinance and any conditions attached by the Board of Supervisors; or that the
subdivider or developer has posted an improvement bond or other acceptable security
in an amount sufficient to insure completion of all required improvements.
e. Complete engineering design of any new bridges or culverts or storm water drainage
facilities proposed in the tract being subdivided or developed and certification by the
Township Engineer that these proposed structures or facilities are satisfactorily
designed and will achieve compliance with the requirements of Section 712 and 750(s)
of this Ordinance.
f. An earth disturbance permit if the subdivision (for this purpose the subdivision shall
include all lands shown on the Preliminary Plan which includes the lots shown on the
"Final Plan") proposes development over twenty-five (25) acres or if such a permit is
otherwise required pursuant to the provision of Chapter 102, Erosion Control, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources."
g. An agreement that the subdivider or developer will install underground utilities before
paving streets and constructing sidewalks.
VI-3
?
h. A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures,
roads, and public utilities to be constructed within any of the areas identified as being
subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood Insurance Study prepared for
Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance Administration in March, 1981. All
such maps shall show contours at intervals of two (2) feet and identify accurately the
boundaries of such flood-prone areas.
i. If access is to be provided by a road maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the subdivider or developer shall submit proof that a driveway permit
has been issued to permit a driveway to be completed at the proposed location, or
certification from a professional engineer, that in his best judgment, consistent with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation a permit can be issued to
permit a driveway to be completed at the proposed location. If the required permit has
not yet been issued the plan shall set forth in conspicuous form a notice that a Highway
Occupancy Permit is required from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
before driveway access is permitted. In addition, in the event a Highway Occupancy
Permit has not yet been obtained from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
subdivider or developer shall prior to plan approval enter into a written agreement with
the Township on a form prepared by or approved by the Township Solicitor which
shall provide that the subdivider or developer shall not transfer any legal or equitable
interest in any lot requiring a Highway Occupancy Permit to be issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (this shall not be interpreted to preclude
the entry into an unrecorded contract of sales provided any and all amount of down
payment is held in escrow by an attorney or a licensed real estate broker) until a
Highway Occupancy Permit for the lot in question has been obtained and the Township
has executed a writing authorizing the sale of such lot.
j. If access is to be provided by a road maintained by Peach Bottom Township, the
subdivder or developer shall submit proof that a driveway permit has been issued to
permit a driveway to be completed at the proposed location.
k. If access is to be provided by a road which has not yet been constructed but which will
be constructed as a part of the subdivision process, the subdivision shall not be
approved unless the township engineer certifies that the location and design of the
driveway meet the requirements of this ordinance and the Peach Bottom Township
Driveway Ordinance.
l. Complete engineering design of any buildings or structures proposed for the purpose of
receiving, storing, or holding manure, water borne or water soluble chemicals,
including petroleum products or distillates, or biological chemicals or agents identified
as water pollutants/contaminants by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and certification from the Township Engineer that the proposed design
meets the requirements of Section 719 of this ordinance.
m. If connection to an existing public sewer system is proposed, the subdivider or
developer shall submit an agreement committing the public sewer system to accept and
treat all sewerage that will be generated by the proposed subdivision or land
development for such period of time and under such terms and conditions as the public
sewer system accepts and treats sewerage emanating from elsewhere in its service area
?
subject only to the condition that the lines, mains, and other sewage facilities shown
on such final subdivision or land development plan be constructed in accordance with
such plan.
n. If connection to an existing public water supply system is proposed, the subdivider or
developer shall submit an agreement committing the public water supply system to
provide such water as will be utilized by the subdivision or land development for such
period of time and under such terms and conditions as the public water supply system
provides water service elsewhere in its service area subject only to the condition that
such public water supply facilities as are shown on the final subdivision or land
development plan be constructed in accordance with such plan. Added 8/3/09
VI-5
?
ARTICLE VII
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION 701 APPLICATION OF STANDARDS
The following subdivision and land development principles, standards and requirements
will be applied by the Township in evaluating plans for proposed subdivisions.
The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards
and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare.
Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the
Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization
of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these
regulations.
SECTION 702 LOCATION OF SITE
All subdivision plans must reflect a location which has given consideration to the
following factors:
a. The location of the subdivision must conform to Peach Bottom Township
Comprehensive Plan with respect to streets, public sites and proposed utilities.
b. The proposed use of the land in any subdivision must conform to the Zoning
Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township.
c. Land subject to hazards of life, health, or property as may arise from fire, floods,
disease, excessive noise, falling aircraft, or considered uninhabitable for other reasons
may not be subdivided unless the hazards have been removed or the plans show
adequate safeguards against them.
d. Building sites shall not be permitted in any of the areas identified as being subject to
the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood Insurance Study prepared for Peach
Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance Administration in March, 1981.
e. A subdivision or land development must be coordinated with existing development in
the neighborhood so the entire area may be developed harmoniously.
f. (1)If the subdivision or land development is of a tract (for purposes of this section
"tract" shall have the meaning given to it by Section 501 of the Peach Bottom
Township Zoning Ordinance) which will after the subdivision or land
development contain more than ten (10) dwelling units, the subdivision or land
development must be adjacent to and have all of its development streets
VII-1
?
intersect solely with (1) a road or street currently maintained by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; or (2) a township maintained road or street
which has a paved surface at least twenty (20) feet in width.
(2)If the subdivision or land development is of a tract (for purposes of this section
"tract" shall have the meaning given to it by Section 501 of the Peach Bottom
Township Zoning Ordinance) which will after the subdivision or land
development contain more than twenty (20) dwelling units, the subdivision or
land development must be adjacent to and of all its development streets intersect
solely with (1) a road or street currently maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or (2) a township maintained road or street which has a paved
surface of at least twenty-six (26) feet in width.
Alternatively, the subdivider or land developer may redesign or improve all
currently Township maintained roads or streets connecting the subdivision with a
road or street maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania not meeting the
paved width requirements of subparagraphs (1) and (2) so that such Township
maintained roads or streets are designed so as to be in compliance with the
standards of Sections 704 through 709 of this Ordinance and are improved so as
to be in compliance with the standards of Sections 804 and 805 of this Ordinance,
excepting that if the subdivision or land development is of a tract (for purposes of
this section "tract" shall have the meaning given to it by Section 501 of the Peach
Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance) which will after the subdivision or land
development contain less than twenty (20) dwelling units the road or street shall
have a required paved surface width of twenty (20) feet and if the tract will after
the subdivision or land development contain more than twenty (20) dwelling units
the road or street shall have a paved surface of twenty-six (26) feet in width.
SECTION 703 GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SITES
In the layout of any subdivision attention must be focused on conditions which can affect
development. These can include the following:
a. Location with Reference to Streets.
1)Except as set forth in subsection (2) of this section, every lot proposed for
subdivision or land development shall adjoin for its lot width as required by the
Township Zoning Ordinance for a lot in the zone where the lot proposed for
subdivision or land development is located, a road or street currently maintained
by Peach Bottom Township or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a road
or street which has been designed in accordance with the provisions of Sections
704 through 709 of this Ordinance and improved in accordance with the provision
of Section 804 and 805 of this Ordinance.
VII-2
?
2)Exception - A lot or lots may be approved for subdivision or land development
notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph provided
that such subdivision or land development is in compliance with the provisions of
subsections (a) through (e) as set forth below.
a) No subdivisions or land development shall be approved showing a private
street as the sole means of ingress and egress to lots, tracts, or parcels of land
unless the private street meets the design requirements set forth in this Section.
b) No more than three (3) lots shall be permitted on any one private street.
c) Subdivision applications which propose a private street shall be accompanied
by a Road Use and Right-of-Way Agreement which is subject to review and
approval by the Township. This Agreement shall be recorded in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds in and for York County on the same date as the
recording of the final Subdivision or Land Development Plan. This Agreement
shall contain at least the following:
i. identification of the entity/person(s) with responsibility of
maintenance for the private street. This entity shall be principally
composed of the owners of the land which the private street
services.
ii. Provisions for enforcing the Agreement upon all parties of the
Agreement.
iii. Assurance that the private street will be constructed and maintained
in conformance with this Ordinance and the Township’s Zoning
Ordinance, and all rules, regulations, or specifications created
pursuant to those Ordinances.
iv. A statement that the covenants in the Agreement shall run with the
land and be binding on agents, successors, successors in title,
occupants of the land, heirs and beneficiaries.
v. A requirement that any future offer of dedication, if any will not be
made unless and until the private street is constructed to the then
prevailing standards for a Township street.
vi. A requirement that an offer of dedication will include either the
entire street, or sections which provide reasonable circulation within
the Township’s public street system.
vii. A method for assessing maintenance of repair costs.
viii. A provision that so long as a private street remains private, Peach
Bottom Township shall have no responsibility or obligation for
construction, maintenance, repairs and snow removal.
?
g) All portions of the private road or street which provides access to more than one
lot have been improved to a mud free or otherwise permanently passable
condition with eight (8) inches of compacted crushed stone for a width of at
least sixteen (16) feet. The subdivider must enter into an agreement with the
township guaranteeing that such private road or street will be permanently
maintained with eight inches of compacted crushed stone for a width of at least
sixteen (16) feet by the owners of the lands whose access is provided by such
private road or street and that the township will have no obligation of
maintenance or repair.
h) The private road providing access to such lot or lots must be designed so as to
not cause erosion of adjoining properties or a public street or road.
i) The private road or street shall have a right-of-way of at least twenty-five (25)
feet except that where the potential exists for subsequent development in excess
of the three (3) lots permitted by this section, the right-of-way shall be fifty (50)
feet in width.
j) If such lot or lots are in the Agricultural Zoning District, such lot or lots together
with the private road or street providing access to such lot or lots must be
located in their entirety on land of low quality for agriculture use as defined in
Section 202.9(e) of the Township Zoning Ordinance. .
b. In all subdivisions, subdividers shall preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic points,
historic spots and other community assets and landmarks on the basis of Township
determination.
c. Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public lands or adjacent
private lands are prohibited.
d. Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health, or property and land deemed to
be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such
other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or
flood hazard until adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the
subdivision plans. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plan for
uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not
produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
Where flooding is known to have occurred within the area shown on the plan, such area
shall be clearly marked "subject to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in streets
and lots. No building may be erected in any designated floodplain area.
e. The subdivision plan shall establish compliance with the screening and buffer
requirements of Section 221 of the Township Zoning Ordinance and, in addition, in
the event the plan proposes dwelling units within a residential zoning district but
within two hundred (200) feet of a zoning district boundary, a fence or hedge must be
placed sufficient to screen such dwelling units from a commercial, industrial or
agricultural district. The fence or hedge may not be within a required setback area.
?
SECTION 704 STREET SYSTEMS - GENERAL
All streets proposed to be constructed within Peach Bottom Township shall conform to the
following general design requirements:
a. Proposed streets shall be planned with regard to the existing street system, public
convenience in terms of fire protection and pedestrian traffic, probable volumes of
traffic, existing and proposed use of land on abutting properties and future subdivision
extension of the street system.
b. Residential streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through traffic; however, the
arrangement of streets shall provide for continuation of existing or platted streets and
for proper access to adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future subdivision.
c. Proposed streets, which are aligned with existing streets, shall bear the name of the
existing street. In the event a proposed street is not aligned with an existing street, it
shall not bear a name similar to any existing street located within the Township and/or
the same postal service area, irrespective of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive,
place, court, etc.
d. Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce reasonable grades,
satisfactory drainage and suitable building sites.
e. The streets must be properly located and built with regard to the proposed traffic
functions, including the minimizing of through traffic on minor streets and the
protection of major street capacities from excessive marginal access.
f. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets and
highways must conform to the applicable Township or County Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map.
SECTION 705 STREET DESIGN
a. Width - Minimum street widths shall be as follows:
Minimum Minimum
Classification Right-of-Way Cartway Width
Arterial or Limited 80 - 120 feet As determined after consultation
with the York County Planning
Commission and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation
Collector Street 60 feet 36 feet
Minor Street 50 feet 28 feet
VII-5
?
Marginal Access Variable, but not less 22 feet
Street than 33 feet in addition
to right-of-way of the
major street it adjoins
Permanent 50 feet 28 feet
Cul-de-sac
Street
Private Service 33 feet 20 feet
Drive or Alley
_______________________________________________________________________
b. Dead End Streets - Shall be prohibited, except when designed as temporary cul-de-sac
streets by the developer on his own land in order to permit future street extensions into
adjoining tracts. These temporary dead-end streets must be on approved plans. Also
they must be constructed with a stabilized all weather turnaround of the same radius as
that which would be required for a permanent street; the turnaround to be removed
when the street is continued.
c. Cul-de-sac Streets - Should in general not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length
unless topographic conditions and/or tract shape warrant an increase that is approved
by the Township. The cul-de-sac itself shall be designed so that there is a one way flow
of traffic around the cul-de-sac. The radius from the center point of the cul-de-sac to
the outer edge shall be at least ninety (90) feet. There shall be a paved travelable area
sixteen (16) feet in width, the outer edge of which shall be seventy-eight (78) feet from
the center point of the cul-de-sac and the inner edge of which shall be sixty-two (62)
feet from the center point of the cul-de-sac. The center of the cul-de-sac shall be
included as a part of a single lot. No lot having access from the cul-de-sac shall be
permitted unless there is a least seventy (70) feet in width at the outer line of the paved
surface.????????
Cul-de-sac streets should not be utilitized unless there is no other feasible manner in
which to design a street system so as to permit the reasonable development of the
property.
d. Curves - Where connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point, by
more than 10 degrees, the lines must be connected with a true, circular curve. The
minimum radius of the centerline for the curve must be as follows:
Type of Street Minimum Radius
Arterial 500 feet
Collector 300 feet
Minor 200 feet
Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the beginning or end of curves.
Except for minor streets there must be a tangent of at least 100 feet between reverse
curves. For curves on arterial streets, proper superelevation must be provided as
required by the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
?
e. Vertical Curves - Changes in grade shall be joined by vertical curves; a smooth grade
line with gradual changes, as consistent with the type of street and the character of
terrain, should be strived for in preference to a line with numerous breaks on short
lengths of grades. Vertical curves which do not satisfy the minimum stopping sight
distance requirements, specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall not be approved.
f. Grades - The grades of streets must meet the requirements below:
Minimum Grade Maximum Grade
All Streets .5%
Arterial 6%
Collector 7%
Minor Streets 12%
Cul-de-sacs 12%
Marginal Access Streets 12%
Alleys or Service Drives 14%
In all grades exceeding 1%, vertical curves must be used and must be designed for
proper sight distance.
After consultation with the Township Engineer the Board of Supervisors may permit
variations of these grade standards.
g. Crown - The slopes of the crown on residential service and neighborhood collector
streets shall be at least one-eighth inch per foot but not more than one-third inch per
foot as directed by the Engineer.
h. Sight Distances - Proper sight distance must be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. Measured along the centerline, 5 feet above grade,
the minimum sight distance must be as follows:
Type of Street Sight Distance
Arterial 400 feet
Collector 200 feet
Minor 200 feet
Cul-de-sac 100 feet
i. Slope of Banks - Measured perpendicular to the street centerline may not exceed:
3 to 1 for fills
2 to 1 for cuts.
Such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or other vegetation to
prevent erosion.
VII-7
?
SECTION 706 INTERSECTION DESIGN
a. Types of Intersections - Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets
are prohibited. Intersections must be as nearly at right angles as possible. However, in
no case should they deviate from the standards below:
Type of Intersection
Arterial Arterial Collector Collector Minor
Angle of with with with with with
Intersection Arterial Collector Collector Minor Minor
of Street
Centerlines 90° 75°-105° 75°-105° 75°-105° 75°-105’
b. Intersection Grades - Intersections must be approached on all sides by level areas.
Where the grade exceeds 7% these level areas must have a minimum length of 50 feet
(measured from the intersection of the centerlines) within which no grade may exceed
a maximum of 4%.
c. Intersection Curve Radii - Design of curb or edge of pavement must take into account
such conditions as types of returning vehicles, likely speeds of traffic, angle of turn,
number of lanes, and whether parking is permitted; but curb or edge of pavement radii
must not be less than the following:
Minimum Simple Curve Radii
Type of Intersection of Curb or Edge of Pavement
Arterial with Arterial 40 feet or more, as determined after
consultation with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation
Arterial with Collector and Minor 35 feet
Collector with Collector 30 feet
Collector with Minor Street 25 feet
Minor Street with Minor Street 20 feet
Three-centered compound curves equivalent to the above minimum simple curves are
permitted and encouraged where applicable.
Radius corners or diagonal cutoffs must be provided on the property lines substantially
concentric with, or parallel to the corner of, the curb radius corners.
d. Intersection Sight Distances - Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street
intersections. Clear sight triangles of 150 feet for major thoroughfares and 75 feet for
minor streets measured along the centerline of the street from their points of junction
shall be provided at all intersections and no building, structure, grade or planting higher
than three (3) feet above the centerline of the street shall be permitted within such sight
VII-8
?
triangles. At intersections involving state highways, sight distances must conform to
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
e. Distance Between Intersections - Shall be in accordance with the following:
Type of Intersection
Arterial
Arterial with Collector Collector Minor
Minimum with Collector with with with
Distance Arterial & Minor Collector Minor Minor
Between
Centerlines 800 feet 800 feet 600 feet 500 feet 500 feet
of Intersections
Minimum Separation of Centerlines
For Streets Must be in alignment with 125 feet 125 feet
Not in planned or proposed streets
Alignment entering from opposite side.
f. Multiple Intersections - Involving junction of more than two streets shall be avoided.
where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care
for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
SECTION 707 PAVEMENT SURFACE
a. Pavements - Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans,
profiles, and cross sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Township.
Before paving the street surface, the subdivider must install required utilities and
provide, where necessary, adequate subsurface drainage for the streets, as acceptable to
the Township.
The Township shall decide if a collector or arterial street is required as a direct
result of the construction of his subdivision in which case the subdivider is responsible
for paving the additional width required.
b. Curbs - In subdivisions which have a typical lot width of eighty (80) feet or less at the
building setback line, curbs must be installed.
c. Gutters - In areas where curbing is not used, suitable gutters must be installed to avoid
erosion. The Township may require installation of curbs and/or gutters in any
subdivision where the evidence indicates that such improvements are necessary for
proper drainage.
SECTION 708 STREET VERGE
a. Where Sidewalks Required - In subdivisions where semi-detached and attached
structures are planned and in subdivisions which have an average lot width at the
building setback line of 80 feet or less, sidewalks must be installed on both sides of
VII-9
?
each street, except streets which bound the subdivision. Sidewalks must be installed on
one side of all streets which bound the subdivision and on one side of all streets where
the average lot width at the building set-back line is less than 200 feet. Sidewalks may
also be required:
-In subdivisions where lot widths are greater than 200 feet and the character of the
neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary.
-To continue sidewalks that are existing in adjoining subdivision or
-To provide access to adjacent or nearby community facilities such as schools,
shopping areas, and recreation areas.
b. Location of Sidewalks - The sidewalks must commence 1 foot inside the right-of-way
line and extend toward the curb line.
c. Width of Sidewalks - Sidewalks must be at least 4 feet wide. In the vicinity of
shopping centers, schools, recreation areas, and other such facilities, they must be at
least 6 feet wide and located within the street right-of-way.
d. Grass Planting Strip - Must be provided between the curb or edge of the cartway and
sidewalk. No shrubs or trees shall be planted within the grass planting strip.
e. Crosswalks - When considered necessary to provide circulation access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other facilities, pedestrian
crosswalks must be provided. They must be no less than 12 feet wide.
f. Handicapped Accessible – All sidewalks shall be constructed so as to be handicapped
accessible consistent with standards contained in the American with Disabilities Act of
1990
SECTION 709 OTHER STREET PROVISIONS
a. Required Location and Size of Service Drives or Alleys - In subdivisions with detached
and semi-detached dwellings, alleys are prohibited except:
-In the rear of lots that front on a major thoroughfare, or
-Where necessary to furnish access to rear yard garages on very steep lots.
In other types of residential subdivisions they may be permitted. In Commercial or
Industrial Districts without off-street loading areas, alleys are required except as
following: Where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such
as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed, the Board of Supervisors may waive this alley requirement. No part of any
dwelling, garage, or other structure may be located within 16 feet of the centerline of
an alley.
VII-10
?
All service drives or alleys must be paved to a width of at least 20 feet.
b. Dead End Service Drives or Alleys - Where service drives or alleys dead end, they
must be provided with a paved turnaround with a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet
or a paved "Y" turnaround of sufficient size.
c. Access - Streets shall be laid out to make provision for access to all lots and to adjacent
undeveloped areas and the subdivider shall improve these streets to the limits of the
subdivision.
d. Access Drives - Within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way, an access drive may not
exceed 35 feet or be less than 12 feet in width.
On street frontage, the number of access drives may not exceed two per lot.
An access drive may not cross a street right-of-way line:
-Within forty (40) feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
-Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
-Within twenty-five (25) feet of another access drive on the same property.
The minimum angle between the centerline of the access drive and the street shall be
not less than sixty-five (65) degrees.
An access drive must be located in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to
vision.
Safe sight determination shall be made in accordance with a minimum stopping sight
distance chart attached hereto as "Exhibit A": which establishes minimum safe
stopping distances in accordance with maximum speeds and highway grades. In
applying this chart speeds of ten miles per hour in excess of posted limits should
normally be anticipated.
The drive may not exceed a slope of 5% within twenty-five (25) feet of the street rightof-
way line.
Where a drive enters a bank through a cut, the shoulders of the cut may not exceed
50% in slope within twenty-five (25) feet of the point the drive intersects the street
right-of-way.
Access drives must provide reasonable access to the property proposed to be served
and must be designed so as not to unreasonably erode the public street or road.
e. Reserve Strips - controlling access to the subdivisions or to adjacent areas are
prohibited except when their control is definitely placed in the Township under
conditions approved by the Board of Supervisors.
?
SECTION 710 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
1. Connection to Existing Sanitary Sewer System – When connection to an existing
municipal sanitary sewer system is determined to be feasible based upon the report
required to be submitted pursuant to Section 503 of this ordinance, a complete sanitary
sewage collection system must be installed and connected to the existing municipal
sanitary sewer system. In this situation the following requirements must be met:
a. The plan for the installation of a sanitary sewer system must be prepared for the
development and approved by the Township engineer and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The Township engineer must inspect all
sewer lines before they are covered. Upon completion of the sanitary sewer
installation, the plan for the system as built must be filed with the Township;
b. Any sewer pipe main must be at least eight (8) inches in diameter and any sewer
lateral must be at least four (4) inches in diameter. Storm sewers must not be
connected with sanitary sewers;
c. Manholes shall be located generally at intervals of two hundred fifty (250) feet and
in no case no more than four hundred (400) feet. Manholes are also required at all
points of change of course or grade and at all points of intersection of sewer lines;
d. All sanitary sewer systems located in any of the areas identified as being subject to
the one hundred year flood insurance study prepared for Peach Bottom Township
by the Federal Insurance Administration, whether public or private, shall be flood
proofed up to one hundred year flood elevation.
2. Private Sewage Disposal System Requirements- Where installation of a public sanitary
sewer system is not required, the developer or owner of the lot shall provide for each lot at
the time improvements are erected thereon, a private sewerage disposal system consisting
of a septic tank and soil absorption fields and reserve field or other systems approved by
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and acceptable to Peach Bottom
Township.
If on-site conventional sewage disposal systems are to be used, they must be laid out in
accordance with at least minimum standards of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and
the regulations issued pursuant thereto. The Township and/or the Department of
Environmental Protection must inspect and approve each on-site sewage disposal system.
No installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems shall occur
where such system will not function due to high groundwater, flooding, or unsuitable soil
characteristics or where such systems are proposed for location in any of the areas
identified as being subject to the one hundred year flood in the flood insurance study
prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance Administration.
Added 11/6/2006
VII-12
?
SECTION 711 WATER SUPPLY
1. Connection to Existing Public Water Supply System
Unless it is determined based upon the feasibility report conducted pursuant to the
provisions of Section 503 of this ordinance not to be feasible, the developer shall provide
the development with a complete water supply system to be connected to an existing
municipal water supply system and shall supply to the system sufficient water to meet the
water needs of the proposed development. In this situation, the following requirements
must be met:
a. The plan for installation of a water supply system must be prepared for the
development with the cooperation of the municipal water utility company and
approved by the Township engineer. Upon completion of the water supply
system, one copy of the plan for the system as built must be filed with the
Township.
2. Private On-Lot Water Supply Systems
Where connection to a municipal water supply system is determined not to be feasible, the
developer shall supply for each lot or dwelling unit at the time improvements are erected or
installed, individual water supply systems. All such individual systems shall meet all
applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. All
wells must be sited, improved and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the
Peach Bottom Township Well Permit Ordinance and with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Prior to use of a well for domestic purposes the water must be tested for coliform and
nitrates. Copies of the test results must be provided to the Township. Added 11/6/2006
SECTION 712 STORM DRAINAGE
a. General Requirements - Adequate storm sewers, culverts, and related facilities must be
provided, as necessary, to:
-Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
-Ensure the drainage of all low points and swampy areas within the subdivision or land
development.
-Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals, reasonably related to the extent
and grade of the area drained.
-Provide adequate drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities.
Storm drainage facilities must be designed to handle the anticipated peak discharge
from the property being subdivided on the basis of one hundred (100) year storm.
b. Lot Drainage - Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from new and existing buildings.
VII-13
?
c. Nearby Existing Facilities - Where adequate existing storm sewers are readily
accessible, the subdivider must connect his storm water facilities to these existing
sewers.
d. Open Drainageways - When open drainageways are used for the disposal of storm
water; the Township shall review the design of such open drainageways in relation to
the following:
-Safety: Steep bank and deep pools shall be avoided.
-Erosion: Adequate measures shall be taken, such as seeding, sodding, paving, or other
measures as necessary to prevent the erosion of banks and the scouring of channel
bottom.
-Stagnation: Design of open drainageways shall not create stagnant pools or swampy
areas.
e. Abutting Properties - In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration
must be given to excessive runoff to adjacent development or undeveloped property.
In no case may a change be made in the existing topography which would:
-Result in a slope of more than ten (10) percent within twenty (20) feet of a property
line.
-Alter the existing drainage or topography in any way so as to adversely affect
adjoining property.
In no case may any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved.
All slopes must be protected against erosion.
f. Drainage Upon and On Streets - In order to give proper surface water drainage upon
streets, a structure on a lot must be at a grade in satisfactory relationship:
-With the established street grade, or
-With the existing street grade where none is established.
A street must be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from this
right-of-way. The slope of the crown on a street may not be less than 1/8 of an inch
per foot and not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot. Adequate facilities must be
provided at low points along a street and at other points at which it is necessary to
intercept runoff.
g. Storm Water Management - Storm water runoff from any given area to be developed
shall be computed in accordance with Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Technical Release No. 55, prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture,
January, 1975, or as may otherwise be acceptable to the Township. The design concept
where runoff may affect downstream properties should be as follows:
?
-The release rate from storms up to ten (10) years in recurrence frequency shall be
limited to the predevelopment flow rate from a two (2) year storm.
-The release rate from storms from up to one hundred (100) years in recurrence
frequency shall be limited to the predevelopment flow rate from a ten (10) year
storm.
-Retention facilities shall be designed to retain the differences in flow rates per above;
provided, however, if the installation of the necessary retention facility would
require removal of trees at least eight (8) inches in diameter four (4) inches above
the base, the size of the retention facility may be reduced. However, in all
circumstances the retention facility must be designed so that post development
flow rates computed for the two (2) year storm, the ten (10) year storm and the
one hundred (100) year storm are less than the pre development flow rates for
such storms. Added 12/6/10
-The emergency spillways from such facilities shall be designed based on a one
hundred (100) year storm.
-If the flow from a detention facility would otherwise damage or interfere with the
agricultural or residential use of a property over which it would flow it shall be
piped to a stream with the pipe at such a depth so as not to interfere with the
agricultural use of the property through which the water is piped. This requirement
shall not apply if the owner of the property which would be adversely
affected by the flow refuses to grant to the subdivider or land developer a rightof-
way without charge to the subdivider or developer except for damage to
growing crops and trees. Any pipeline shall be located so as to minimize surface
damage.
h. Maintenance - The subdivider or land developer must make adequate provision for the
perpetual maintenance of all storm water management facilities proposed by the
Subdivision or Land Development Plan.
The subdivider or land developer shall in addition provide for an easement enabling the
Township to perform emergency maintenance in the event the property owner should
fail to do so and shall establish a procedure whereby the Township shall be able to
assess the cost of such emergency maintenance upon the owner of the land where the
detention basin or other storm water management facility is located, by the filing of a
municipal lien.
SECTION 713 OTHER UTILITIES
a. Easements, Width and Location - When easements for utilities are required, they must
be a minimum of 15 feet wide. The location of easements for overhead utilities shall
be determined after consultation with the appropriate utility companies.
b. Underground Installations - Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be
installed underground unless, in the opinion of the Township, special conditions
require otherwise.
VII-15
?
c. Natural Gas Lines - All natural gas lines must be installed in compliance with the ASA
Code B31, 80 1958, as amended. The minimum distance from a natural gas line to a
dwelling unit must be as required by the applicable transmission or distributing
company.
d. Petroleum Lines - Between a proposed dwelling unit and the centerline of a petroleum
products transmission line which may traverse the subdivision, there must be a
minimum distance of 100 feet measured in the shortest distance. In instances such that
topographic conditions decrease the hazards involved or in which it would cause undue
hardship in the efficient layout of the subdivision, the Board of Supervisors may reduce
this requirement.
e. Street Lighting Installation - The subdivider must provide an easement for any street
lights installed or for future street lighting installations. Before installation, he must
consult with the public service utility involved.
f. All gas lines underground, electric lines, underground telephone lines and other utilities
located in any of the areas identified as being subject to the one hundred (100) year
flood in the Flood Insurance Study prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the
Federal Insurance Administration in March, 1981, whether public or private, shall be
flood-proofed up to the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
SECTION 714 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
a. Specifications - Monuments and markers must be constructed as follows:
Material Minimum Size
Monument Concrete or Stone 6" x 6" x 30"
Marker Iron Pipes or Iron or Steel Bars 15" x 3/4" dia.
b. Placement and Marking - Monuments and markers must be placed by a Registered
Engineer or Surveyor so that the scored or marked point coincides exactly with the
point of intersection of the lines being monumented. They must be set so that the top
of the monument or marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass dowel.
c. Location of Monuments - Monuments must be set:
-At the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the subdivision.
-At the intersection of street lines.
d. Location of Markers - Markers must be set:
VII-16
?
-At the beginning and ending of curbs along street property lines.
-At points where lot lines intersect curves either front or rear.
-At angles in property lines of lots.
-Al all other lot corners.
e. Removal - Any monuments or markers that are removed must be replaced by a
Registered Engineer or Surveyor at the expense of the person removing them.
SECTION 715 BLOCKS
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the
following:
- Provision of adequate sites for the type of buildings proposed.
- Zoning requirements.
- Topography.
- Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
Blocks shall have a maximum length of sixteen hundred (1,600) feet, and so far as
practical, a minimum length of five hundred (500) feet. In the design of blocks longer than
eleven hundred (1,100) feet, special consideration shall be given to the requirements of
satisfactory fire protection.
Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots, except
where reverse frontage lots bordering a major traffic street are used.
Pedestrian interior walks may be required where necessary to assist circulation or provide
access to community facilities. Such cross-walks shall have a width of not less than ten
(10) feet and a paved walk of not less than four (4) feet.
In commercial and industrial areas, the block layout shall be designed with reference to
service of the public and with provisions for adequate off-street parking and loading
facilities.
SECTION 716 LOTS AND LOT SIZES
a. Lot Layout in a Subdivision - Insofar as is possible all lots within a subdivison shall
conform to the following requirements:
-Corner lots shall provide for equal setbacks on both streets.
VII-17
?
-Lots shall be drawn to the center of the road if possible.
-Lot depths shall not be less than one nor more than two times the average width
excepting this shall not be applicable if the total lot area is in excess of three (3)
acres.
-Depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for non-residential use shall be
adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory space for offstreet
parking and unloading.
-Residential lots shall front on a dedicated public street, existing or proposed, except as
provided in Section 703(a)(2) amended 6/3/13
-Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent vehicular
access to major traffic streets.
-Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radian to street lines.
-Lots shall be reasonable in shape and average lot width shall not be substantially
greater nor less than the lot width measured at the minimum setback line for the
zone in which the lot is located.
b. Lot Dimensions - The dimensions and areas of the lots must conform to the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
c. Building Setback Lines - The building setback lines must conform to the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
d. Planting Screens - Where lots face an interior street and back on a major thoroughfare
or abut properties in other uses with an adverse effect upon them, a planting strip at
least fifteen (15) feet wide for a screen may be required along the back or abutting side
of the lot as the case may be. No rights-of-access may open onto or through the strip.
e. Grading - Lots shall be graded to sufficient elevation to secure drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of storm water in pools. Roof drainage shall be
provided for according to recommendations of the Engineer or such other official as
may be designated by the Board of Supervisors. Top soil shall be preserved and
redistributed as cover and shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or ground
cover.
f. Residential Parking - At least one off-street parking space with access to a public street
shall be provided for each proposed dwelling unit. Where such access is to other than a
residential service street, adequate turnaround space shall be provided on the lot.
g. House Numbers - House numbers may be assigned to each lot by the Township.
VII-18
?
SECTION 717 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Any subdivider or land developer who proposes to engage in a earth-moving activity on
any subdivision or land development shall, prior to final plan approval, prepare an erosion
and sediment control plan and obtain a permit, if applicable, according to the provisions of
Chapter 10, Erosion Control, The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
Specifications for soil erosion and sediment control practices are available at the York
County Soil Conservation District Office.
SECTION 718 TREES AND LANDMARKS
a. The subdivider or land developer shall be required to preserve all trees, other than
those whose removal is necessary in order to place the required improvements and to
place the driveways, parking facilities and structures intended to be located within the
subdivision and land development.
b. Wherever possible subdividers may be required to preserve waterways, scenic and
historical places and other community assets and landmarks.
SECTION 719 POLLUTION CONTROL
If the plan proposes a building or structure for the purpose of receiving, storing, or holding
manure, water borne or water soluble chemicals, including petroleum products or
distillates, or biological chemicals or agents identified as water pollutants/contaminants by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the building or structure must
be designed in a manner consistent with the regulations issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection including, but not limited to, those contained in
Chapters 91 and 245. Added 8/3/09
VII-19
?
ARTICLE VIIA
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 750 MOBILE HOME PARKS
a. "Mobile Home" shall be defined as follows:
A single family dwelling designed for transportation after fabrication on streets and
highways on its own wheels or on flat bed or other trailers and arriving at the site
where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operation, location on jacks or
permanent foundations, connection to utilities and the like. Not to include mobile
dwelling units.
b. "Mobile Home Park" shall be defined as follows:
Any lot, parcel, tract or contiguous tracts or lots, whether or not separated by public or
private roads, and whether or not separated by parcels adversed from the original tract
or parcel. owned by the same person or persons or corporations, (for this purpose any
person shall be considered to own all tracts or lots owned by himself, his spouse, or by
a corporation or partnership in which he and/or his spouse together own at least fifty
percent (50%) of the outstanding voting stock of the corporation or at least fifty
percent (50%) of the ownership equity in the partnership), and designed, maintained,
or used for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for two or more
mobile homes, or upon which two or more mobile homes are parked or located; and
the owner of the property in question receives consideration directly or indirectly for
the use of the space occupied by the mobile home; and shall include all buildings and
structures used or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof. The term
"mobile home park" shall not include any automobiles, mobile home, or trailer sales
lot on which any unoccupied mobile home is parked for the purpose of inspection and
sale and shall not include mobile home, occupied by a family headed by an individual
employed as a farm worker on a full-time basis by the owner of the property in
question.
c. Approval Required - It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend
any mobile home park within the limits of the Township until plans have been
approved by the Township in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
d. Application for Mobile Home Park Approval - Applications for mobile home park
approval shall conform to the requirements and procedures as established in Articles
IV, V and VI of this Ordinance.
e. Mobile Home Park Improvements - All improvements required in mobile home parks
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this Article and Articles VII and
VIII.
VIIA-1
?
f. Site Location and Dimensions - The location and minimum area of all mobile home
parks shall be in accordance with the Township Zoning Ordinance and shall also
comply with the following minimum requirements:
1)Not located on flood plains or subject to flooding or located with respect to adverse
influences from swamps, marshes or other water hazard areas.
2)Not subject to any hazard or nuisance such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke,
toxic matter, heat, odor, glare, etc.
3)Mobile home parks located adjacent to an arterial street or located adjacent to
industrial or commercial properties shall provide a planting screen at least fifteen
(15) feet wide or approved fencing shall be provided along the abutting side
separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential uses.
g. Mobile Home Lots
1)All lots shall abut a park street.
2)The lot upon which the mobile home is located shall conform with the minimum lot
size requirements contained in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
3)The lot or parcel shall be seeded and landscaped.
h. Erection and Placement of Mobile Homes
1)The mobile home shall be located in conformance with all front, side and rear
setback requirements as contained in the Township Zoning Ordinance.
2)The mobile home shall be placed upon and securely fastened to a concrete or
bituminous pad which shall be built upon a frost-free foundation or footer. In no
instance shall it be placed upon jacks, loose block, etc., or other similar
arrangements.
3)An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around the entire
base of the mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to
inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure.
4)Any garage, utility shed or other similar building or structure shall conform with all
applicable zoning and building code requirements, if such are in existence.
i. Areas for Nonresidential Uses
1)No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes except such uses that
are required for recreation, direct servicing, management or maintenance of the
park and its residents.
2)Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the display and sale
of a mobile home when located on an approved mobile home lot in compliance
with s.706 and connected to utilities.
VIIA-2
?
j. Street System - All streets within mobile home parks whether offered for public
dedication or not shall conform to the following standards:
1)General Requirements - A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided
from abutting public streets and roads.
2)Location Principles - The streets or roads in a mobile home park shall be located and
built with regard to:
- Providing trafficways for convenient access to each mobile home lot and other
important facilities in the park.
- Designed to recognize existing easements which are to be preserved.
- Permit connection to existing facilities where necessary for the proper
functioning of drainage and utility easements.
3)Circulation - The street system should provide convenient circulation by means of
minor street and properly located collector streets.
Minor streets shall be so located that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
Where a mobile home park abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Township may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage or such
other treatment as may be necessary to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
4)Pavement Width - The entrance road connecting the park with a public street or road
shall have a minimum pavement of thirty-six (36) feet.
Other internal streets shall be as follows:
- For collector streets a minimum width of thirty-six (36) feet will be required.
- For minor streets a minimum pavement width of twenty-eight (28) feet will be
required.
- Dead end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a paved turnaround
having an outside diameter of at least eighty (80) feet.
5)Right-of-way - Streets shall provide minimum right-of-way widths as follows:
- Collector Street - sixty (60) feet.
- Minor Street - fifty (50) feet.
VIIA-3
?
6)Alignment and Grades - Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have
suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface and
groundwater drainage, and proper functioning of sanitary and storm sewer
systems.
Centerline grades shall not be less than one-half of one percent (0.5%).
Centerline grades shall not exceed the following:
- Collector Streets - seven percent (7%)
- Minor Streets - twelve percent (12%)
Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection exceeds seven
percent (7%), a leveling area of at least fifty (50) feet shall be provided having
not greater than four percent (4%) grades.
7)Intersections - Street intersections shall generally be at right angles. No street shall
intersect another at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be prohibited.
Streets entering opposite side of another street shall be laid out either directly
opposite one another or with a minimum offset of one hundred fifty (150) feet
between their centerlines.
Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be as follows:
Intersection Pavement Edge
Collection with Public Road 30 feet
Collector with Collector 30 feet
Collector with Minor 25 feet
Minor with Minor 20 feet
8)Street Surfacing - Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on
plans, profiles, and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by
the Township. Before paving the street surface, the subdivider must install
required utilities and provide, where necessary, adequate subsurface drainage for
the streets, as acceptable to the Township. The pavement base and wearing
surface must be constructed in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 804 of this Ordinance.
The Township shall decide if a collector or arterial street is required as a direct
result of the construction of his subdivision in which case the subdivider is
responsible for paving the additional width required.
VIIA-4
?
k. Blocks - The size and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to:
- Zoning requirements as to lot size.
- Need for convenient access, automotive and pedestrian movement.
- Providing desirable lot depths for interior walkways and easements for utilities to
be located within the block.
Blocks shall not exceed a maximum length of 1600 feet.
l. Street Lights - Street lights shall be provided to illuminate streets, driveways, and
walkways for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Their type and
location shall be shown on the plan.
m. Off-street Park Areas - A paved off-street parking space for one (1) automobile vehicle
shall be provided for each mobile home lot. Required car parking spaces shall be so
located as to provide convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve.
n. Walks
1)All mobile home parks where the typical mobile home lot width at the building
setback line is less than eighty (80) feet, shall be provided with common
pedestrian walls on both sides of the street. Such walks shall be at least four (4)
feet in width and shall commence at least four (4) feet outside of the curb line.
2)All mobile home lots shall be connected to common pedestrian walks with an
individual walk at least two (2) feet in width.
o. Curbs - Curbs shall be installed along both sides of all streets. The Township
Supervisors shall have the option of waiving curbs in areas where the lot frontage
exceeds eighty (80) feet. Curbs shall be concrete and either the vertical type or the
rolled curb-and-gutter type. The transition from one type of curb to another shall be
made only at a street intersection, and adequate provisions shall be made for driveway
entrances.
p. Recreation Areas
1)In all mobile home parks, a recreation area or areas, with suitable facilities shall be
maintained within the park for the use of all park residents.
2)Land required for such recreation areas shall not be less than ten (10) percent of the
gross site area. Such should generally be provided in a centralized location, or
decentralized in larger mobile home parks.
VIIA-5
?
q. Water Supply - An adequate supply of safe water of satisfactory quality under adequate
pressure shall be provided in all parks to all mobile homes, service buildings and other
accessory facilities. Such system shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
r. Sewage Disposal - An adequate and safe community sanitary sewerage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile homes,
service buildings and other accessory facilities. The developer shall provide a system
of sanitary sewer mains and shall provide lateral connections to each mobile home lot.
Such sewerage disposal system including treatment plant shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. The treatment plant shall
provide for sanitary treatment.
s. Storm Drainage
1)General Requirements - Adequate storm sewers, culverts, and related facilities must
be provided, as necessary, to:
- Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
- Ensure the drainage of all low points and swampy areas within the mobile home
park.
- Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals, reasonably related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
- Provide adequate drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities.
Storm drainage facilities must be designed to handle the anticipated peak
discharge from the property being subdivided on the basis of a one hundred (100)
year storm.
2)Lot Drainage - Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from new and existing buildings.
3)Nearby Existing Facilities - Where adequate existing storm sewers are readily
accessible, the subdivider must connect his storm water facilities to these existing
sewers.
4)Open Drainageways - When open drainageways are used for disposal of storm water,
the Township shall review the design of such open drainageways in relation to the
following:
- Safety: Steep banks and deep pools shall be avoided.
- Erosion: Adequate measures shall be taken, such as seeding, sodding, paving,
or other measures as necessary to prevent the erosion of banks and the scouring
of the channel bottom.
VIIA-6
?
- Stagnation: Design of open drainageways shall not create stagnate pools or
swampy areas.
5)Abutting Properties - In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration
must be given to excessive runoff to adjacent developed or undeveloped property.
In no case may a change be made in the existing topography which would:
- Result in a slope of more than ten (10) percent within twenty (20) feet of a
property line.
- Alter the existing drainage or topography in any way so as to adversely affect
adjoining property.
In no case may any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material
involved. All slopes must be protected against erosion.
6)Drainage Upon and On Streets - In order to give proper surface water drainage upon
streets, a structure on a lot must be at a grade in satisfactory relationship:
- With the established street grade, or
- With the existing street grade where none is established.
A street must be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from
its right-of-way. The slope of the crown on a street may not be less than 1/8 of an
inch per foot and not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot. Adequate facilities must
be provided at low points along a street and at other points at which it is
necessary to intercept runoff.
7)Storm Water Management - Storm water runoff from any given area to be developed
shall be computed in accordance with Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed,
Technical Release No. 555, prepared by the United States Department of
Agriculture, January, 1975, or as may otherwise be acceptable to the Township.
The design concept where runoff may affect downstream properties should be as
follows:
- The release rate from storms up to ten (10) years in recurrence frequency shall
be limited to the predevelopment flow rate from a two (2) year storm.
- The release rate from storms from up to one hundred (100) years in recurrence
frequency shall be limited to the predevelopment flow rate from a ten (10) year
storm.
- Retention facilities shall be designed to retain the differences and flow rates per
above.
- The emergency spillways from such facilities shall be designed based on a one
hundred (100) year storm. The applicant must make adequate provision for the
?
perpetual maintenance of all storm water management facilities proposed by the
plan.
8)Storm Drainage Facilities - Whenever the evidence available to the Board of
Supervisors indicates that natural surface drainage is inadequate to meet the
requirements of Section 712 of this Ordinance, the subdivider or land developer
shall install a storm water drainage system in accordance with plans and profiles
designed to meet the requirements of Section 712 of this Ordinance and which
meets the approval of the Township Engineer. In addition, drainage structures for
areas of more than one-half mile square shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. All installation shall be
in accordance with approved plans and profiles, with the requirements of this
Ordinance, and shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
9)Storm Water Detention Basins - Whenever the evidence available to the Township
indicates that a storm water detention basin is necessary to control the rate of
storm water runoff from the site, the subdivider or land developer shall install a
detention basin in accordance with approved design, calculations, plans and
profiles. Design and construction of detention basins shall meet the requirements
of U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, "Engineering Field
Manual," Agriculture Handbook No. 387 "Ponds," and Technical Release No. 55,
"Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," and be designed on the basis of a one
hundred (100) year storm.
The subdivider shall provide for continuing maintenance of such storm water
detention basin by the owners of the land on which the same is located and shall
further provide for an easement enabling the Township to perform emergency
maintenance in the event the property owner should fail to do so and shall
establish a procedure whereby the Township shall be able to assess the cost of
such emergency maintenance upon the owner of the land where the detention
basin is located by the filing of a municipal lien.
Where the subdivision or land development proposing the storm water detention
basin proposes residential development, the slopes on such detention basin may
not exceed 2-1/2 to 1.
The subdivider or land developer shall provide for continuing maintenance of
such storm water detention basin by the owners of the land on which the same is
located and shall further provide for an easement enabling the Township to
perform emergency maintenance in the event the property owners should fail to
do so and shall establish a procedure whereby the Township shall be able to
assess the cost of such emergency maintenance upon the owner of the land where
the detention basin is located by the filing of a municipal lien.
10)Where the Storm Water Management plan provides for roof drain and/or driveway
drain infiltration facilities, these must be protected by filter fabric and in the case
of roof drain facilities, provide for sediment filtering at the roof and for a clean
out at ground level.
VIIA-8
?
t. Utility Systems - Electric, telephone and other utility facilities shall be provided as
necessary within the mobile home park. Such utilities shall be installed underground
and maintained in accordance with the local utility company's specifications regulating
such systems.
u. Service Building and Other Community Service Facilities
1)Every mobile home park shall have a structure clearly designated as the office of the
mobile home park manager.
2)Service and accessory buildings located in a mobile home park shall be used only by
the residents of the mobile home park.
VIIA-9
?
ARTICLE VIII
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 801 SUBDIVIDER'S RESPONSIBILITY
The subdivider shall complete (or furnish a proper completion guarantee for) such of the
improvements as the Supervisors may require in the public interest, as heretofore stated in
Articles IV and V.
SECTION 802 COVERAGE OF SPECIFICATIONS
The following specifications cover only the improvements which will be required in most
subdivisions; specifications for improvements not contained herein will be furnished by
the Township as required. Before construction of any public improvements is undertaken,
sufficient notice shall be given to the Township Engineer to enable him to check
the work.
SECTION 803 STREET GRADING
All streets shall be graded to:
a. The grades shown on the street profile plan provided by the subdivider and approved
by the Township Engineer.
b. In cross-section, to the full width of the right-of-way, providing for a properly
crowned cartway, and where no sidewalks are required, a slope of not more than five
(5) horizontal, to one (1) vertical, starting at the gutter line and running to the property
line.
c. A slope of not more than three (3) horizontal, to one (1) vertical beyond the
right-of-way line.
d. On streets in excessive cut or fill, or on steep side hill locations, these grading
specifications may be altered.
SECTION 804 CARTWAY PAVING
Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans, profiles, and crosssections
submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Township. Before paving the
street surface, the subdivider must install required utilities and provide, where necessary
adequate subsurface drainage for the streets, as acceptable to the Township. The pavement
base shall be at least eight (8) inches in depth after compaction with a roller of not less than
ten (10) tons in weight. The base course material shall be of PA
VIII-1
?
DOT No. 2A Form material or in lieu thereof, such other stone base material as may be
approved by the Township Engineer. The surface course shall consist of four and one-half
(4-1/2) inches of compacted ID-2 bituminous paving material installed as a three (3) inch
compacted binder course and a one and one-half (1-1/2) inch compacted wearing course.
In all other respects, the construction of all streets shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, 1967, Form 409/76 as amended
or supplemented.
The Township shall decide if a collector or arterial street is required as a direct result of the
construction of the development, in which case the developer is responsible for paving the
additional width required.
In all respects in which standards for required improvements are not set forth herein or
specified by the Township, the applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation shall govern, and all works shall be performed in the manner
prescribed in the standard specifications for road construction of said department for the
type of construction under consideration.
SECTION 805 CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
a. Curbs - Curbs are required in accordance with the requirements of section 707 of this
Ordinance. Curbs shall be the vertical or slant type curb. All curbs must be placed over
compacted earth and must be constructed of Class A (3,000 psi) concrete. Vertical
curbs shall be eighteen (18) inches in depth with ten (10) inches below the road
surface. Slant type curbs shall be sixteen (16) inches in depth at the high side and
twelve (12) inches in depth at the low side with eleven (11) inches below the road
surface. Vertical curbs shall be eight (8) inches thick. Slant type curbs shall be fourteen
(14) inches thick. Contraction joints shall be spaced in uniform lengths or sections at a
minimum of four (4) feet and a maximum of twenty (20) feet apart and be threesixteenth
(3/16) inches wide and two (2) inches deep. Three-quarter (3/4) inch
premolded expansion joint filler material shall be placed at structures such as inlets,
manholes and head walls and at the end of the work day. Backfill shall be installed and
compacted to the top of the curb elevation on the back side of all curbs so that curbs do
not act as unsupported retaining walls for streets. The construction and installation of
curbs shall in all other respects conform to the requirements set forth in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, most current edition.
b. Gutters - In areas where curbing is not used, suitable gutters must be installed to avoid
erosion. The Township may require installation of curbs and/or gutters in any subdivision
where the evidence indicates that such improvements are necessary for proper drainage.
The design and construction of all gutters must be approved by the Township Engineer
c. Sidewalks - Sidewalks are required in accordance with the requirements of Section 708 of
this Ordinance. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Class A (3,000 psi) concrete at least five
(5) inches thick (six (6) inches thick at residential driveway crossings and eight (8) inches
thick at commercial driveway crossings), and shall be underlaid by a compacted crushed
stone base at least four (4) inches in thickness. Contraction joints shall be placed every five
VIII-2
?
(5) feet, be three-sixteenth (3/16) inches wide, and one (1) inch deep. The construction and
installation of sidewalks shall in all other respects conform to the requirements set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, most current
edition. Added 12/7/09
SECTION 806 STORM AND SURFACE DRAINAGE
a. Storm Drainage Facilities - Whenever the evidence available to the Board of
Supervisors indicates that natural surface drainage is inadequate to meet the
requirements of Section 712 of this Ordinance, the subdivider or land developer shall
install a storm water drainage system in accordance with plans and profiles designed to
meet the requirements of Section 712 of this Ordinance and which meet the approval of
the Township Engineer. In addition, drainage structures for areas of more than
one-half mile square shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. All installation shall be in accordance with approved plans
and profiles, with the requirements of this Ordinance and shall be approved by the
Township Engineer.
b. Storm Water Detention Basins - Whenever the evidence available to the Township
indicates that a storm water detention basin is necessary to control the rate of storm
water runoff from the site, the subdivider or land developer shall install a detention
basin in accordance with approved design, calculations, plans and profiles. Design and
construction of detention basins shall meet the requirements of U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, "Engineering Field Manual," Agriculture
Handbook No. 387 "Ponds," and Technical Release No. 55, "Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds," and be designed on the basis of a one hundred (100) year storm.
VIII-3
The subdivider shall provide for continuing maintenance of such storm water detention
basin by the owners of the land on which the same is located and shall further provide
for an easement enabling the Township to perform emergency maintenance in the event
the property owner should fail to do so and shall establish a procedure whereby the
Township shall be able to assess the cost of such emergency maintenance upon the
owner of the land where the detention basin is located by the filing of a municipal lien.
Where the subdivision or land development proposing the storm water detention basin
proposes residential development, the slopes on such detention basin may not exceed
2-1/2 to 1.
The subdivider or land developer shall provide for continuing maintenance of such
storm water detention basin by the owners of the land on which the same is located and
shall further provide for an easement enabling the Township to perform emergency
maintenance in the event the property owners should fail to do so and shall establish a
procedure whereby the Township shall be able to assess the cost of such emergency
maintenance upon the owner of the land where the detention basin is located by the
filing of a municipal lien.
VIII-3
?
c. Where the Storm Water Management Plan provides for roof drain and/or driveway
drain infiltration facilities, these must be protected by filter fabric and in the case of
roof drain facilities, provide for sediment filtering at the roof and for a clean out at
ground level.
SECTION 807 MONUMENTS
Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete or a durable stone, at least five (5)
inches wide at top and seven (7) inches wide at bottom, and at least thirty-six (36) inches
in depth, set flush with the finished grade, shall be set at such points as will be designated
by the Township Engineer, and the location and elevation of each monument shall be
shown on the Final Plan, and survey work involved in the placement of these monuments
shall be carried out with an accuracy of not less than 1 in 10,000.
SECTION 808 WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWERS
a. Water Supply - Based upon the results of the feasibility report, the subdivision must be
provided with water supply facilities as follows:
-Where there is an existing public water supply system on or near the subdivision, a
complete water main supply system connected to the existing public water supply
system, or
-Where there is no existing public water supply system on or near the subdivision, a
community water supply system approved by the engineer of the water utility
company holding a franchise covering the land to be subdivided and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, with satisfactory
provision of its maintenance, or
-Where there is no existing public water supply and the feasibility report indicates that
a community water supply system is not feasible, each lot in the subdivision must
be provided with an individual water supply system in accordance with minimum
standards approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
-All water supply systems or portions thereof located in any of the areas identified as
being subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood Insurance Study
prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance Administration in
March, 1981, whether public or private, shall be flood-proofed up to the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation.
b. Sanitary Sewers - Based upon the results of the Feasibility Report required the
subdivision must be provided with sanitary sewage disposal facilities as follows:
-Where there is an existing public sanitary sewer system on or near the subdivision, a
complete sanitary sewage collection system must be installed and connected to
the existing public sanitary sewer system, or
?
-Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system, but a public sanitary sewer
system is to be installed on or near the subdivision within a reasonable time as
determined by the Township Supervisors, a complete sanitary sewage collection
system must be installed and
-- Connected to a community treatment plant, until connection to a public sanitary
sewer system is made, or
-- Capped, and on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems provided.
-Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system, a community sanitary sewer
system and treatment plant approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, must be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Sanitary Water Board, with satisfactory provision for its
maintenance, or
-Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system and the Feasibility Report
indicates that a community sanitary sewer system and treatment plant is not
feasible, on-site subsurface disposal systems must be installed.
If on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems are feasible, they must be laid out in
accordance with minimum standards of the Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537) of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. The Township and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources must inspect and approve each
on-site sewage disposal system.
If on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems are not feasible, connection to a public
sanitary sewer system or installation of a community sanitary sewer system must be
made prior to development of the subdivision.
All sanitary sewer systems located in any of the areas identified as being subject to the
one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood Insurance Study prepared for Peach Bottom
Township by the Federal Insurance Administration in March, 1981, whether public or
private shall be flood proofed up to the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
No installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems shall
occur where such system will not function due to high groundwater, flooding, or
unsuitable soil characteristics or where such systems are proposed for location in any
of the areas identified as being subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance
Administration in March, 1981.
SECTION 809 STREET LIGHTS
For the safety, convenience, and attractiveness of the subdivision land development, the
subdivider or land developer may be required by the Board of Supervisors to install street
VIII-5
?
lights. Street lights shall be required in a subdivision or land development if the
subdivision or land development is of a tract (for purposes of this section "Tract" shall
have meaning given to it by Section 501 of the Peach Bottom Township Zoning
Ordinance) which will after the subdivision or land development contain ten or more
dwelling units. For this purpose subdivision shall include all dwellings located on the tract
as it existed June 15, 1964 (the Board of Supervisors may require the installation of either
public street lights or private-owner maintained street lights. If public street lights are
required they shall be spaced no more than three-hundred (300) feet apart or as
recommended for residential subdivisions by the lighting manufacturer of the lights to be
used and shall be designed so as not to create unreasonable glare.
If private-owner maintained street lights are to be installed they must utilize 50-Watt high
sodium post lights and be equipped with an electric eye and the subdivider or land
developer must make adequate provision to insure the perpetual maintenance of such
private-owner maintained street lights and to insure that the 50-Watt high pressure sodium
post lights continued to be used and that the electric eye is not modified or adjusted by the
owners so as to preclude the light from functioning as designed. The design and plan for
street lighting shall be submitted by the subdivider or land developer and must be approved
by the Township Board of Supervisors.
SECTION 810 STREET NAME SIGNS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS
Must be placed at all intersections. Such signs must be provided by the subdivider or land
developer with the design being approved by the Township.
SECTION 811 STREET TREES
For the safety, convenience, and attractiveness of the subdivision street trees may be
required. They should be:
- Of a minimum diameter of 1 1/2 inches and of a minimum height of 6 feet.
- Planted between the sidewalk and building line at least five (5) feet from the sidewalk,
or where the planting strip is six (6) or more feet wide, between the curb and sidewalk,
or on the centerline of median dividers.
- Uniformly spaced not less than fifty (50) feet nor more than seventy (70) feet apart.
- Varieties acceptable to the Township.
?
VIII-6
?
ARTICLE IX
ADOPTION AND DEDICATION
SECTION 901 ADOPTION
To secure adoption by Peach Bottom Township of streets and alleys, laid out and built in
conformance with these regulations, a developer shall submit to the Township Engineer in
writing a request that such streets as he may designate shall be adopted, together with a
plan showing the exact length of streets to be adopted, a profile showing the centerline
finished grade of the street as built, and curb grades and a cross-section showing the
graded and paved width, and the paving construction. If the streets built are in
conformance with these regulations, and all requirements herein have been met, the
Township Supervisors may adopt such streets by ordinance resolution, notifying the
developer of their action, and cancelling the performance bond filed for their construction.
SECTION 902 DEDICATION
Where a proposed park, playground, open space, or other local or neighborhood recreation
site is shown on a comprehensive plan or where the Township considers that a local
recreation site is necessary to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance, the Township may
require the dedication of all or a portion of such site in accordance with the standards
following:
a. The land to be dedicated must be of suitable size, dimensions, topography, access, and
general character for the proposed use.
b. The amount of land so required for this purpose must not exceed 0.05 acres of land for
each lot on the Final Plan.
c. In the case of an apartment development, however, the number of dwelling units shall
be used to determine the required acreage instead of lots.
SECTION 903 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF DEDICATION
Where the application of the area standards stated in the previous section would result in
an open space or recreation site too small to be reasonably usable, or if the
Comprehensive Plan calls for such local recreation site to be located elsewhere, or if a
suitable local recreation site cannot be properly located in the land development as
determined by the Township, a payment of a fee in the amount of one thousand, five
hundred ($1,500.00) dollars per proposed dwelling unit or residential lot in lieu of
dedication of such land is required. The following procedures must be followed:
IX-1
?
a. The fee must be paid to the Township prior to the approval of the Final Plan.
b. All moneys paid to the Township in this manner must be kept in a capital reserve fund
established as provided by law. Moneys in such capital reserve fund shall be used only
for the purpose of providing, acquiring, operating or maintaining park or recreational
facilities reasonably accessible to the development. Amended 6/3/15
SECTION 904 DRAINAGEWAYS
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, stream, channel or other drainageway,
the subdivider must provide a drainage easement conforming substantially to the existing
alignment of the drainageway. The easement must be a width adequate to:
- Preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage.
- Widen, deepen, relocate, improve, or protect the drainageway.
- Install a storm water sewer.
Any changes in the existing drainageway must be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
SECTION 905 EFFECT OF PLAN RECORDING ON DEDICATION AND
RESERVATIONS
Recording the Final Plan after approval of the Board of Supervisors has the effect of an
irrevocable offer to:
- Dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use.
- Dedicate all neighborhood parks and other public areas to public use.
- Reserve for possible future public acquisition such additional areas as may be required
by the Township.
IX-2
?
ARTICLE X
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1001 MODIFICATIONS
These provisions shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the
public welfare and the Board of Supervisors reserves the right to modify or to extend them
as may be necessary in the public interest. However, waivers or variations of the
requirements outlined herein may be permitted by the Board on application when in its
judgment, special factors warrant, and when such waivers and variations are not
detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare.
In particular, the Board may waive requirements relevant to a lot being approved as a site
for a principal use, such as a dwelling, if the lot is proposed to be added to and merged
with another lot which either contains a dwelling or other use served by water under
pressure or has been approved for such use, provided the subdivider, the owners of the
property with which the lot is proposed to be merged, and all persons or entities having a
lien on such property, enter into a recordable agreement with the township insuring the
effective merger of the proposed lot and the property with which it is proposed to be
merged. Added 4/7/2007
In particular, the Board may waive the requirements of Sections 703, 502, 503, 602,
501(c), (e), (i), (j), (l), (m) and (n) and Section 601(c),(g), (j), and (k) relevant to a lot being
approved as a site for a dwelling or other principal use, if the lot is proposed to be added to
and merged with another lot which either contains a dwelling or other use served by water
under pressure or has been approved for such use, provided the subdivider, the owners of
the property with which the lot is proposed to be merged, and all persons or entities having
a lien on such property, enter into a recordable agreement with the Township insuring the
effective merger of the proposed lot and the property with which it is proposed to be
merged.” Amended 4/7/08
SECTION 1002 VALIDITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable, and if any of its
provisions shall be held to be invalid or otherwise void for any reason, such decision shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions hereof.
SECTION 1003 FEES????RESOLUTION ADOPTED ANNUALLY – Check with Township
At the time of filling a preliminary of final plan, the subdivider or land developer shall pay
to the Township such fees as may be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
X-1
?
No final plan shall be approved until all fees and charges required by such resolution have
been paid in full; and until any and all unpaid fees incurred in connection with previously
submitted subdivision or land development plans for any land included within the
proposed subdivision or land development, whether or not such plans were submitted by
the present owner of such land, have been paid in full. ?
SECTION 1004 PENALTIES
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which being the owner or agent of any lot,
tract or parcel of land shall lay out, construct, open and dedicate any street, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main or other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who sells, transfers or
agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a subdivision or land development
whether by reference to or by use of a plan of such subdivision or land development or
otherwise, or erect any building thereon, unless and until a final plan has been prepared in
full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and has been recorded as provided
herein or who in any other way be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall upon being found liable therefore in a civil proceeding commenced by the Township,
pay a judgment of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or
corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain appropriate actions
by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations of this Ordinance, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or
transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
The Township may further refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to
further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has
resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this Ordinance. The authority
to deny such permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
?
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of the
violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual constructive knowledge of the violation.
As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to
any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real
property, the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
SECTION 1005 REPEALER
All current ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance or inconsistent with the provision of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect
SECTION 1006 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall become effective on
December 1, 1969, and remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Board
of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, York County, Pennsylvania.
/s/ A. Clyde Aubel /s/ Robert C. Ruff /s/ Albert Steele
Including amendments approved, adopted, and enacted into an Ordinance the 6th day of
July, 1972; the 5th day of January, 1976; the 4th day of September, 1979; the 3rd day of
December, 1979; the 8th day of September, 1981; the 6th day of June, 1983; the 7th day of
April, 1986; the 5th day of July, 1988; the 11th day of September, 1989 and the 2nd day of
April, 1990.
By: S. David Stewart
President
Attest:
J. Rush Baldwin Board of Supervisors of Secretary Peach Bottom Township
Updated to January 1, 2018 to the best of my knowledge – Catherine M. Bilger, Secretary
?
?
?
X-3
?
Peach Bottom Township Sewage Management Ordinance
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, York
County, Pennsylvania on the 2nd day of October, 2006.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION I. DEFINITIONS
A. Dwelling Lot - A lot, tract, or parcel of land containing one or more dwelling units or
commercial or industrial structures.
B. Dwelling Unit - A building or structure containing one or more rooms arranged for the use of
one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
C. Commercial or Industrial Structure - A structure designed for use as a place from which to
manufacture, fabricate, work with, store or sell any items.
D. Owner of Real Estate –
(1) The owner, either individually or in combination with others, of any interest in real
estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by
a specific number of years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
(2) The owner, either individually or in combination with others, of any interest in real
estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by reason of the length of the term of
the grant of a right to extend the term by renewable or otherwise, consists of a group of rights
approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold, including
without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy for a
term of thirty (30) days or more or a leasehold interest of possessory interest in real estate in
which the lessee has equity; or
(3) The owner, either individually or in combination with others of any interest in real
estate which, upon satisfaction of obligations contained in a certain agreement, will entitle the
purchaser to obtain an interest in the real estate described in subparagraphs (1) or (2) above,
provided possession is or is to be transferred to such agreement and prior to the completion of
the obligations set forth in such agreement.
E. On-Site Sewage Disposal System - Any system of sewage disposal other than a public sewer
system.
F. Malfunction - The condition which occurs when an on-site sewage disposal system discharges
sewage onto the surface of the ground, into ground waters of the Commonwealth, into surface
waters of the Commonwealth, backs up into the building connected to the system or otherwise
causes a nuisance hazard to the public health or pollution of the ground or surface water or
contamination of public or private drinking water wells. It shall also be a malfunction if any of
the approved parts or components of the system are not present or are not functioning as
designed. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the conditions noted above
occur for any length of time during any period of the year.
SECTION II. INTENT OF ORDINANCE
It is the intent of this ordinance that no on-site sewage disposal system within Peach Bottom
Township be permitted to malfunction. It is the further intent of this ordinance that to ensure the
accomplishment of the aforesaid that each on-site sewage disposal system be pumped and
inspected by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer at least once every five (5) years and
more frequently at the discretion of the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, and that all
malfunctions found during such inspections be promptly repaired.
SECTION III. DUTIES OF OWNER
Each owner of a dwelling lot, dwelling unit or commercial or industrial structure or other
structure whose sewage needs are provided by an on-site sewage disposal system shall within
thirty (30) days next following the sending of notice of an intent to inspect by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer make arrangements with the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer for the inspection of the on-site sewage disposal system located on such owner's
property. Prior to the scheduling of such inspection the owner must extend to surface grade the
manhole of any septic tank and must cause any cesspool or dry well to be accessible for
inspection. A notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been sent if it is deposited in the
U.S. mail addressed to the owner of any interest in the property served by the on-site sewage
disposal system and is sent to the address of such owner as set forth in the records utilized for the
assessment of real estate taxes. At the time of the scheduled inspection the owner shall cause the
on-site sewage disposal system to be pumped so that it may be inspected by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer. It shall be a violation of this ordinance if any owner given notice
as above provided, fails to contact the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer and arrange for
inspection of the sewage disposal system within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice,
and it shall be a further violation if the owner fails to cause the on-site sewage disposal system to
be pumped and available for inspection at the date of the scheduled inspection.
In the event the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer finds during the inspection that
the on-site sewage disposal system is malfunctioning, the owner shall follow the steps required
by Section 2 of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance to repair the system;
provided, however, unless the system is malfunctioning to the surface of the ground, the owner
shall not be required to replace the tank, the cesspool, the drainfield, or the sand mound system.
SECTION IV. DUTIES OF INDIVIDUAL FIRM OR CORPORATION
REMOVING CONTENTS FROM AN ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
Any individual, firm or corporation which removes contents from an on-site sewage disposal
system shall forward to the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer a copy of the York County
Solid Waste and Refuse Authority Septage Manifest (hereinafter "manifest") within thirty (30)
days following each time such individual, firm or corporation removes contents from an on-site
sewage disposal system. Such individual, firm or corporation shall at the time of forwarding the
manifest to the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer inform the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer whether any malfunctions were observed during the removal process.
SECTION V. FEES
The owner of any dwelling lot, dwelling unit or commercial or industrial structure whose sewage
needs are provided by an on-site sewage disposal system, which system is required to be
inspected pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall, prior to such inspection, pay to
Peach Bottom Township an inspection fee in an amount established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
SECTION VI. PENALTIES
Any individual, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each and every violation. Each day following the thirty (30) day period provided in Section III
hereof without the owner making arrangements for inspection with the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and each day following a
scheduled date of inspection when the on-site sewage disposal system was not pumped and
available for inspection as required by this Ordinance, until arrangements have been made for an
alternate inspection day and such inspection occurs, shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense and each day that any individual, firm or corporation removing contents from an on-site
sewage disposal system fails to provide the information required by Section IV to the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION VII. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Peach Bottom Township Sewage Management
Ordinance". ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania on the 2nd day of October, 2006.
Amended March 4, 2013
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION OR
EXPANSION OF ALL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS WITHIN THE LIMITS OF
PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP; AUTHORIZING THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS;
PROVIDING FOR PERMIT FEES; AND PROVIDING FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township;
York County Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION 1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation to
erect, construct, install, alter or extend any sewage system of any kind within the limits of Peach
Bottom Township or to have present on his property in Peach Bottom Township any sewage
disposal system of any kind which has been erected, constructed, installed, altered or extended
after January 1, 1971, without a permit having been issued pursuant to this ordinance permitting
such erection, construction, installation, alteration or extension and unless all of the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the regulations issued pursuant thereto respecting the
erection, construction, installation, alteration, extension, operation and maintenance of the
sewage disposal system have been complied with, excepting that no permit shall be required for
the alteration or repair of an individual on-lot sewage system if:
(a) The system being altered or repaired existed on January 10, 1987; and
(b) The system serves a residential structure occupied by not more than two (2) families, one
of which is the owner of the property; and
(c) The property on which the system is located is at least 10 acres in size; and
(d) The owner of the property at the time of the alteration or repair is the same owner as on
January 10, 1987
SECTION 2. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
maintain or use any sewage disposal system of any kind so that vectors (insects and rodents
capable of carrying disease) may have access to the excrementitious matter contained thereon or
so that such sewage disposal directly or indirectly drains or discharges over or upon the surface
of the ground or into any waters of the Township or to maintain or use any sewage system unless
all approved parts and components of such system are present and functioning as designed. It
shall also be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to fail to comply with the
requirements set forth in subparagraphs (a) and/or (b) of this paragraph.
(a) In the event any sewage disposal system be in violation of this section of this ordinance,
the owner of such system shall within two (2) days of the occurrence of such violation
apply to the Sewage Enforcement Officer for a permit to repair or replace such system
unless pursuant to Section 1 of this ordinance a permit for the required repair or alteration
is not required, in which case the owner shall within ten (10) days repair the system, and
within ten (10) days of being requested to do so, shall make such tests as the Sewage
Enforcement Officer deems necessary to enable the Sewage Enforcement Officer to
determine whether the sewage disposal system can be repaired and if so, how it can be
repaired or if it cannot be repaired whether it can be replaced and if so, how it can be
replaced. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall investigate the conditions and evaluate
the tests made by the owner, and if the Sewage Enforcement Officer determines the
system can be repaired, or alternatively be replaced, the Sewage Enforcement Officer
shall issue a permit authorizing such repair or replacement and shall set forth on the
permit or on an attachment thereto, the steps that the owner is to take to effect the repair
and/or replacement of the system.
(b) The owner shall within ten (10) days of the issuance of such permit, complete the repair
and/or replacement of the sewage disposal system in accordance with the requirements
set forth on the permit or on the attachment thereto unless the Sewage Enforcement
Officer grants an extension of time in writing, in which event the repair and/or
replacement shall be completed within the extended time. No work shall be covered until
inspected by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 3. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
occupy a building or structure or permit a building or structure to be occupied as a dwelling
unless such building or structure is served by a sewage disposal system which is in compliance
with all of the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the regulations issued
pursuant thereto.
SECTION 4. Any person, firm, association or corporation owning a structure, the
sewage needs of which are served by an on-site sewage disposal system, shall insure that within
thirty (30) days following the pumping of any septic tank, the person, firm, association or
corporation performing the pumping forwards to the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer a
copy of the York County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority Septage Manifest and at the same
time informs the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer whether any violations of Section 2 of
this ordinance are observed during the pumping process.
SECTION 5. All application for permits shall be made to the Township Secretary, who
shall refer such applications to the permit office or enforcement official designated by the Board
of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, who shall evaluate the application’s soil conditions to
insure compliance with the “Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act”’ the regulations issued
pursuant thereto and with this ordinance. The applicant shall dig such holes as may be required
by the Sewage Enforcement Officer in order to conduct percolation tests and evaluate soil
conditions. All percolation test and/or probe hole evaluations shall be performed by Peach
bottom Township Sewage Enforcement Officer or someone specifically approved by him.
SECTION 6. Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the
applicant, and shall be on the standard form adopted by or prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or by Peach Bottom Township. Any system for
which a permit is granted shall be completed within three (3) years of the date of the granting of
the permit.
SECTION 7. The fees to be paid at the time of application shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
No fee shall be refunded to the applicant in the event a permit is not granted or in the event the
evaluation of the percolation tests and/or analyses of probe hole causes the permit officer to
reject the lot as a site for an on-site sewage disposal system. All tests required by any
application not performed by the Township Sewage Permit Officer shall be performed by the
applicant at his own expense in a manner satisfactory to the Township Sewage Permit Officer.
In the event a check paying any of the fees imposed by this section is dishonored, any permit or
approval issued, the fees for which were in whole or in part covered by such check, shall be void
and shall not be reinstated until the Township has received payment of all sums represented by
such dishonored check in full, plus an additional administrative charge in an amount established
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
SECTION 9. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate be subject
to a penalty in the amount of One Thousand Dollars ( $1,000.00 ) for each and every offense.
Each and every day that a violation of any provisions of this ordinance continues shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION 10. No person, firm, association, corporation which has been in violation of
any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall subsequently be issued a permit to erect, construct,
alter, or extend any sewage disposal system of any kind until the previous violation has been
cured by the securing of a permit.
For purposes of the interpretation of this section, the person, firm, association, or
corporation applying for a permit, hereinafter referred to as “Applicant” shall be considered the
identical person, firm, association, or corporation as the one on violation, hereafter referred to as
“Violator”, if at least twenty (20%) percent of the ownership equity in both the “Applicant” and
the “Violator” can be attributed to the same person, firm, association or corporation. For
purposes of this section, a person, firm, association, or corporation shall have attributed to him:
(a) All of the equity, stock, or partnership share owned by a corporation in which he and his
spouse own at least fifty (50%) percent of all of the outstanding voting stock.
(b) With respect to a corporation in which he and his spouse own less than fifty (50%)
percent of the outstanding voting stock, the same percentage of the ownership equity,
stock, or partnership share that the voting stock owned by him and his spouse bears to the
entire outstanding voting stock of the corporation.
(c) All of the equity, as tenants in common, joint tenants or tenants by the entireties, owned
by him and his spouse.
(d) All of the equity owned in partnership in which the value of the partnership shares owned
by him and his spouse is a least fifty (50%) percent of the value of all of the partnership
shares.
(e) With respect to a partnership in which the value of the partnership shares owned by him
and his spouse is less than fifty (50%) percent of all the partnership shares, the same
percentage of ownership equity which the value of the partnership shares owned by him
and his spouse to the value of all the partnership shares.
For purposes of this section “he” shall be interpreted to refer to the masculine, the feminine,
and the neuter.
SECTION 11. It shall be the burden of the “Applicant” to prove that the applicant is not
the same person, firm, association, or corporation as the “Violator”
SECTION 12. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phase of this
ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect; and, to this end,
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared severable.
SECTION 13. This ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township Sewage
Permit Ordinance”.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania on the 2nd day of February, 2004.
ATTEST: PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Catherine M. Bilger By: S. David Stewart
Secretary Chairman
Amended 3/4/2013
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE DIGGING OF WELLS IN PEACH BOTTOM
TOWNSHIP; AUTHORIZING THE ISSUING OF PERMITS; PROVIDING FOR
PERMIT FEES; AND PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION I. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to dig
a well or cause to be dug a well on a tract (as defined in the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision
and Land development Ordinance) of land owned by him which is less than five (5) acres in size
unless a permit has be issued pursuant to this ordnance permitting such digging and unless all of
the requirements of this ordinance have been complied with.
SECTION II. All applications for permits shall be made to the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer. Applicant must have on his property a sewage disposal system which is
not in violation of the requirements of Section II of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit
Ordinance, or in the alternative, the applicant must have a permit to install a sewage disposal
system meeting all of the requirements of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit
Ordinance. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall investigate the proposed location of the well
and if the proposed location complies with all of the requirements of this ordinance, he shall
issue a permit permitting such digging, which shall be done at the location proposed.
SECTION III. All wells shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any portion
of any sewage disposal system and shall to the extent possible be located so as to enable adjacent
lots to have a permitted location for a sewage disposal system at least one hundred (100) feet
distance from well.
SECTION IV. The fee to be paid at the time of the application shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
SECTION V. Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this ordinance shall
upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate be subject to a penalty in the amount of six
hundred ($600.00) dollars for each and every offense. Each and every day that a violation of any
provision of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION VI. No person, firm, association or corporation which is in violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance shall subsequently be issued a permit to erect, construct, alter or
place a building on the property where the violation has occurred or be issued an occupancy
permit to occupy such building.
SECTION VII. This ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township Well
Permit Ordinance.”
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania on the 4th day of June, 1990
November 11, 1991
September 13, 1993
September 2, 1997
April 5, 1999
ATTEST: PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
PEACH BOTTOM
TOWNSHIP
ZONING
ORDINANCE
JANUARY 1, 2019
Table of Contents
PART I: SHORT TITLE, PURPOSES, ZONES AND STATEMENT
OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
Ordinance No. 71-1 Page
Section 101 Short Title............................................................................................ I-1
Section 102 Purpose of Ordinance........................................................................... I-1
Section 103 Establishment of Zones........................................................................ I-2
Section 104 Boundaries of Zones........................................................................... I-2
Section 105 Statement of Community Development Objectives............................. I-3
PART II: ZONE REGULATIONS
A. Use Regulations
1. Type and Extent of Uses Permitted.........................................................................II-1
Section 200 Uses Permitted...................................................................................... II-1
Section 200.1 All Other Uses..................................................................................... II-1
Section 200.2 Accessory Uses and Structures............................................................ II-1
Section 200.3_ Uses With Nuisance Effect................................................................. II-1
2. Residential District (R)......................................................................................................II-3
Section 201 Purpose................................................................................................. II-3
Section 201.1 Use Regulations................................................................................... II-3
Section 201.2 Uses by Special Exception................................................................... II-4
Section 201.3 Lot Area and Width............................................................................. II-4
Section 201.4 Building Coverage............................................................................... II-7
Section 201.5 Setbacks.............................................................................................. II-7
Section 201.6 Building Height.................................................................................. II-8
Section 201.7 Extent-of-Use....................................................................................... II-8
Section 201.8_ Utilities................................................................................................ II-8
3. Agricultural District (A).....................................................................................................II-9
Section 202 Purpose................................................................................................. II-9
Section 202.1 Use Regulations................................................................................... II-9
Section 202.2 Uses by Special Exception.................................................................. II-10
Section 202.3 Lot Area and Width.............................................................................. II-11
Section 202.4 Building Coverage................................................................................. II-11
Section 202.5 Setbacks............................................................................................... II-11
Section 202.6 Building Height................................................................................... II-12
Section 202.7 Extent-of-Use...................................................................................... II-12
Section 202.8 Subdivision.......................................................................................... II-12
Section 202.9 Limitations with Respect to Dwellings................................................ II-14
Section 202.10 Burden of Proof................................................................................... II-18
Section 202.11 Soil Classification Review................................................................. II-18
4. Commercial District (C)...................................................................................................II-19
Section 203 Purpose............................................................................................... II-19
Section 203.1 Use Regulations................................................................................... II-19
Section 203.2 Uses by Special Exception.................................................................. II-20
Section 203.3 Lot Area and Width............................................................................ II-21
Section 203.4 Building Coverage............................................................................. II-21
Section 203.5 Setbacks............................................................................................. II-21
Section 203.6 Building Height................................................................................. II-22
Section 203.7 Extent-of-Use.................................................................................... II-22
5. Industrial District (I).......................................................................................................II-23
Section 204 Purpose........................................................................................ II-23
Section 204.1 Use Regulations............................................................................ II-23
Section 204.2 Uses by Special Exception............................................................ II-24
Section 204.2(A) Special Exception for Placing Material in Quarry……………… II-25
Section 204.3 Lot Area and Width...................................................................... II-25
Section 204.4 Building Coverage...................................................................... II-25
Section 204.5 Setbacks........................................................................................ II-26
Section 204.6 Building Height........................................................................... II-26
Section 204.7 Performance Standards................................................................ II-26
Section 204.8 Extent-of-Use.............................................................................. II-28
Section 204.9__ Utilities........................................................................................ II-29
6. Residential District II (RII).............................................................................................II-30
Section 205 Purpose............................................................................................. II-30
Section 205.1 Use Regulations............................................................................... II-30
Section 205.2 Uses by Special Exception............................................................... II-31
Section 205.3 Lot Area and Width.......................................................................... II-31
Section 205.4 Building Coverage........................................................................... II-31
Section 205.5 Setbacks............................................................................................ II-31
Section 205.6 Building Height................................................................................ II-32
Section 205.7 Extent-of-Use.................................................................................... II-32
7. Exceptions and Modifications..........................................................................................II-33
Section 210 Yard Regulations................................................................................. II-33
Section 212 Sight Distance..................................................................................... II-35
Section 213 Setback on Corner Lots....................................................................... II-36
Section 214 Exceptions for Accessory or Appurtenant Structures........................ II-36
Section 215 Minimum Habitable Floor Area.......................................................... II-36
Section 216 Number of Principal Uses on a Lot..................................................... II-37
Section 217 Building Coverage............................................................................... II-37
Section 218 Row Dwelling - Extent of Use Requirement – Deleted………………
Section 219 Multi-family Dwelling – Density – Deleted 3/1/04…………………
Section 220 Sale of Agricultural Products.............................................................. II-37
Section 221_ Screens and Buffers............................................................................. II-37
B. Improvements
1. Parking...............................................................................................................................II-38
Section 230 Size of Parking Space.......................................................................... II-38
Section 231 Off-street Parking Spaces.................................................................... II-38
Section 232 Location.............................................................................................. II-40
Section 233 Layout.................................................................................................. II-40
Section 234 Parking Area Adjacent to Street......................................................... II-40
Section 235 Improvement...................................................................................... II-40
Section 236_ Storm Water Drainage........................................................................ II-41
2. Loading..............................................................................................................................II-41
Section 240 Size; Surfacing.................................................................................... II-41
Section 241 Spaces Required................................................................................. II-41
Section 242_ Layout.................................................................................................. II-42
3. Driveways........................................................................................................................II-42
Section 250 Width.................................................................................................. II-42
Section 251 Number.............................................................................................. II-42
Section 252 Offsets................................................................................................ II-42
Section 253 Sight Distances; Slope, Cuts............................................................. II-42
Section 254_ Driveway Permits............................................................................. II-43
4. Illumination......................................................................................................................II-43
Section 260_ Lighting............................................................................................... II-43
5. Drainage..............................................................................................................................II-45
Section 270 Adequate Drainage Required.............................................................. II-45
Section 271 Building Restricted Adjacent to Drainage Channels and Waterways... II-45
Section 272 Drainage upon Streets.......................................................................... II-45
Section 273 Drainage upon Adjoining Properties; Slopes…………………......... II-45
Section 274 Obstruction to Drainage Prohibited..................................................... II-46
Section 275_ Storm Water Management.................................................................. II-46
Section 276 Maintenance of Storm Water Management Facilities......................... II-47
6. Other Improvements...........................................................................................................II-47
Section 280_ Water Supply....................................................................................... II-47
7. Demolition of Improvements.............................................................................................II-47
Section 285_ Requirements....................................................................................... II-47
C. Nonconformities
1. Nonconforming Buildings and Uses...........................................................................II-48
Section 290 Continuance........................................................................................ II-48
Section 291 Abandonment...................................................................................... II-48
Section 292 Restoration.......................................................................................... II-48
Section 293 Change of Use..................................................................................... II-49
Section 294 Alterations........................................................................................... II-49
Section 295 Construction Approved Prior to Ordinance........................................ II-50
Section 296 Zone Changes..................................................................................... II-50
Section 297_ Additional Requirements..................................................................... II-50
Section 298 Non Conforming Farm II-50
PART III: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR USES
A. Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 300 Attached Structures.............................................................................. III-1
Section 301 Nonattached Structures........................................................................ III-1
Section 302 Fences and Walls................................................................................. III-2
Section 303 Home Occupation................................................................................. III-2
Section 303A No-Impact Home-Based Business....................................................... III-5
Section 304 Domiciliary Care Unit......................................................................... III-6
Section 305 Family Day Care Home....................................................................... III-6
Section 306 Limitation of Accessory Uses............................................................. III-6
Section 307 Keeping of Animals............................................................................ III-6
Section 308_ Residential Uses Accessory to Commercial and Industrial Uses……. III-7
Section 309 Windmills, Wind Wheels and Wind Energy Conversion Systems….. III-7
Section 309A Accessory Solar Energy Systems (ASES)
B. Outdoor Signs
Section 310 Signs Permitted and Extent-of-use...................................................... III-8
Section 311 Setback of Signs.................................................................................. III-10
Section 312 Buntings and Pennants......................................................................... III-10
Section 313 Projection of Signs............................................................................... III-10
Section 314 Illumination of Signs........................................................................... III-10
Section 315 Temporary Signs................................................................................. III-11
Section 316 Construction and Maintenance............................................................ III-11
Section 317 Termination of Enterprise…………………………………………… III-12
C. Other Uses with Possible Nuisance Effect
Section 319_ Adult Entertainment....................................................................... III-12
Section 320 Gasoline Stations or Service Station.............................................. III-14
Section 321 Mobile Home Parks...................................................................... III-15
Section 322 Group Home III-15
Section 323 Child Day Care Center.................................................................. III-17
Section 324 Nursery School.............................................................................. III-18
Section 325 Shopping Center............................................................................. III-19
Section 326 Industrial Park Standards................................................................ III-19
Section 327 Trailer Camps and Campground..................................................... III-20
Section 328 Outdoor Swimming Pool............................................................... III-21
Section 329 Kennels.......................................................................................... III-22
Section 330 Bed and Breakfast Inn................................................................... III-22
Section 331 Nursing Home or Convalescent Home.......................................... III-23
Section 332 Personal Care Home....................................................................... III-23
Section 333 Hospital.......................................................................................... III-24
Section 334 Social or Recreation Club.............................................................. III-24
Section 335 Communication, Transmitting and/or Receiving Facilities III-25
Section 336 Agricultural Operations Including CAO And CAFO Operations III-26
Section 337 Small School……………………………………………………... III-28
Section 338 Retail Store………………………………………………………. III-29
Section 339 Light Manufacturing…………………………………………….. III-29
Section 339A Principal Solar Energy Systems (PSES) III-30
D. Public Utility Building
Section 340 Requirements....................................................................................... III-36
E. Storage
Section 350 Trailers and Trucks.............................................................................. III-37
Section 351 When Permitted.................................................................................. III-37
Section 353 Junkyard.............................................................................................. III-37
Section 354 Outdoor Storage................................................................................... III-39
F. Quarries
1. Quarrying Standards...........................................................................................................III-40
Section 360 Quarrying Standards............................................................................ III-40
2. Optional Requirements......................................................................................................III-41
Section 361 Machinery; Equipment; Operations..................................................... III-41
Section 362 Barriers................................................................................................ III-42
Section 363 Washing............................................................................................... III-42
Section 364 Setbacks from Residential Zones........................................................ III-42
Section 365 Street Setbacks.................................................................................... III-43
Section 366 Property Line Setbacks........................................................................ III-43
3. Rehabilitation Requirements.............................................................................................III-43
Section 370 Rehabilitation Required........................................................................ III-43
Section 371 Removal of Plant and Equipment........................................................ III-43
Section 372 Reporting of Operational and Rehabilitation Information………….... III-44
G. Environmental Regulations
Section 390 Performance Standards........................................................................ III-45
Section 391 Application of Performance Standards............................................... III-47
Section 392 Flood Plain Regulations...................................................................... III-48
Section 393 Sewage............................................................................................... III-49
Section 394 Cemetery.............................................................................................. III-50
Section 395 Funeral Home...................................................................................... III-50
Section 396 Medical Clinic, Laboratories................................................................. III-50
Section 397 Tree Removal in Environmentally Sensitive Areas………………… III-50
PART IV: ADMINISTRATION
A. Applicant - Permits, Variances, Special Exceptions and Penalties
Section 400 Building Permits................................................................................. IV-1
Section 401 Special Exceptions............................................................................... IV-1
Section 402 Temporary Permits............................................................................... IV-2
Section 403 Hardship Permit................................................................................... IV-2
Section 405 Use Certificates.................................................................................... IV-3
Section 410 Variances............................................................................................. IV-3
Section 412 Appeals - Zoning Hearing Board........................................................ IV-4
Section 413 Appeals - Courts of Law....................................................................... IV-4
Section 415 Fees...................................................................................................... IV-4
Section 416 Enforcement Remedies....................................................................... IV-4
Section 417 Penalties............................................................................................... IV-5
Section 418__ Public Hearings.................................................................................... IV-5
B. Zoning Offices
Section 420 Appointment and Powers.................................................................... IV-6
Section 421 Forms................................................................................................... IV-6
Section 422 Transmittal of Papers........................................................................... IV-6
Section 423 Action on Building Permits................................................................ IV-6
Section 424 Action on Use Certificates.................................................................. IV-7
Section 426 Records............................................................................................... IV-7
Section 427__ Reports............................................................................................... IV-7
C. Zoning Hearing Board - Powers and Duties
1. General.............................................................................................................................IV-8
Section 430 Membership of Board......................................................................... IV-8
Section 431 Organization of Board........................................................................ IV-8
Section 432 Powers................................................................................................ IV-8
Section 433__ Board Calendar................................................................................... IV-9
2. Special Exception..............................................................................................................IV-9
Section 440 Referral to Planning Commission........................................................ IV-9
Section 441 Conditions........................................................................................... IV-9
Section 442 Application of Extent-of-Use Regulations.......................................... IV-9
Section 443 General Standards................................................................................. IV-10
Section 444 Standards for Expansion of Nonconforming Uses.............................. IV-11
Section 445
Standards for Replacement of One Nonconforming Use
by Another Nonconforming use...........................................................
IV-12
3. Variances........................................................................................................................IV-13
Section 450 Referral to Planning Commission................................................... IV-13
Section 451 Standards for Variances.................................................................. IV-13
Section 452 Conditions........................................................................................ IV-13
Section 453_ Temporary Permits--Granting of..................................................... IV-14
4. Public Hearing..................................................................................................................IV-14
Section 460 Procedures........................................................................................... IV-14
Section 461 Representation; Statements................................................................. IV-16
Section 462 Witnesses............................................................................................ IV-16
Section 463 Decision Procedure............................................................................ IV-16
Section 464_ Records............................................................................................... IV-17
D. Township Engineer - Powers and Duties
Section 470 Drainage............................................................................................... IV-18
Section 471 Building Adjacent to Drainage Channels and Watercourses………… IV-18
Section 472_ Zoning Hearing Board Cases............................................................... IV-28
E. Planning Commission - Powers and Duties
Section 480 Zoning Hearing Board Cases............................................................... IV-19
Section 481 Amendments........................................................................................ IV-19
Section 482 Screen Where C and I Zones abut R Zones......................................... IV-19
Section 483_ Conditional Uses................................................................................. IV-19
F. Township Supervisors - Powers and Duties
Section 490 Zoning Hearing Board - Appointment................................................ IV-20
Section 491 Changes.............................................................................................. IV-20
Section 492_ Fees..................................................................................................... IV-20
PART V: GENERAL INTERPRETATION
A. Definition
Section 500 General Interpretation......................................................................... V-1
Section 501__ Specific Words and Phrases................................................................ V-1
B. Building Under Construction
Section 502__ ............................................................................................................. V-16
C. Division of Built-on Lots
Section 503__ ............................................................................................................. V-16
D. Erroneous Permit
Section 504__ ............................................................................................................. V-16
E. Interpretation
Section 505__ .............................................................................................................. V-16
F. Repealer
Section 506__ .............................................................................................................. V-17
G. Validity
Section 507__ .............................................................................................................. V-17
H. Effective Date
Section 508__ ............................................................................................................. V-17
ORDINANCE NO. 71-1
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE HEIGHT,
NUMBER OF STORIES AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER
STRUCTURES; THEIR CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, EXTENSION,
REPAIR, MAINTENANCE AND ALL FACILITIES AND SERVICES IN OR
ABOUT SUCH BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; PERCENTAGE OF LOT
THAT MAY BE OCCUPIED; THE SIZE OF YARDS, COURTS AND OTHER
OPEN SPACES; THE DENSITY OF POPULATION AND THE LOCATION
AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND FOR TRADE,
INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE OR OTHER PURPOSES; AND FOR THESE
PURPOSES ESTABLISHING ZONES AND BOUNDARIES AND
DESIGNATING AND REGULATING RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL,
INDUSTRIAL, PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC, AGRICULTURAL AND
CONSERVATION USES WITHIN SUCH ZONES AND BOUNDARIES;
PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THIS ORDINANCE AND
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, IN THE TOWNSHIP OF
PEACH BOTTOM, IN THE COUNTY OF YORK AND STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Board OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
PEACH BOTTOM in the County of York and the State of Pennsylvania, as
follows:
PART 1
SHORT TITLE, PURPOSES ZONES AND STATEMENT OF
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
SECTION 101 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Peach Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance."
SECTION 102 PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE
The regulations in this Ordinance have been promulgated with the purpose of promoting,
protecting, and facilitating—
a. Harmonious community development.
b. Proper density of population.
c. Adequate water and sewerage.
d. Adequate schools, parks, and other public grounds and buildings.
e. Adequate light and air.
f. Adequate transportation, parking and loading space.
g. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
h. The preservation of prime agricultural land for agricultural purposes.
i. Overcrowding of land.
j. Blight.
k. Danger and congestion in travel and transportation.
l. Injury or loss of health, life, or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
This Ordinance is enacted as part of the overall plan for the orderly growth and development of
Peach Bottom Township and as such it is an integral part of the Township Comprehensive Plan.
I-1
SECTION 103 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
The Township of Peach Bottom is divided into zones enumerated below and shown on the
Zoning Map of Peach Bottom Township, which map is part of this Ordinance.
R__________Residential
RII_______._Residential II
C__________Commercial
I________.__Industrial
A__________Agricultural
SECTION 104 BOUNDARIES OF ZONES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the zones as shown on the zoning map, the
following rules shall apply:
a. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or
alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
b. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
c. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following municipality limits shall be construed
as following municipality limits.
d. Boundaries indicated, as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway
between the main tracks.
e. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
f. Boundaries indicated, as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsection a
through e above shall be so construed. Distance not specifically indicated on the official
zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
g. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those
shown on the official zoning map or in circumstances not covered by Subsections a
through f above, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
I-2
SECTION 105 STATEMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES
The primary objective of the Township's development policy is to preserve for agricultural use
the major portion of the Township's quality farmlands. This should be done by preserving most
of the best land in agricultural use and by minimizing the presence of conflicting uses in the
agricultural zones, which would tend to impair or interfere with continued agricultural activity.
Preservation of farmland should be achieved by:
a. Directing residential growth away from areas of quality farmland.
b. Utilizing the least productive farmland where possible for industrial, commercial and
residential growth.
c. Providing an extensive well insulated agricultural area in order to encourage continued
agriculture and agricultural related industries.
d. Preventing the Township from becoming the sites for leapfrog development and exurban
sprawl.
e. Maintaining agricultural parcels or farms in sizes, which will permit efficient agricultural
operations.
Lands set aside for agricultural should reflect the better agricultural soils as well as including
those areas to be protected from unnecessary development. Where feasible, soils classified as
good for agricultural purposes should be preserved for agricultural use. In planning for
agricultural land, it is the Township's policy not to consider agricultural land as "undeveloped
farmland awaiting another use." Farmland must be considered as "developed land." It is being
used to produce a product. Farming is a land intensive manufacturing process, which converts
raw materials into a product comparable to other industrial operations, with occasional
accompanying nuisances of noise, odor and dust. The agricultural zone should not be considered
as a holding zone but as a zone having a positive purpose of utilizing the Township's natural
resources for the benefit of the entire community and the Township should protect the
agricultural zone from interference by incompatible uses which breakdown the integrity of the
zone and also interfere with normal and customary operations within the zone.
Residential development should occur in limited amounts consistent with the area's needs.
However, the Township does not represent a reasonable or logical place for urban oriented
residential growth to occur. Generally, residential growth should represent an expansion of the
Borough of Delta and an infilling of the Susquehanna Trail's development which at this time has
large numbers of undeveloped lots. Some minimal development should occur in the agricultural
or non-development areas of the Township. This development should be directed toward the
lower quality agricultural soils. Large lot or farmette type of development wastes land and
should be discouraged.
I-3
The Borough of Delta at present has a public water supply system and a public sewer system.
These systems are currently serving residents of the Borough and residents of areas of the
Township adjacent to the Borough. It is the Township's objective that development in the
Township is concentrated in areas that can be served by the Delta Borough public water system
and public sewer system with developers making arrangements to assume their proper share of
the costs of these facilities and the Township residents being served by such facilities
contributing fairly to operating costs.
The Township recognizes that the Borough of Delta's public water system is totally dependent on
ground water and that the recharge areas for the Borough’s wells include significant land areas
within the Township. Therefore, the Township will work cooperatively with the Borough in its
efforts to develop a wellhead protection program to protect the quality of the ground water
resource.
The Township's need for commercial and industrial enterprise is minimal but to the extent
commercial development is to occur, it should occur near present population centers and so as
not to increase traffic or residential and farm roads. If industrial development is to occur, it is
important that it not degrade the quality environment currently existing in the Township and that
it not have the effect of accelerating residential and commercial development in order to serve
the residential and commercial needs of those who would be employed in such industry with the
resulting loss of productive farmland and environmental quality.
The Township recognizes that its road network will require continuing maintenance and
upgrading if it is to properly serve the needs of Township citizens. The Township recognizes that
the Susquehanna Trails Development is to a large degree served by private roads, which can only
become acceptable for adoption as public roads by enormous expense. How the residents of that
area can have better highway access without adversely impacting the Township's financial
resources represents a major challenge.
The Township also recognizes that its existing recreational areas will need continuing
maintenance and improvement and that with population growth additional recreation facilities
will be required and plans are for them to be constructed gradually as resources become available
and they become needed.
I-4
PART II
ZONE REGULATIONS
A. USE REGULATIONS
1. Type & Extent of Uses Permitted
SECTION 200 USES PERMITTED
The uses permitted in the zones established by this Ordinance and the permitted extent of those
uses, are as shown in the zoning districts following. The uses shown as permitted in each zone
are the only uses permitted in the zone and all other uses are subject to Section 200.1. Unless
otherwise noted, the extent-of-use or dimensional standards are the requirements for each use.
However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements as set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses, are set forth in Part III.
SECTION 200.1 ALL OTHER USES
Any use not specifically allowed elsewhere in this Ordinance shall be allowed by special
exception in the zone or zones where, and to the extent that, similar uses are permitted or
allowed by special exception provided that said use meets the requirements for a special
exception in that zone and does not constitute a public or private nuisance.
SECTION 200.2 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in conjunction with the principal uses permitted
by this Ordinance and shall be further subject to the requirements for accessory uses and
structures as set forth in Part III-A.
SECTION 200.3 USES WITH NUISANCE EFFECT
In no case is a use permitted which by reason of noise, dust, odor appearance, or other
objectionable factor creates a nuisance, hazard, or other substantial adverse effect upon the
property value or reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding property, Every reasonable effect
must be made to prevent this effect through—
a. Control of lighting
II-1
b. Design and maintenance of structures
c. Use of planting screens or attractive fences
d. Placement of structures on this site
e. Appropriate control of use
f. Prompt removal of trash or junk
2. Residential District (R)
SECTION 201 PURPOSE
The residential zone is for people to live in. The purpose of this Residential Zone is to provide
for the orderly expansion of residential development; to provide for the public health and to
prevent the overcrowding of land through the application of maximum housing densities; to
provide standards which will encourage the installations of public facilities and the preservation
of open space; and to exclude any activities not compatible with residential development.
SECTION 201.1 USE REGULATIONS
No building or structure may be erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for
one of the following uses:
Principal Uses:
1. Single family detached dwelling
2. Single family semi-detached dwelling
3. Rooming house
4. Multi-family conversion
5. Public buildings and facilities
6. Parks and other open spaces of a non-profit nature
7. Schools
8. House of worship
9. Cemetery (see section 394)
10. Forest and wildlife preserve
11. Group Home (see Section 322)
12. Single Family attached dwelling
13. Multi-family dwelling
14. Municipal buildings and facilities
Amended 8/6/12
Accessory Uses:
1. The sale of any products grown or produced on the farm on which they are sold.
2. Home occupation. (see section 303)
3. Signs. (see section 310 et seq.)
4. Storage. (see section 350 et seq.)
5. Private non-commercial swimming pool or pond. (see section 328)
6. Domiciliary care unit. (see section 304)
7. Family day care home (See Section 305)
8. Nursery school (See Section 324)
9. Child day care center (See section 323)
10. Bed and breakfast inn (See Section 330)
II-3
11. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as
principal uses. Amended 3/1/04
Accessory uses 2, 5, 6, 7 and 10 shall be permitted as accessory only to principal uses 1,
2, 4, 12 and 13. Accessory uses 8 and 9 shall be permitted as accessory only to principal
use 8.
Amended 8/6/12
SECTION 201.2 USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such uses in
accordance with the criteria established in Part III of this ordinance as applicable to such use and
in accordance with the criteria established in Part IV of this Ordinance.
Principal Uses:
1. Mobile home park (See Section 321)
2. Medical clinic laboratory
3. Group Home (See Section 322) Added 10/4/04
4. Professional office
5. Nursery School. (See Section 324)
6. Child day care center (See Section 323)
Accessory Uses:
1. Home occupation. (See Section 303)
2. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as uses.
Amended 8/6/12
SECTION 201.3 LOT AREA AND WIDTH
The lot area and width of not less than the dimensions shown on the following table shall be
provided for every dwelling unit and/or principal non-residential structure hereafter erected or
altered for any use permitted in this District: Amended 3/1/04
Public Water
& Public Sewer
Public Water
or Public Sewer
No Public Water
or Public Sewer
Minimum Lot Size 8,000 sq. ft. 30,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 70 ft. 80 ft. 200 ft.
II-4
The lot areas and widths of lots for the location of dwellings shall conform to the following
minimum lot and area requirements:
1. Where both on-lot water supply and on-lot sanitary sewage disposal are provided, lots for
single family detached dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet and
a minimum lot width of 200 feet. Lots for single family semi detached dwellings shall
have a minimum lot area of 60,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 250 feet.
Amended 8/6/12
2. Where either off-lot water supply or sewer service will be provided.
a. Lots for single family detached dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of
30,000 square feet with off-lot water supply and a minimum lot area of 20,000
square feet with off-lot sewer service. Both shall have a minimum lot width of
100 feet.
b. Lots for single family semi-detached dwellings (duplex) shall have a minimum lot
area of 30,000 square feet for each such dwelling or a total of 60,000 square feet
with off-lot water supply and a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet for each
such dwelling with off-lot sewer service, or a total lot area of 40,000 square feet.
Each single family semi-detached dwelling shall have a minimum lot width of
100 feet.
c. Lots for dwellings other than single family detached dwellings and single family
semi-detached dwellings without both off-lot water supply and off-lot sewer
service are not permitted.
3. Where connection to both municipal public water and municipal public sewer service will
be provided, the following minimum requirements shall apply:
a. Area, Width and Yard Requirements
The minimum lot area, lot width, and setback areas shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule.
Dwelling
Unit Type
Lot Area
Sq. Feet
Per Dwelling Unit
Lot Width
Feet
Per Dwelling Unit
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Single Family
Detached 9,000 80 35 * 15
Single Family
semi-detached 4,500 45 35 * 15
Single Family
attached 2,200 22 35 * 15
II-5
* To maximize the flexibility and in lot layout and design, side setbacks shall be calculated based
on maintaining a minimum distance between structures of twenty (20) feet with at least ten (10)
feet to be allocated to each lot. The side property line of the whole tract must be at least twenty
(20) feet from the nearest structure. Amended 1/7/08
** The lot containing one (1) or more multi-family dwellings must have a lot width of at
least two hundred (200) feet. In those instances where more than one (1) multi-family dwelling
is located on a lot, parallel buildings shall have at least forty (40) feet between faces of the
buildings. If the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances may be decreased
by as much as ten (10) feet at one end if increased by similar or greater distance at the other end.
The minimum lot width as above required shall be abutting a public road or a private road
meeting the requirements of Section 703(a) of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance except that if access is to be from a cul-de-sac at the end of a
street the lot is not required to abut more than seventy (70) feet of such cul-de-sac. Access to the
lot shall be from the public road or approved private road abutting the lot. Amended 8/6/12
b. Single family attached dwellings – The maximum number of dwelling units in a row
group is eight (8).
c. Multi-Family Dwellings - The maximum number of dwelling units in a multi-family
dwelling is eight (8).
d. Ratio of Dwelling Types – The total number of single family attached dwelling units
and multi-family dwelling units or combination thereof may not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the total number of dwelling units. This requirement does not apply if the
“parcel” is less than fifteen (15) acres in size.
e. Unit Density – The maximum gross density or number of dwelling units permitted shall
be based upon the total area of the parcel. The unit density may not exceed one (1)
dwelling unit per 32,000 square feet unless the feasibility study performed pursuant to
Section 503 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance establishes that the
ground water recharge on the tract in question after development computed during
drought conditions (periods where precipitation is forty percent (40%) below normal)
will exceed the anticipated water usage figures computed by using Department of
Environmental Protection figures of 3.5 persons per dwelling unit and average daily
uses of one hundred (100) gallons per person per day demonstrates that less than 32,000
square feet is necessary to provide three hundred fifty (350) gallons per day recharge
during drought conditions when precipitation is forty percent (40%) below, in which
event the permitted density can be increased accordingly.
The minimum lot width as above described shall be abutting a public road or a private road
meeting the requirements of Section 703(a) of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision and
Multi-Family 2,200 ** 35 ** 15
Land Development Ordinance, except that if access is to be from a cul-de-sac at the end of a
street the lot is not required to abut more than seventy (70) feet of such cul-de-sac. Access to
the lot shall be from the public road or approved private road abutting the lot.
II-6
SECTION 201.4 BUILDING COVERAGE
The maximum coverage of lot area by buildings, structures or impervious surface shall be as
permitted in Section 217.
SECTION 201.5 SETBACKS
Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less than the following:
a. Front setback
1. For a non-agricultural use - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For a principal or accessory building - thirty-five (35) feet
b. Each side setback
1. For a principal building - ten (10) feet
2. For an accessory building – ten (10) feet
3. For a non-agricultural use - ten (10) feet
c. Rear setback
1. For a principal building - thirty-five (35) feet; fifteen (15) feet if served by public water
and sewer.
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-agricultural use - ten (10) feet
Amended 1/7/08
d. Setback for wells
1. A well must not be placed within (10) feet of a property line unless such location is
necessary in order to enable a well, sewage disposal system, driveway and dwelling to be
placed on the lot.
2.
A well must not be placed within the right-of-way of any public road or within twenty
(20) feet of the center line of any public or private road providing or potentially providing
access to more than one dwelling.
II-7
SECTION 201.6 BUILDING HEIGHT
The height limit for a main building shall be two and one-half stories, but not over thirty-five
(35) feet, except that the height limit may be extended to three and one-half stories but not over
forty-five (45) feet if each side yard is increased in width one-half foot for each additional foot of
height. The height limit for accessory buildings shall be two stories, but not over twenty-five
(25) feet. There shall be no height limitations for agricultural buildings.
SECTION 201.7 EXTENT-OF-USE
Unless otherwise noted the extent-of-use or dimensional standards as set forth herein are the
requirements for each use in this District. However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements are set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses are set forth in Part III.
SECTION 201.8 UTILITIES
Each principal use shall be provided with public water and sewer service if it is determined by
the Township engineer that adequate water and/or sewer service is available and that it is feasible
to have the service extended to serve the principal use.
II-8
3. Agricultural District (A)
SECTION 202 PURPOSE
A primary purpose of the Agricultural Zone is to permit, protect and encourage the continued use
of the land for agricultural purposes. This Zone is composed of those areas in the Township
whose predominant land use is agricultural. The regulations for this zone are designed to protect
and stabilize the essential characteristics of these areas, to minimize conflicting land uses
detrimental to agricultural enterprises, to limit development which requires highways and other
public facilities in excess of those required by agricultural uses and to maintain agricultural
parcels of farms in sizes which will permit efficient agricultural operations.
SECTION 202.1 USE REGULATIONS
No building or structure may be erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for
one of the following principal uses:
Principal Uses:
1. Farm
2. Forest and wildlife preserve
3. Greenhouse, nursery
4. Single family detached dwelling (see Section 202.8 and Section 202.9 )
5. Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling (see Section 202.8 and Section 202.9 )
6. Concentrated Animal Operation / Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation(see Section
336)
7. Small School (see Section 337)
8. Group Home (Section 322) Added 3/1/04
Uses identified as principal uses in subsections 7 and 8 shall be located on land of low
quality for agricultural use as defined in Section 202.9(f) of this ordinance. Uses
identified as principal uses in subsections 4, 7 and 8 shall utilize one of the tract’s
allocation of dwelling units permitted by Section 202.9 of this ordinance and the use
identified in subsection 5 shall utilize two of the tract’s allocation of dwelling units
permitted by Section 202.9 of this ordinance. Added 8/6/12
Accessory Uses:
1. The sale of any products grown or produced on the farm on which they are sold
2. Home occupations (see Section 303)
3. Signs (see Section 310 et seq.)
4. Storage (see Section 351 and Section 354)
5. Private non-commercial swimming pool or pond (see Section 328)
6. Bed and breakfast inn (See Section 330)
II-9
7. Domiciliary care unit (See Section 304)
8. Family day care home (See Section 305)
9. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as
principal uses
10. Small School (see Section 337)
Accessory uses 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 shall be permitted as accessory only to principal uses 1, 4
and 5. Accessory use 10 shall be permitted as an accessory use only to principal use 1.
SECTION 202.2 USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such uses in
accordance with the criteria established in Part III of this ordinance as applicable to such use and
in accordance with the criteria established in Part IV of this Ordinance.
1. School
2. Club room, clubhouse, etc.
3. Outdoor recreational establishment (See Sections 221 and 328)
4. Trailer camp or campground (See Section 327)
5. Communications, transmitting and/or receiving facilities (See Section 335)
6. deleted 9/3/14
7. Sawmill added 2/4/13
8. Municipal buildings and facilities
9. Kennel (See Section 329)
10. House of worship
11. Cemetery (See Section 394)
12. Veterinarian office or animal hospital
All such uses excepting uses 5 and 6 shall be located on land of low quality for agricultural use
as defined in Section 202.9(f) of this ordinance. Each use identified in subsection 1, 2, 3, 8, 10,
11 and 12 shall utilize one of the tract's allocation of dwelling units permitted by Section 202.9
of this ordinance.
Amended 8/6/12
Accessory Uses:
The following accessory uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such uses
according to the criteria established in Part IV of this Ordinance, provided , however, all such
uses shall be located on land of low quality for agricultural use as defined in Section 202.9(e) of
this Ordinance or in buildings existing prior to January 1, 1985.
1. Home occupation (see Section 303)
2. Nursery school ( See Section 324)
3. Child day care center (See Section 323)
II-10
4. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by this section as
special exception uses.
All accessory uses excepting uses 2 and 3 shall be located on land of low quality for
agricultural use as defined in Section 202.9(f) of this ordinance or in buildings existing
prior to January 1, 1985. Accessory uses 2 and 3 shall be permitted accessory only to
principal use 10. Amended 8/6/12
SECTION 202.3 LOT AREA AND WIDTH
For each use permitted by right or by special exception, the following lot area and lot widths are
applicable:
Use Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
1. Farm 50 acres 200 ft.
(see Section 298 for non-conforming farm use) added 4/1/13
2. Forest and wildlife preserve 10 acres 200 ft.
3. Single family semi-detached dwelling 60,000 sq. ft. 250 ft.
4. All other uses 40,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.
The minimum lot width shall be abutting a public or private road meeting the
requirements of Section 703(a) of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, except that if access is to be from a cul-de-sac at the end of a
street, the lot is not required to abut more than seventy (70) feet of such cul-de-sac.
Access to the lot shall be from the public road or approved private road abutting the lot.
Added 8/6/12
SECTION 202.4 BUILDING COVERAGE
The maximum coverage of lot area by buildings, structures or impervious surface shall be as
permitted in Section 217.
SECTION 202.5 SETBACKS
Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less than the following:
a. Front setback
1. For a non-agricultural use - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For a principal or accessory building - thirty-five (35) feet
II-11
b. Each side setback
1. For a principal building - ten (10) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
c. Rear Setback
1. For a principal building - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
d. Setback for wells
1. A well must not be placed within ten (10) feet of a property line unless such location is
necessary in order to enable a well, sewage disposal system, driveway and dwelling to be
placed on the lot.
2. A well must not be placed within the right-of-way of any public road or within twenty
(20) feet of the center line of any public or private road providing or potentially providing
access to more than one (1) dwelling.
SECTION 202.6 BUILDING HEIGHT
The building height limit shall be fifty (50) feet, except in the case of the agricultural buildings,
in which case there shall be no height limitation.
SECTION 202.7 EXTENT-OF-USE
Unless otherwise noted the extent-of-use or dimensional standards as set forth herein are the
requirements for each use in this District. However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements are set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses are set forth in Part III.
SECTION 202.8 SUBDIVISION
1. Lots shall not be separated from the original tract or parcel unless it is determined that:
a. The entire area being separated from the original tract is land which meets the
requirements of Section 202.9(b) and (c) of this ordinance as the location of one or more
of the dwelling rights allocated to the parcel by Section 202.9(a) of this ordinance; and
II-12
there is being separated from the original tract no more land than necessary to, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 202.9(b) of this ordinance, locate all of the
dwelling units being allocated to the tract being separated; or
b. The area being separated includes a group of existing buildings which have been
determined to have no functional utility in connection with the agricultural use of the
original tract, and it is necessary to include all of the land shown on the plan in order to
include such existing buildings. The owner of land asking approval of a lot larger than
that permitted by Section 202.9(c) of this ordinance shall enter into an agreement with the
township committing the owner of such lot to restore and maintain the structural integrity
of the buildings which necessitate such oversized lot; or
c. The land being separated is being transferred to an adjacent parcel that will not, after
the inclusion, be larger than one (1) acre if it contains any prime agricultural land as
defined in Section 501 and will not be larger than three (3) acres if it does not contain any
prime agricultural lands. Any lot transferred to another parcel pursuant to this section
shall have be effectively merged with such parcel and shall not subsequently be separated
therefrom; or
d. The parcel is proposed to be divided into or among two (2) or more farms, each of
which will after transfer contain at least fifty (50) acres of crop land. For purposes of this
section, land converted from pasture or woodland after January 1, 2007 shall not be
considered cropland excepting contiguous segments at least two (2) acres in size, which
are in “prime agricultural land” as defined in this ordinance. Any new division line being
created between two (2) farms shall be agriculturally reasonable and shall not be so as to
render the agricultural use of the tracts less efficient; i.e. under normal circumstances
fields and contour strips will not be split. Any tracts transferred to another tract pursuant
to this section shall be effectively merged with such tract and shall not subsequently be
separated therefrom. No farm created and/or modified by this section as having at least
fifty (50) acres of cropland shall subsequently be permitted to locate dwelling units
allocated pursuant to Section 202.9(a) of this ordinance or accessory buildings so as to
reduce the amount of cropland to less than fifty (50) acres; or
e. Land is proposed to be transferred to an adjacent parcel which will after such
transfer be at least as large as and contain at least as much cropland as the transferor's
parcel prior to such transfer. The new division line shall be agriculturally reasonable and
shall not be so as to render the agricultural use of the tract less efficient; i.e., under
normal circumstances fields and contour strips will not be split. Any lot transferred to
another parcel pursuant to this section shall be effectively merged with such parcel and
shall not subsequently be separated therefrom; or
f. The land proposed to be separated has been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
as the location of one (1) or more of the uses permitted by Section 202.2 of this ordinance
and is not larger than necessary to accommodate that use.
II-13
2. There must be assigned both to the land being separated from the original tract or parcel
and the remaining portion of the original tract or parcel at least one (1) of the original tract’s
permitted allocation of dwellings permitted by Section 202.9(a) of this ordinance, unless that
land or parcel is being permanently joined to an adjacent tract or parcel which either contains an
existing dwelling or has allocated to it the right to construct at least one (1) dwelling. Where the
entire tract or parcel being subdivided is preserved farmland subject to an Agricultural
Conservation Easement granted to either the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to York County
pursuant to the Agricultural Area Security Law (P.L. 128 No. 43), as amended. (3 P.S. §914.1),
the separated tract or parcel is exempt from the requirement to contain an existing dwelling or
dwelling right.” Added 3/5/12
3. A property owner submitting a subdivision plan will be required to specify on his plan
which lot or lots shall carry with them the right to erect or place any unused allocation of
dwellings permitted his tract or parcel pursuant to Section 202.9(a) of this ordinance. Such plan
shall also contain such information as is necessary to enable the Board of Supervisors to
determine whether or not the requirements set forth in this article and in other articles of the
Peach Bottom Township Zoning Ordinance will be met. Amended 6/2/08
SECTION 202.9 LIMITATIONS WITH RESPECT TO DWELLINGS
Dwelling units in the Agricultural District shall be subject to the following limitations:
a. There shall be permitted on each tract of land the following number of dwelling
units:
Size of Tract of Land
as of January 5, 1976
Number of
Dwelling Units Permitted
(including those existing
as of January 5, 1976 and
those located on a "farm")
0-7 acres 1
7-30 acres 2
30-80 acres 3
80-130 acres 4
130-180 acres 5
180-230 acres 6
230-280 acres 7
280-330 acres 8
330-380 acres 9
380-430 acres 10
430-480 acres 11
480-530 acres 12
530-580 acres 13
580-630 acres 14
630-680 acres 15
680-730 acres 16
730-780 acres 17
780-830 acres 18
830 and over 19
In the event an agricultural conservation easement or other easement restricting or
limiting nonagricultural development has been placed on any parcel or part thereof,
such parcel shall not have any allocation of dwelling units in excess of dwelling units
currently existing on the parcel whether pursuant to subsection (a) or subsection (b)
(e) below above unless the deed creating the easement specifically reserves to the
parcel such dwelling rights or the property owner has entered into an agreement with
the Township prior to the granting of such easement allocating permitted dwelling
units between the portion of the parcel which will be subject to the easement and a
portion of the parcel which will not be subject to the easement. In no event shall the
permitted allocation exceed the number permitted the tract by subsections (a) or (b)(e)
of this section as may be applicable.
b. New dwelling units must be located on lots containing in their entirety land of low
quality for agricultural use as defined in subsection (f) of this section. Where such
location is not feasible permits shall be issued to enable dwelling units to be
located on lots containing higher quality soils. However, in all cases such
dwellings and residential lots shall be located on the least agriculturally
productive land feasible and so as to minimize interference with agricultural
production.
c. A lot on which a new dwelling is to be located shall not contain more than one (1)
acre unless the lot in its entirety is composed of land of low quality for
agricultural use as defined in Section 202.9 (f) of this ordinance, and it is
determined from the subdivision plan submitted by the property owner that the
increased size of the proposed lot will not have the effect of precluding the
property owner from locating all of the dwelling units permitted his tract by
paragraph (a) of this section on lots composed in their entirety of the type of land
described in subsection (f) of this section, or that the physical characteristics of
the land itself require a lot size on excess of one (1) acre in order to properly
locate a dwelling, a driveway, and an on-site sewage disposal system.
If the entire lot is composed of land of low quality for agricultural use as defined
in section 202.9(e) (f) of this ordinance, the lot shall not contain more than
(3)three acres unless:
II-15
1. The physical characteristics of the land itself require a larger lot size in
order to properly locate a dwelling, a driveway, and an on-site sewage
disposal system; or
2. The result of limiting the lot size to three (3) acres would be to leave a
narrow strip or peninsula of land remaining connected to the residual tract
in connection with the farming operation occurring on such residual tract
either as cropland or pasture land.
If a new dwelling is to be located on a residual tract which currently is not
improved with a dwelling, that dwelling must be located on the least
agriculturally productive land feasible and so as to minimize interference with
agricultural production.
d. A property owner submitting a subdivision plan will be required to specify on his
plan which lot or lots shall carry with them the right to erect or place any unused
quota of dwelling units his tract may have. The property owner shall be required
to assign to each lot the right to erect or place at least one dwelling unit and
demonstrate that the lot can be approved as a location for the placement or
erection of a dwelling unless the lot is being permanently merged with another
parcel which has either an existing dwelling or the right to erect or place at least
one dwelling. Where the entire tract or parcel being subdivided is preserved
farmland subject to an Agricultural Conservation Easement granted to either the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or to York County pursuant to the Agricultural
Area Security Law (P.L. 128 No. 43), as amended. (3P.S. §914.1), the separated
tract or parcel is exempt from the requirement to contain an existing dwelling or
dwelling right. Amended 3/5/12
e. Lots for the location of dwelling units in addition to those authorized by
subparagraph (a) of this section may be permitted provided:
1. All of the dwelling units permitted by subparagraph (a) and constructed
between January 5, 1976 and October 1, 2007 are located on lots which
consist in their entirety of lands of low quality for agricultural use as
defined in Section 202.9(e) of the Peach Bottom Zoning Ordinance in
effect as of October 1, 2007; and
2. All lots approved for the location of dwelling units between January 5,
1976 and October 1, 2007 but which as of October 1, 2007 have not had
dwelling units constructed upon them are lots which consist in their
entirety of land in Section 202.9(e) of the Peach Bottom Township Zoning
Ordinance in effect on October 1, 2007; and
3. All lots approved for the location of dwelling units which have been
approved or for which approval is sought after October 1, 2007 consist in
their entirety of land of low quality for agricultural use as defined in
subsection (f) of this section.
II-16
4. All dwelling units located after October 1, 2007 on a residual tract and all
dwelling units for which approval is sought to be located on a residual
tract after October 1, 2007 are or will be located on land of low quality for
agricultural use as defined in subsection (f) of this section.
5. The number of dwelling lots permitted by this subsection shall not be such
as to permit there to be on any tract of land more than twice the number of
dwelling units permitted on that tract of land by subsection (a) of this
section. Added 8/6/12
f. Land shall be considered of low quality for agricultural use if:
1. The land is not "prime agricultural land" as defined by this ordinance; or
2. The areas of prime agricultural land are minor and isolated (meaning not
contiguous with other areas of prime agricultural land) and cumulatively
do not exceed the lesser of one-tenth of the lot or 6500 square feet); or
3. The land cannot feasibly be farmed:
(a) Due to the existing features of the site, such as rock too
close to the surface to permit plowing, wetlands or the fact
that the slope of the area exceeds fifteen percent (15%); or
(b) Due to the fact that the size or shape of the area suitable for
farming or which could be made suitable for farming by
removal of obstacles such as trees, underbrush and other
growth is insufficient to permit efficient use of farm
machinery. For purposes of the application of this
subsection, the land to be contained in the lot shall be
considered as part of the original tract.
g. In the event two (2) or more parcels are in common ownership, the owners may
transfer the right to construct or erect dwellings as provided by subparagraph (a)
of this section from one parcel to another owned by them, provided the resulting
dwelling unit or units are located on lots which, when considered as a part of the
entire tract, consists in their entirety either of land of low quality for agricultural
use as defined in paragraph (e) of this section section 202.9(f) of this ordinance or
of land which is less desirable for agricultural use than any land on which a
dwelling unit could feasibly be located on the transferor Tract.
Before such transfer is approved, the owner or owners must enter into a
recordable agreement with the Township in the form approved by the Township
Solicitor to give public notice of the transfer.
II-17
A transfer may not be approved if the location of the dwelling units allocated to
the transferor tract by subparagraph (a) of this section is practically precluded by
physical features such as inadequate access, steep slopes, wetlands, etc. as
opposed to the desire to preserve agricultural use, except that this provision shall
not apply if the transferor tract and transferee tract are contiguous to one another
and will be merged with one another. If the merger is to occur, the owner or
owners and anyone holding a lien against either the transferor tract or the
transferee tract must enter into an agreement with the Township obligating them
to merge the tracts upon approval of the transfer.
No tract from which dwelling rights have been transferred pursuant to this section
shall be permitted additional dwelling units or lots as provided by subparagraph
(e) of this section except if the owner can demonstrate that he can, consistent with
the requirements of this ordinance and with other applicable ordinances including,
but not limited to, the Sewage Permit Ordinance, locate all of the unutilized
dwelling units allocated to his tract of land both by Section 202.9 (a) and by
Section 202.9 (e) of this ordinance on the transferor tract of land, the number of
additional dwelling units or lots permitted the transferor tract by subparagraph (e)
of this section will be reduced only by the number of dwelling rights or units
allocated to the transferor tract by subparagraph (a) of this section which are
transferred to another tract or parcel.
Following the transfer, the transferor tract must either contain an existing
dwelling or have allocated to it the right to construct at least one (1) dwelling
unless it is being permanently joined to and merged with an adjacent or nearby
parcel which either contains an existing dwelling or has allocated to it the right to
construct at least one (1) dwelling.
h. Each single family semi-detached dwelling shall constitute two dwelling units for
the purpose of determining the total number of dwelling units permitted the tract
by the provisions of subparagraphs (a) and (e) of this section.
SECTION 202.10 BURDEN OF PROOF
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the land he seeks to subdivide or to utilize for
a use or in a manner permitted only if the land is found to be of low quality for agricultural use,
meets the criteria set forth in Section 202.9 (f) of this Ordinance.
SECTION 202.11 SOIL CLASSIFICATION REVIEW
Any land owner who disagrees with the classification of his farm or any part thereof by the soil
maps prepared by York County Planning Commission for Peach Bottom Township, may submit
an engineering analysis of the soils on the portion of the farm which he seeks to have reclassified
and if the Board of Supervisors finds the study to be accurate, it shall act in accordance with the
results of such study. Amended 1/7/08
II-18
4. Commercial District (C)
SECTION 203 PURPOSE
The purpose of this zone is to provide reasonable standards for the development of commercial
uses which serve day-today shopping needs of the residents as well as those establishments
which cater primarily to the motoring public. The standards of this District are designed to
separate access roads from major thoroughfares, to minimize traffic congestion and to provide
buffer yards, and screen plantings where such adjoin residential areas.
SECTION 203.1 USE REGULATIONS
No building or structure may be erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for
one of the following uses.
Principal use:
1. Public building and facilities
2. House of worship
3. Public or private parking lot
4. Professional and business offices
5. Medical clinic, laboratory (see Section 396 )
6. Financial institution
7. Commercial school
8. Retail stores and personal service shops (see Section 338)
9. Eating establishments including drive-in restaurants
10. Indoor and outdoor recreational establishments (see Section 221 and Section 328 )
11. Motel, hotel, tourist home
12. Laundry and dry cleaning
13. Vehicle sales, service and repair
14. Service stations (see Section 320 )
15. Animal hospital, kennel
16. Funeral home(see Section 395 )
17. Nursery School (See section 324) Added 8/36/12
18. Child Day Care Center (See section 323) Added 8/6/12
19. Massage Establishment- Added 5/7/07
20. Greenhouse, nursery
21. Parks and other open spaces of a non-profit nature
22. Forestation and wildlife preserve
23. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with Part III-B
24. Motor freight depot, truck terminal
25. Group Home (see Section 322) Added 3/1/04
II-19
Accessory Uses:
1. Storage (see Section 350 et seq.)
2. A single apartment in conjunction with a commercial establishment or alternatively a
caretaker or watchman dwelling in conjunction with such commercial establishment
3. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by this section as
principal uses.
SECTION 203.2 USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and; decide requests for such uses
according to the criteria established in Part IV Part III of this ordinance as applicable to such use
and in accordance with the criteria established in Part IV of this ordinance. Amended 8/6/12
Principal Uses:
1. Mobile home park (see Section 321)
2. Club room, club grounds, meeting hall
3. Shopping center (see Section 325)
4. Processing establishment
5. Heavy storage services (see Section 350 et seq.)
6. Research Laboratory
7. Racetrack
8. Adult Entertainment Facility (See Section 319) Added 5/7/07
9. Group Home (See Section 322) Added 8/6/12
10. Nursing Home or Convalescent Home (see Section 331)
11. Personal Care Home (see Section 332)
12. Hospital (see Section 333)
13. Communication, transmitting and/or receiving facilities (See Section 335) Added 1/3/00
14. Light Manufacturing (see Section 339) Added 8/5/13
15. Principal Solar Energy Systems (see Section 339A) Added 7/1/20
Accessory Uses:
Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as special
exception uses.
SECTION 203.3 LOT AREA AND WIDTH
The lot area and width of not less than the dimensions shown on the following table shall be
provided for each principal structure hereafter erected or altered for any use permitted in this
District
II-20
Public Water &
Public Sewer
Public Water or
Public Sewer
No Public Water or
Public Sewer
Minimum Lot Size 8,000 sq. ft. 12,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 70 ft. 80 ft. 100 ft.
The minimum lot width as above described shall be abutting a public road or a private road
meeting the requirements of Section 703(a) of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision
Ordinance, except that if access is to be from a cul-de-sac at the end of a street the lot is not
required to abut more than seventy (70) feet of such cul-de-sac. Access to the lot shall be from
the public road or approved private road abutting the lot.
SECTION 203.4 BUILDING COVERAGE
The maximum coverage of lot area by buildings, structures or impervious surface shall be as
permitted in Section 217.
SECTION 203.5 SETBACKS
Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less than the following:
a. Front setback
1. For a non-agricultural use - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For a principal or accessory building - thirty-five (35) feet
b. Each side setback
1. For a principal building - ten (10) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
c. Rear Setback
1. For a principal building - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
d. Setback for wells
1. A well must not be placed within ten (10) feet of a property line unless such location is
necessary in order to enable a well, sewage disposal system, driveway and business
structure to be placed on the lot.
II-21
2. A well must not be placed within the right-of-way of any public road or within twenty
(20) feet of the center line of any public or private road providing or potentially providing
access to more than one dwelling or business.
SECTION 203.6____BUILDING HEIGHT
The building height limit shall be three (3) stories but in no case more than seventy-five (75)
feet. The height limit for an accessory building shall be two stories but not over twenty-five (25)
feet. There shall be no height limitations for agricultural buildings.
SECTION 203.7____EXTENT-OF-USE
Unless otherwise noted the extent-of-use or dimensional standards as set forth herein are the
requirements for each use in this District. However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements are set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses are set forth in Part III.
II-22
5. Industrial District (I)
SECTION 204 PURPOSE
The purpose of this zone is to permit and encourage industrial development that will be so
located and designed as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate development, contribute to
the soundness of the economic base of the Township and otherwise further the purpose of this
Ordinance. In promoting these and the general purposes of this Ordinance, the specific intent of
this zone is:
a. To encourage the development of a continued use of land for industrial purposes.
b. To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the development, continuation or
expansion of industrial uses in the District.
c. To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other structures, the areas and dimensions
of yards and other open spaces, and the provision of facility and operation of industries to
minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat vibration and fire and safety hazards.
SECTION 204.1 USE REGULATIONS
No building or structure may be erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for
one of the following uses.
Principal Uses:
1. Public or private parking lot
2. Public building and facilities - Added 8/6/12
3. Professional and business office
4. Heavy storage services
5. Motor freight depot, truck terminal
6. Research laboratory
7. Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with Part III-B
8. Farm – Amended 8/6/12
9. Schools, public or private – Added 7/6/87
10. Sawmill – Added 8/6/12
Accessory Uses:
1. The sale of any products grown or produced on the farm on which they are sold
2. Home occupation (see Section 303)
3. Signs (see Section 310 et seq.)
4. Storage (see Section 350 et seq.)
II-23
5. Private non-commercial swimming pool or pond (see Section 328)
6. Domiciliary care unit (see Section 304)
7. A single apartment in conjunction with an industrial establishment or alternatively a caretaker
or watchmen dwelling in conjunction with such industrial establishment.
8. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by this section as principal
permitted uses.
SECTION 204.2 USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such uses
according to the criteria established in Part III of this ordinance as applicable to such use and in
accordance with the criteria established in Section 204.7 of this ordinance and in accordance
with the criteria established in Part IV of this ordinance. Amended 8/6/12
Principal Uses:
1. Industrial Park (see Section 326)
2. General manufacturing, including Light Manufacturing (see Section 204.7) Added 8/5/13
These include such uses as:
a. Food processing
b. Furniture
c. Textiles, leather, rubber, paper
d. Fabricated metals, machinery and parts
e. Stone, clay, glass
f. Printing and Publishing
g. Soft drink bottling, packaging products in the form of powder or other dry state
h. Lace manufacture, sewing apparel
i. Assembly of electronic apparatus
j. Instrument making, tool and die making, cabinetmaking
k. Electroplating metals, molding plastics
l. Power or electric generating facility
3. Automobile dismantling plant
4. Incineration, baling, recycling or treatment of junk, scrap, metals, rags, paper
5. Kennel (See Section 329) Added 8/6/12
6. Landfill
7. Airport
8. Junkyard
9. Construction Equipment Business
10. Repair of Equipment and Vehicles
11. Quarrying (see Section 360 et seq.)
12. Communication, transmitting and/or receiving facilities (see Section 335)
13. Principal Solar Energy Systems (see Section 339A) Added 7/1/20
II-24
Accessory Uses:
1. Home occupation (see Section 303)
2. Signs (see Section 310 et seq.)
3. Storage (see Section 350 et seq.)
4. Caretaker or watchman dwelling
5. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by this section as
special exception uses.
SECTION 204.2(A) SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR PLACING
MATERIAL IN QUARRY
No material may be placed in an existing quarry except by special exception granted by the
Township Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall not approve such a special exception application unless the
applicant can establish compliance with all of the performance standards set forth in Section
204.7 of this Ordinance, the general standards for the grant of a special exception as set forth in
Section 443 of this Ordinance, and in addition, can establish that the placing of such material in a
quarry will not violate any state or federal law or adversely affect the underground waters of the
Township.
SECTION 204.3 LOT AREA AND WIDTH
The lot area shall be not less than 20,000 square feet and the lot width shall be not less than 100
feet which shall be abutting a public or private road meeting the requirements of Section 703(a)
of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, except that if
access is to be from a cul-de-sac at the end of a street the lot is not required to abut more than
seventy (70) feet of such cul-de-sac. Access to the lot shall be from the public road or approved
private road.
SECTION 204.4 BUILDING COVERAGE
The maximum coverage of lot area by buildings, structures or impervious surface shall be as
permitted in Section 217.
II-25
SECTION 204.5 SETBACKS
Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less than the following:
a. Front setback
1. For a non-agricultural use - fifty (50) feet
2. For a principal or accessory building - fifty (50) feet
b. Each side setback
1. For a principal building - thirty (30) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
c. Rear Setback
1. For a principal building - Forty (40) feet
2. For an accessory building - forty (40) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - forty (40) feet
d. Setback for wells
1. A well must not be placed within ten (10) feet of a property line unless such location is
necessary in order to enable a well, sewage disposal system, driveway and industrial
business structure to be placed on the lot.
2. A well must not be placed within the right-of-way of any public road or within twenty
(20) feet of the center line of any public or private road providing or potentially providing
access to more than one dwelling, business or industrial use.
SECTION 204.6 BUILDING HEIGHT
The building height limit shall be three stories but in no case more than seventy-five (75) feet.
The height limit for an accessory building shall be two stories but not over twenty-five (25) feet.
There shall be no height limitations for agricultural buildings.
SECTION 204.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Before any permit for any use permitted in this zone by special exception is granted the applicant
must establish that his proposed use will not:
1. Cause dust, smoke, fumes, gas or offensive odors to be disseminated beyond the
boundaries of the lot in violation of Section 390(e).
II-26
2. Cause vibration beyond that permitted by Section 390(b) of this Ordinance.
3. Cause noise exceeding that permitted by Section 390(a) of this Ordinance.
4. Cause glare observable from beyond the boundaries of the lot in violation of Section
390(d) of this Ordinance.
5. Cause heat beyond the boundaries of the lot in violation of Section 390(c) of this
Ordinance.
6. Cause pollution, degradation, contamination or discoloration of any underground or
surface water of the Township or cause pollution, degradation, contamination or
discoloration of any soils of the Township.
7. Constitute an unusual fire or explosion hazard.
In addition to the above, the applicant for a special exception for a use permitted in this District
by special exception must establish to the Zoning Hearing Board the following:
1. That the ground water recharge on the tract in question after development computed
during drought conditions (periods when precipitation is forty (40%) percent below
normal) will exceed the anticipated water usage figures computed by using Department
of Environmental Resource's figures of 3.5 persons per dwelling unit and average daily
usage of one hundred gallons per person per day, where residential use is contemplated
and will exceed projected water usage figures where industrial or commercial use is
contemplated and that the installation of the proposed system will not lower the ground
water table in the area so as to endanger or decrease ground water supplies available to
other properties in the area of the property proposed for the use permitted by special
exception.
2. That there is suitable access to the site of the proposed use taking into consideration the
amount and type of additional traffic movement likely to result from the location of the
proposed use on the site proposed and that the use will not substantially increase traffic
on residential streets and/or farm roads.
3. That the buildings to be erected in conjunction with the proposed use will be suitably
designed and landscaped so as to be compatible with surrounding areas.
4. That the drainage requirements of Section 270-275 of this Ordinance will be complied
with.
5. That adequate fencing shall be provided to prevent children from having access to any
dangerous facilities and/or materials.
6. That the buffer requirements of Section 221 of this Ordinance will be complied with.
II-27
In the event that a special exception for a use permitted in this District by special exception is
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board and a permit and use certificate are issued therefore by the
Township Zoning Officer and it is established that to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that the use is in fact causing:
1. Dust, smoke, fumes, gas or offensive odors to be disseminated beyond the boundaries of
the lot in violation of Section 390(e) of this Ordinance; or
2. Vibration beyond that permitted by Section 390(b) of this Ordinance; or
3. Noise exceeding that permitted by Section 390(a) of this Ordinance; or
4. Glare observable from beyond the boundaries of the lot in violation of Section 390(d) of
this Ordinance; or
5. Heat beyond the boundaries of the lot in violation of Section 390(c) of this Ordinance.
6. Any pollution, degradation, contamination, or discoloration of underground or surface
waters of the Township; or
7. An unusual fire or explosion hazard; or
8. An adverse affect upon water supplies utilized by neighboring properties; or
That the permit or certificate holder has:
1. Failed to construct and/or landscape buildings as provided in the proposal; or
2. Has failed to comply with the drainage requirements of Section 270 -275; or
3. Has failed to fence facilities or materials dangerous to children; or
4. Has failed to comply with the buffer requirements of Section 221 of this Ordinance.
The permit and use certificate issued with respect to the use shall be revoked and the use shall
terminate immediately.
SECTION 204.8 EXTENT-OF-USE
Unless otherwise noted the extent-of-use or dimensional standards as set forth herein are the
requirements for each use in this District. However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements are set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses are set forth in Part III.
II-28
SECTION 204.9 UTILITIES
Each principal use shall be provided with public water and sewer service if it is determined by
the Township engineer that adequate water and/or sewer service is available and that it is feasible
to have the service extended to serve the principal use.
II-29
6. Residential District II (RII)
SECTION 205 PURPOSE
The Residential II Zone is for people to live in. The purpose of this Residential Zone is to
promote and encourage a suitable and safe environment by promoting medium density singlefamily
residences in rural areas where public services such as water and sewerage are not
available and are not expected to be available as contrasted with the residential district where
public facilities are expected to ultimately be available, and to exclude any activities not
compatible with such medium density residential development.
SECTION 205.1 USE REGULATIONS
No building or structure may erected or used and no land may be used or occupied except for one
of the following uses:
Principal Uses:
1. Single family detached dwelling excepting that a mobile home as defined in Section 501
of this Ordinance shall not be permitted in this District.
2. Public buildings and facilities
3. Parks or other open spaces of a non-profit nature
4. Schools, public or private
5. House of worship
6. Cemetery (see Section 394)
7. Forest or wildlife preserve
8. Group Home (see Section 322) Added 3/1/04
Accessory Uses:
1. The sale of any products grown or produced on the farm on which they are sold
2. Home occupation (see Section 303)
3. Signs (see Section 310 et seq.)
4. Storage (see Section 350et seq.)
5. Private non-commercial swimming pool or pond.
6. Domiciliary care unit (see Section 304)
7. Family day care home See Section 305)
8. Nursery school (See Section 324)
9. Child day care center (See Section 323)
10. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as
principal permitted uses.
Accessory uses 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7 shall be permitted as accessory only to principal use 1.
Accessory uses 8 and 9 shall be permitted as accessory only to principal permitted use 5.
Amended 8/6/12 II-30
SECTION 205.2 USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
The following uses shall be permitted as special exceptions when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such uses
according to the criteria established in Part III of this ordinance as applicable to such use and in
accordance with the criteria established in Part IV of this Ordinance. Amended 8/6/12
Principal Uses:
1. Medical clinic, laboratory
2. Antique sales facility
3. Social or Recreation club (see Section 334)
4. Nursery School (see Section 524)
5. Child day care center (See section 323) Added 8/6/12
Accessory Uses:
1. Home occupation (see Section 303)
2. Any other use customarily incidental to any of the uses permitted by the section as
special exception uses.
SECTION 205.3 LOT AREA AND WIDTH
The lot area and width of not less than the dimensions shown on the following table shall be
provided for every dwelling unit and/or principal nonresidential structure hereafter erected or
altered for any use permitted in this District.
Minimum Lot Area -- 40,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width -- 200 ft.
The minimum lot width as above described shall be abutting a public road or a private road
meeting the requirements of Section 703(a) of the Peach Bottom Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance. Access to the lot shall be from the public road or approved
private road abutting the lot.
SECTION 205.4 BUILDING COVERAGE
The maximum coverage of lot area by buildings, structures or impervious surface shall be as
permitted in Section 217.
SECTION 205.5 SETBACKS
Each lot shall provide front, side and rear setbacks not less than the following:
II-31
a. Front setback
1. For a non-agricultural use - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For a principal or accessory building - thirty-five (35) feet
b. Each side setback
1. For a principal building - ten (10) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
c. Rear Setback
1. For a principal building - thirty-five (35) feet
2. For an accessory building - ten (10) feet
3. For a non-Agricultural use - ten (10) feet
d. Setback for wells
1. A well must not be placed within ten (10) feet of a property line unless such location is
necessary in order to enable a well, sewage disposal system, driveway and dwelling to
be placed on the lot.
2. A well must not be placed within the right-of-way of any public road or within twenty
(20) feet of the center line of any public or private road providing or potentially
providing access to more than one dwelling.
SECTION 205.6 BUILDING HEIGHT
The height limit for a main building shall be two and one-half stories, but not over thirty-five
(35) feet, except that the height limit may be extended to three and one-half stories but not over
forty-five (45) feet if each side yard is increased in width one-half foot for each additional foot of
height. The height limit for an accessory building shall be two stories but not over twenty-five
(25) feet. There shall be no height limitations for agricultural buildings.
SECTION 205.7 EXTENT-OF-USE
Unless otherwise noted the extent-of-use or dimensional standards as set forth herein are the
requirements for each use in this District. However,
a. Exceptions and modifications to the extent-of-use requirements are set forth in Part II-A-7, and
b. Additional or special extent-of-use requirements for certain uses are set forth in Part III.
II-32
7. Exceptions and Modifications
SECTION 210 YARD REGULATIONS
1. Expansion of Existing Buildings
a. Expansion of buildings existing as of September 1, 1984, shall be permitted
without regard to the yard requirements set forth in this Ordinance provided such
expansion does not project further into the required yard area than does the
building before expansion.
2. New Principal Buildings
a. New principal buildings or structures may be located in the required front setback
or front yard area only if:
1. ) The alignment of one or more of the existing principal buildings on each
side of the lot proposed as the location for a new principal building and
within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of the proposed building and
fronting on the same side of the same road or street is more proximate to
the center of the road or street than the required minimum front setback
line; and
2. ) The proposed principal building will be located so that it is in alignment
with the principal buildings on each side of the lot within a distance of two
hundred (200) feet of the proposed building or structure and fronting on
the same side of the same road or street as the proposed building; and
3. ) The resulting front setback is not less than thirty-five (35) feet from the
center line of the road or street.
3. New Accessory Buildings
a. New accessory buildings may be located within the minimum required front
setback or front yard areas only if:
1. ) There is on the property proposed as the location for the accessory
building another building within the required front setback or front yard
area; and
2. ) Such building was existing on September 1, 1984; and
3. ) The proposed accessory building will not project further into the required
front setback or front yard area than the other building existing on
September 1, 1984.
II-33
b. New accessory buildings may be located in the existing front yard area as defined
in relation to the principal building only if:
1. ) The provisions of subsection (a) above are applicable to permit the
accessory building to be located within the minimum required front
setback or front yard area; or
2. ) The propose accessory building will be located in the Agricultural
District; and
a. ) The accessory building will be located at least five hundred (500)
feet from any dwelling other than one owned by the owner of the
accessory building; or
b. ) The accessory building will be located on a farm containing at
least fifty (50) acres;
3. ) Accessory buildings permitted within the existing front yard area by
reason of the provisions of (2)(a) or (2)(b) above may not be located in the
required front setback.
4. ) New accessory buildings may be located in the front yard area based on
“hardship” if:
a. The proposed accessory building cannot feasibly be located in the
side or rear yard because:
1) There is inadequate space in any side or rear yard to
accommodate the proposed accessory building; or
2) The space available in the side or rear yard cannot feasibly
be used as a location for the accessory building because:
a) The topographic features of such space are such that
the proposed accessory building cannot feasibly be
located in that space; or
b) The proposed accessory building is a garage and the
available space in the side or rear yard cannot be
accessed by motor vehicles; and
b. The proposed accessory building will not project further into the
front yard area than is reasonably necessary. Amended 3/5/12
II-34
4. Exclusions
a. In all Districts, the setback regulations do not apply to:
1. ) School bus shelters and cornices, chimneys, steps, canopies, and
similar extensions, but including porches or patios whether
covered or not
2. ) Open fireproof fire escapes
3. ) Eaves
4. ) Hedges, fences or walls less than six (6) feet in height above the
natural grade except that on a corner lot in any Residential District,
no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than two
and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting
street lines and a straight line adjoining said street lines at points
which are twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of
intersection, measured along said street lines.
5. General
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying
with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street
parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
SECTION 212 SIGHT DISTANCE
Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street intersections. Measured along the
centerline of the street, there must be a clear sight triangle with sides as follows:
Street
Clear Sight Triangle Side
Major Thoroughfares 150 feet
Minor Streets 75 feet
No building or construction is permitted in this area except as follows:
a. Obstruction or plantings less than three (3) feet in height.
b. If not obstructing the view of traffic, post columns and trees not exceeding one (1) foot
in diameter. II-35
SECTION 213 SETBACKs ON CORNER LOTS AND
TRIANGULAR LOTS
In the case of corner lots, two front yards of thirty-five (35) feet each shall be provided and
two side yards of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided. In the case of triangular lots, one
front yard of at least thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided and two side yards of at least ten
(10) feet shall be provided.
SECTION 214 EXCEPTIONS FOR ACCESSORY OR
APPURTENANT STRUCTURES
a. Setbacks: The setback regulations do not apply to--
1. School bus shelters and cornices, chimneys, steps, canopies, and similar
extensions, but not including porches or patios whether covered or not
2. Open fireproof fire escapes
3. Eaves
b. Maximum Height: The height regulations do not apply to—
1. Structures such as chimneys, standpipes, flagpoles, television antennas or radio
towers.
2. Structures on buildings such as clock towers, cupolas, water tanks, and other
mechanical appurtenances, if such structures, at any level, do not cover more than
twenty-five (25%) percent of the roof on which they are located.
3. Parapet walls or cornices used solely for ornamental purposes if not in excess
of five (5) feet.
SECTION 215 MINIMUM HABITABLE FLOOR AREA
All dwelling units must conform to the minimum habitable floor area following:
a. Single-family dwelling: 600 square feet.
b. Apartment, including multi-family conversions: 400 square feet per dwelling unit.
II-36
SECTION 216 NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL USES ON A LOT
In an R zone, not more than one principal use shall be permitted upon a lot except by
special permit.
SECTION 217 BUILDING COVERAGE
1. Maximum coverage of lot area by buildings shall be permitted as follows:
a. Residential Uses
1. If public water and public sewer are not used: 15%
2. If either public water or public sewer, but not both are only is used: 20%
3. If both public water and public sewer are used: 30%
b. Nonresidential Uses
1. If public water and public sewer are not used: 30%
2. If either public water or public sewer, but not both are only is used: 40%
3. If both public water and public sewer are used: 60%
2. Maximum Lot Coverage – 80%
Amended May 7, 2012
SECTION 220 SALE OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
The sale of retail of agricultural products is permitted on the property where they are
grown in any zone where said production is allowed.
SECTION 221 SCREENS AND BUFFERS
1. Where a commercial or industrial zone abuts a residential zone except for street or alley
frontage:
a. A fence or hedge must be placed sufficient to screen any proposed industrial or
commercial uses or structures from any location in a Residential District and from
any existing residence in an Agricultural District.
II-37
b. The space along the side or rear lot line in the Commercial or Industrial Zone
abutting a Residential Zone for fifty (50) feet in depth may not be used for
commercial or manufacturing operations. This area must be suitably landscaped
and maintained.
2. Where an outdoor recreational use other than a golf course adjoins or is in a residential
zone trees or shrubs must be planted on the site of the use so as to form an effective
visual barrier between the outdoor recreational use and the adjoining residentially zoned
property.
B. IMPROVEMENTS
1. Parking
SECTION 230 SIZE OF PARKING SPACE
The parking space must have an area of not less than two-hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of
passageways and driveways appurtenant to the space and giving access to it.
SECTION 231 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
a. Off-street parking spaces must be provided for each building erected or enlarged in
accordance with the following schedule:
TYPE OF USE NO. OF PARKING SPACES
Dwelling, single family or multi-family 2 per dwelling unit
Rooming house 1 per bedroom
Hotel, motel, tourist home
1 per guest room plus 1 for each two full time
employees
Office building 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Retail store or shopping center
1 for each 200 sq. ft. of retail floor space plus 1
additional space for each 2 full time employees
Eating establishment
1 for each 4 seats plus 1 for each 2 full-time
employee
Bowling alley 4 spaces per lane plus 1 for each full time employee
Other recreational establishments 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Automobile repair, gasoline station
1 for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area and ground
area devoted to repair and service facilities
Other commercial buildings 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Hospital, sanitarium
1 for each 3 beds plus 1 for each employee on the
largest shift
Auditorium, church, theater and other such
places of public assembly
1 for each 3 seats
Industrial facility 1 for each employee on the largest shift
Funeral home 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Clubs, lodges and other similar places 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Drive-in restaurants, drive-in dairies, and
other similar establishments
1 for each 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus one (1)
for each two (2) employees
b. Permitted parking adjustments - When an applicant can demonstrate that the number of
parking spaces required by subsection (a) hereof is in excess of that reasonably necessary for the
proposed use, the number of parking spaces may be reduced to the number which the applicant
and the township agree is reasonable for the use provided:
1. The total parking spaces required by subsection (a) hereof shall be shown on the plan;
2. The plan showing such total parking spaces shall comply with all requirements
regarding setbacks and lot coverage;
3. The storm water management plan shall be based upon the total parking spaces
required by subsection (a) being installed;
4. The plan shall also show the parking spaces which are to be currently installed with the
parking spaces not to be currently installed to be planted in trees, grass or other
landscaping and be available to be developed into parking spaces should the township in
its sole discretion determine that some or all of such additional parking spaces are
needed; and
5. The applicant enters into a recordable agreement with the township in a form approved
by the township solicitor, which agreement shall obligate the current property owners,
their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns to improve additional parking spaces up
to the total amount required by subsection (a) hereof upon request by the township.
Amended 1/7/08
II-39
SECTION 232 LOCATION
The parking area must be on the same or nearby premises. If on nearby premises—
a. The nearest point of the parking lot shall be not further than the following distance to the
nearest point of the property served: one hundred (100) feet in the case of a commercial use, two
hundred (200) feet in the case of a residential use, and three hundred (300) feet in the case of
industrial use.
b. The parking area must remain under control of the owner or operator of the use to which the
parking area is appurtenant in a manner satisfactory to the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 233 LAYOUT
a. Parking areas must be arranged so that there will be no need for motorists to back over (1)
local streets, except in the case of residential uses; (2) any street other than a local street.
b. Surfacing - Any off street parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be
surfaced so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface such as a concrete or bituminous
surface, and shall be arranged so as to provide for orderly and safe parking of vehicles. Parking
lots in excess of six (6) spaces shall be clearly striped.
c. Lighting- Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area shall be so arranged so as
to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and from the public right-of-way.
d. Parking area screening - Landscaping and buffer yards shall be provided around all off street
parking areas in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Amended 1/7/08
SECTION 234 PARKING AREA ADJACENT TO STREET
For multi-family and nonresidential uses, where a parking area or other area open to movement
of vehicles abuts the right-of-way line of a public street, a pipe railing, post and chain barricade,
raised curbs or equally effective devices satisfactory to the Township must line the public rightof-
way except at access points.
SECTION 235 IMPROVEMENT
All access drives for commercial or industrial uses (a church is not considered a commercial or
industrial use) shall be improved in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 804 of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The surface course shall be added at
least six (6) months but not more than twelve (12) months following the completion of the stone
base.
II-40
All required parking areas for commercial uses and industrial uses as set forth in Section 204.2
(1), (2), (3), (4) and (7), of this Ordinance shall be improved in accordance with the standards set
forth in Section 804 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance excepting
that four (4) rather than eight (8) inches of pavement base shall be required. The surface course
shall be added at least six (6) months but not more than twelve (12) months following the
completion of the stone base.
SECTION 236 STORM WATER DRAINAGE
All parking areas and access drives must be designed so as to achieve compliance with the storm
drainage requirements of Section 712 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and where necessary in order to achieve compliance with that section storm drainage
facilities including but not limited to storm water detention basins must be designed and installed
so that all of the requirements regarding storm drainage as set forth in Sections 712 and 806 of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance which requirements are incorporated herein
by reference are met with respect to parking areas and access drives. A violation of any provision
of Sections 712 or 806 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be a
violation of this Ordinance.
2. Loading
SECTION 240 SIZE; SURFACING
The loading space must be not less than twelve (12) feet wide and seventy (70) feet long. It must
be surfaced so as to be available in all weather.
SECTION 241 SPACES REQUIRED
Off-street loading spaces must be provided for each building erected or enlarged in accordance
with the following schedule:
TYPE OF USE NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES
Manufacturing, storage, display or sale of
goods, hospitals and sanitaria
1 space for a gross floor area of 5,000 to
25,000 sq. ft. and 1 sanitaria, additional space
for each 10.000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in
excess of 25,000 sq. ft.
Offices, hotels, theaters or similar uses
1 space for a gross floor area of 20,000 to
100,000 sq. ft. and 1 additional space for each
40,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of
100,000 sq. ft.
II-41
SECTION 242 LAYOUT
The loading area must be arranged so that there will be no need for motorists to back over public
rights-of-way and must not be located in the front yard.
3. Driveways
SECTION 250 WIDTH
Within ten (10) feet of the street right-of-way line, access driveways may not exceed thirty-five
(35) feet in width.
SECTION 251 NUMBER
The number of driveways may not exceed two (2) per lot on any one street frontage. The Zoning
Hearing Board may grant permission by special permit for additional driveways where required
to meet exceptional circumstances and where frontage of unusual length exists.
SECTION 252 OFFSETS
Driveways may not enter a public street:
a. Within forty (40) feet of the street right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
b. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
c. Within twenty-five (25) feet of another access drive on the same property.
SECTION 253 SIGHT DISTANCES; SLOPE, CUTS
A driveway must be located in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision. The drive
may not exceed a slope of five (5) percent within twenty-five (25) feet of the street right-of-way
line. Where a drive enters a bank through a cut, unless a retaining wall is used, the shoulders of
the cut may not exceed fifty (50) percent in slope within twenty-five (25) feet of the point at
which the drive intersects the street right-of-way. The height of the bank must not exceed three
(3) feet within ten (10) feet of the street
.
II-42
SECTION 254____DRIVEWAY PERMITS
Hereafter no driveway may be opened or constructed within the limits of Peach Bottom
Township unless a permit to do so shall first be secured in accordance with the provisions of the
Peach Bottom Township Driveway Ordinance, all of which provisions are incorporated herein by
reference; and unless such opening or construction is in strict accordance with the application
submitted pursuant to the Peach Bottom Township Driveway Ordinance and with the permit
issued pursuant thereto in accordance with procedures set forth in such Ordinance. Any violation
of the provisions of the Township Driveway Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance.
4. Illumination
SECTION 260 LIGHTING
All lighting fixtures shall be arranged to prevent objectionable glare on adjoining
properties and roadways and shall comply with the following:
1. In all zones, the maximum illumination off-site shall be one (1) foot
candle at grade level except at driveways or access drives connecting to a
street where the illumination shall not exceed five (5) foot candles.
2. All lighting with the exception of wall pack lighting shall be directed
downward and inward towards the site and all lenses or bulbs shall be
fully recessed or shielded.
3. Prior to approval of all Commercial and Industrial uses the applicant must
submit an accurate and fully legible photometric plan drawn to scale by a
professional engineer or otherwise experienced and qualified lighting
professional as part of the subdivision/land development plan for that use.
The photometric plan shall show on-site illumination levels along with
off-site illumination within fifty (50) feet of the property lines.
4. Prior to installation of wall pack lighting facing a public road, a residential
district or a residential use, screening is required to prevent such lighting
from being visible from a public road, a residential district or a residential
use. Wall pack lighting shall not be permitted in a residential district.
5. Uses within the Commercial and Industrial Districts and for Commercial
and Industrial uses wherever located with the exception of uses that
include dispensing of vehicle fuel, the intensity of illumination is limited
II-43
to five (5) foot candles at all areas of the site. For uses that include
dispensing of vehicle fuel, the intensity of illumination for all areas of the
site is limited to eight (8) foot candles at all areas of the site. Undercanopy
lighting, for such applications as a gas/service station, hotel/theater
marquee, fast food/bank/drugstore drive through, shall be accomplished
using flat-lens full cutoff fixtures aimed straight down and shielded in
such a manner that the lowest opaque edge of the fixture shall be below
the light source. The average illumination intensity in the areas directly
below the canopy shall not exceed thirty (30) foot candles and the
maximum intensity shall not exceed thirty-five (35) foot candles. Also, the
maximum intensity shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot candles within ten
(10) feet of the perimeter of the canopy. Within twenty (20) feet of any
fuel tank storage area the intensity of illumination is limited to fifteen (15)
foot candles.
6. Parking facility and vehicular and pedestrian way lighting (except for
safety and security applications and all-night business operations), for
commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall be automatically
extinguished no later than one-half hour after the close of business or
facility operation. When safety or security lighting is proposed for after
hours illumination, it shall not be in excess of twenty- five (25) per cent of
the number of fixtures or illumination level required or permitted for
illumination during regular business hours.
7. Any applicant for a change of a Commercial or Industrial use which
involves a change of previously approved lighting must submit a
photometric plan or a modification to an existing photometric plan. The
photometric plan shall shown on-site illumination levels along with offsite
illumination within fifty (50) feet of the property lines.
8. All lighting facilities (including street lights owned by private entities)
shall be maintained in good working order in a manner consistent with the
originally approved lighting plan.
9. If the approved lighting is found through field measurements by the
Township to be failing to perform in accordance with levels of
illumination predicted within the photometric plan, or, if there is no plan,
not performing in accordance with the requirements of this Section (260)
of the ordinance, then the lighting shall be field adjusted to be brought into
compliance. All field adjustments of lighting shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township.
Amended November 8, 2010
II-44
5. Drainage
SECTION 270 ADEQUATE DRAINAGE REQUIRED
No principal building may be erected, structurally altered, or relocated on land—
a. Which is not adequately drained at all times.
b. Which is subject to periodic flooding
SECTION 271 BUILDING RESTRICTED ADJACENT TO DRAINAGE
CHANNELS & WATERCOURSES
Except for a boathouse, no building may be erected, structurally altered or relocated—
a. Within twenty (20) feet of the ordinary high water line of any surface water drainage
channel or natural watercourse.
b. So that its lowest floor is less than three (3) feet above the high water line.
SECTION 272 DRAINAGE UPON STREETS
In order to prevent improper surface water drainage upon streets, each building erected,
structurally altered, or relocated, and its driveways, must be at a grade in satisfactory
relationship—
a. With the established street grade, or
b. With the existing street grade where none is established.
SECTION 273 DRAINAGE UPON ADJOINING PROPERTIES; SLOPES
In order to protect adjoining property owners, and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural
beauty and character of the landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land may be
made which would—
a. Result in a slope of more than ten (10) percent within twenty (20) feet of a property line.
b. Alter the existing drainage or topography in any way so as to adversely affect adjoining
properties.
In no case may any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the material involved. All
slopes must be protected against erosion.
II-45
SECTION 274 OBSTRUCTION TO DRAINAGE PROHIBITED
The damming, filling, or otherwise interfering with the natural flow of a surface watercourse is
not permitted without approval of the Township Supervisors.
SECTION 275 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Storm water runoff from any given area to be altered by the erection of a building or
structure, installation of impervious surface, regrading or otherwise must be computed in
accordance with the requirements of Section 712(g) of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance or as otherwise may be acceptable to the Township
engineer, and such storm water management facilities including but not limited to storm
water detention basins, roof drain and/or driveway drain infiltration facilities must be
designed so as to achieve compliance with the requirements of Section 712 of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Any such facilities which are
proposed must be installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 806 of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
All requirements of Sections 712 and 806 of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance are incorporated herein by reference and any violation of any
provision of Section 712 or 806 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
Prior to commencing construction of any storm water detention basin or the installation
of any parking areas or access drives for commercial or industrial uses, the property
owner must obtain a permit from the Township. In the application for the permit the
owner must include a description of the proposed work and a complete design
demonstrating that the design requirements of Section 712 of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance will be achieved. At the time of application, the owner
shall pay to the Township a permit fee to be established by resolution of the Township
Board of Supervisors. Prior to receipt of the permit, the property owner shall pay the
amount estimated by the Township as sufficient to defray the cost of the Township
engineer reviewing such design for consistency with Township requirements, if the
design has not previously been approved by the Township engineer. The applicant shall
also establish an escrow deemed sufficient by the Township to defray the anticipated cost
of inspecting the installation to insure compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance, Sections 712 and 806 of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and with approved design. In reviewing the proposed design, the Township
engineer shall set forth the amount of required inspection escrow and establish the stages
during installation when inspection is required. It is the responsibility of the owner to
notify the Township engineer and request inspection at each stage directed by the
Township engineer. No work shall be covered until approved by the Township engineer.
Amended 3/1/10
II-46
SECTION 276 MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES
Owners of property must maintain all storm water management facilities located on their
property including, but not limited to, roof gutters, roof and driveway storm water pits,
inlets, storm water pipes, swales and gutters so that such storm water management
facilities function as designed. Roof gutters must be maintained so that all water goes to
the roof storm water pits. Roof and driveway storm water pits must be protected by filter
fabric. Caps on storm water pits must be kept on and in good repair. Roof drain facilities
must effectively filter sediment at the roof level and be kept clean and free of debris at
the ground level. Inlets and storm water pipes must be kept open and free of debris.
Swales and gutters must be kept free of debris so that they function as designed.
6. Other Improvements
SECTION 280____WATER SUPPLY
Unless a safe water supply is provided, a use certificate will not be issued for a building
involving human use or occupancy. Any private water supply for a principal building involving
human use and occupancy must be in accordance with minimum standards approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
7. Demolition and Improvements
SECTION 285 REQUIREMENTS
The operator must implement the reclamation plan approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards and time frame set forth in such plan.
II-47
C.__NONCONFORMITIES
1. Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
SECTION 290 CONTINUANCE
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the lawful use of land or buildings existing at the
date of the adoption of this Ordinance may be continued, although such use or building does not
conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the zone in which such land or
building is located, provided however:
a. Structural alterations of a building or structure, or the use of a parcel, lot, or tract of land
which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be allowed only if the
building or structure to be altered or the parcel, lot, or tract of land to be used is in
conformance with the requirements of the Zoning district in which it is located; however
upon application, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve the structural alteration of a
building or structure, or the use of a parcel, lot, or tract of land which is not in
conformance with the provisions of the Ordinance, provided such alteration or extension
of use is restricted to an additional area not exceeding thirty-five (35) percent of those
existing buildings, structures, parcels, lots or tracts of land devoted to a nonconforming
use.
b. Any nonconforming lot may be continued although such lot does not conform to the lot
dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. No lot may be divided so
as to create dimensional nonconformities.
SECTION 291 ABANDONMENT
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when there occurs a cessation of any such
use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate
such use within a period of one (1) year from the date of cessation or discontinuance.
Such use shall not thereafter be reinstated and the structure shall not be reoccupied except in
conformance with this Ordinance.
SECTION 292 RESTORATION
If any nonconforming building or structure shall be damaged or destroyed by reason of
windstorm, fire, explosion or other act of God or the public enemy, such building or structure
may be restored or rebuilt at its original location or at an alternate location within fifty (50) feet
II-48
of the original location provided the alternate location does not involve a greater encroachment
into the required setback or yard area than did the original location, and provided such
restoration or reconstruction is commenced within one year of the date of the casualty and
completed within one year thereafter. Unless such building or structure is restored or
reconstructed as set forth above, it shall be considered abandoned and may not be restored or
reconstructed excepting in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 293 CHANGE OF USE
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only
under the following conditions:
1. Such change shall be permitted only as a special exception under the provisions of
Section 440 et seq of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
2. The applicant shall show that the nonconforming use cannot reasonably be changed to a
permitted use.
3. The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less objectionable in external
effects than the existing nonconforming use with respect to:
a. Traffic generation and congestion, including truck, passenger car and pedestrian
traffic.
b. Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare and/or vibrations.
c. Storage and waste disposal
d. Appearance
e. Pollution of ground or surface water or soil
SECTION 294 ALTERATIONS
A nonconforming building may be altered or improved provided that the alteration or
improvement does not amount to a substantial increase of a nonconforming use; but if such
alterations or improvements involve any increase in lands so used or in the cubic content of the
buildings so used, the permit for the alteration or improvement shall be issued only upon
variance granted in accordance with law.
II-48
SECTION 295 CONSTRUCTION APPROVED PRIOR TO ORDINANCE
Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans, construction or designated use of a
building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and the construction of which
shall have been diligently prosecuted within three (3) month of the date of such permit and
ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed
within six (6) month of the date of the permit and which entire building shall be completed
according to such plans as filed within one (1) year from the date of this Ordinance.
SECTION 296 ZONE CHANGES
Whenever the boundaries of a zone shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one zone to
another zone of a different classification, the forgoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
SECTION 297 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
For additional requirements and regulations concerning nonconformities see Part IV-C-2,
Section 444 and Section 445 .
SECTION 298 NON CONFORMING FARM
A farm which is located in a district where "farm" is not a permitted use may be continued in
farming use and may be expanded for such use without limitation. A non-conforming farm may
be the location of a "concentrated animal operation or concentrated animal feeding operation"
provided the requirements of Section 336 of this ordinance are complied with. Added 8/6/12
(b) The production of agricultural commodities as defined in 3 P.S. §952 and the direct sales of
such commodities, provided at least 50% of the commodities sold are produced by the owner of
the property where sold and the conduct of “normal Agricultural Operations” as defined in 3 P.S.
§952 shall be permitted on every parcel of land in the township irrespective of parcel size or
zoning designation, subject to the provisions of Section 336 to the extent applicable.
Added 4/1/13
II-50
PART III
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR USES
A. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 300 ATTACHED STRUCTURES
A permanent-roofed accessory structure, attached to the principal building, is considered a part
of the principal building for all regulatory purposes.
SECTION 301 NONATTACHED STRUCTURES
A permanent-roofed accessory structure, standing apart from the principal structure, is permitted
in rear and side yards but must be at least ten (10) feet from the principal structure. For all other
requirements, a nonattached structure is considered a part of the principal building.
Structures originally designed for transportation after fabrication on streets and highways on
their own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers and arriving at the site where they are to be
utilized complete and ready for use except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and the like,
including but not limited to structures originally designed as mobile homes, as vans, as trailers or
as busses, are not permitted as accessory structures in any district other than the Industrial and
Commercial Districts excepting that up to two (2) such structures originally designed as storage
trailers may be permitted as an accessory use on parcels in the Agricultural District larger than
(10) acres in size.
Travel trailers and other recreational vehicles are not permitted to be located upon a lot except as
an accessory use. Vehicles of the type required to be registered for highway operation pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 13 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code but not so registered
may not be located on any lot except within an enclosed building. Vehicles which are the type
required for highway operation by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code to display a currently
valid certificate of inspection and approval issued pursuant to Chapter 47 of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code, but do not display such certificate may not be located on any lot except in
an enclosed building.
No such travel trailer or other recreational vehicle may be used or occupied for dwelling
proposes except for sleeping by visitors of the owners or occupants of the lot for periods which
cumulatively do not exceed fourteen (14) days in any ninety (90) day period. The fact that there
is in operation artificial lighting within the vehicle shall create a presumption that such vehicle is
being utilized for dwelling purposes.
III-1
SECTION 302 FENCES AND WALLS
No fence or wall (except a retaining wall or a wall of a building permitted under the terms of this
Ordinance) shall be erected to a height of more than six (6) feet in any yard area in the
Residential District, the Agricultural District or in the Residential II District or to a height of
more than twelve (12) feet in any yard area in the Industrial District or the Commercial District
unless authorized by special exception.
SECTION 303 HOME OCCUPATION
Home occupation shall be conducted in accordance with the following requirements:
1. The following requirements shall apply to all home occupations:
a. The home occupation shall be carried on only by members of the immediate
family of the operator of the Home Occupation, which family members reside on
the lot where the Home Occupation will be located and a maximum of one (1)
non-resident employee.
b. The character or external appearance of the dwelling unit or accessory structure
must be that of a dwelling or structure normally accessory to a dwelling. No
display of products may be shown so as to be visible from outside the dwelling or
the accessory structure. A nameplate not larger than eight (8) square feet in area
shall be permitted. It must be illuminated only by indirect lighting.
c. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the habitable floor area of a dwelling
unit may be devoted to a home occupation.
d. In addition to the required parking for the dwelling unit, additional parking is
required as follows:
1. ) One space for the home occupation, and one space for each employee;
2. ) Three additional spaces for a physician or dentist.
e. The premises must at all times be kept neat and orderly.
f. The use will not result in a substantial increase in traffic. A twenty (20) percent
increase in traffic shall be regarded as substantial. For this purpose, measurement
of traffic increase shall occur on the nearest non-dead end or non-cul-de-sac
street.
g. The use will not involve any waste product other than domestic sewerage or
municipal waste (as defined in the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act).
III-2
h. If the use will occur in an accessory building which was constructed or placed
after January 1, 1985, or if a new building is to be constructed or placed or an
existing accessory building is to be enlarged to accommodate the proposed use,
the building after enlargement or construction shall not have a ground floor area
in excess of fifty (50) percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling, unless
the building is at least three hundred (300) feet from any neighboring residence.
Amended 6/2/08
2. If the home occupation meets all of the above requirements and all of the following
requirements, it shall be permitted in any zone upon receipt of a use certificate to be
issued by the Township Zoning Officer.
a. The use will not involve sale of any item not made on the premises except as
incidental to the home occupation. Beauty shops, insurance agent offices,
physician offices, bake shops, handcraft shops, are examples of the type of uses,
which normally will meet this requirement.
b. (void)
c. The use will not involve any outside storage.
d. The use will not be one which tends to create dust, heat, glare, smoke, vibration
or, odors outside the building in which the use is being conducted or noise audible
outside the building in which the use is being conducted. Motor vehicle repair
facility is a use which tends to create noise audible outside the building in which
the use is being conducted.
e. The parking spaces required by Section 303 (1)(d) are in the rear yard.
The applicant must include which the application for a use certificate such
drawings as will enable the Zoning Officer to have an adequate record of the
location and extent of the proposed use. The applicant must also supply to the
Zoning Officer such information as will enable the Zoning Officer to insure that
all of the above enumerated requirements as well as the requirements of Section
303(1) of this ordinance will be met. The use certificate once issued shall continue
in effect as long as there is no change in the nature or extent of the use and all of
the requirements of Section 303(1) and 303(2) continue to be met.
Copies of these requirements will be attached to the use certificate.
3. If the proposed use would fail to meet one or more of the requirements of Section 303(2),
the use will be permitted only following application and approval as a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the application
and approve it only if the applicant establishes that all of the requirements of Section
303(1) will be met and the applicant also establishes that the following additional
requirements will be met:
III-3
a. The premises will be kept neat and orderly and there will be no outdoor storage of
the following:
i. Automobiles, buses, vans, recreational vehicles and other vehicles of the type
required to be registered for highway operation pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 13 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code but not so registered.
ii. Automobiles, buses, vans, recreational vehicles and other vehicles of the type
required to be registered for highway operation pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 13 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code but not so registered; but
not displaying a currently valid certificate of inspection and approval issued
pursuant to Chapter 47 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
iii. Discarded motor vehicle parts or accessories.
iv. Other trash or junk as defined in this Ordinance.
b. The use will not involve noise audible to neighboring residents between 6:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M. The Zoning Hearing Board may require as a condition to any special
exception that the applicant put in noise insulation and take other action so as to
minimize audible noise during the period between 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. If the
Zoning Hearing Board determines that the use will involve unreasonable noise, which
cannot be satisfactorily reduced by insulation or other action by the applicant, the
application shall not be approved.
c. (Void)
d. The use shall not create any vibrations, smoke, dust, and odor, heat or glare detectable
beyond the property of the owner of the use.
e. Unless the use is to be located in a building constructed or placed prior to January 1,
1985, if it is in the Agricultural District, it shall be located on land unsuitable for
agricultural purposes as defined by Section 202.9 (e) of this ordinance.
f. If the parking spaces required by Section 303(1)(d) are not in the rear yard:
i. ) The Zoning Hearing Board must find that the use is at least five-hundred
(500) feet from any neighboring residence; or
ii. ) The Zoning Hearing Board must find that it is not feasible to place the
parking spaces in the rear yard and that the location of the parking spaces
outside the rear yard will not detract from the residential character of the
Premises where the home occupation is being conducted or have adverse
effect upon the property value or the reasonable enjoyment of surrounding
property.
III-4
4. If caring for roomers is claimed as a home occupation the following additional regulations
shall apply:
a. There must be at least two hundred fifty (250) square feet of livable floor space per
occupant and no more than a total of four (4) roomers.
b. The use must not involve any dimensional alteration to any existing building or the
use of any building constructed or placed after January 1, 1985 or the construction or
placement of any new building; unless a special exception has been granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
c. The use must be confined entirely within the dwelling and not involve the use of any
accessory building.
SECTION 303A NO- IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS
This use shall be permitted in all zones as an accessory use secondary to the use of a
property as a residential dwelling without receipt of a use certificate for the no-impact
home-based business provided all of the following criteria are met:
a. The business activity is compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses;
b. The business employs no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling;
c. There is no display or sell of retail goods; no customer, client or patient traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian; no pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises
in excess of those normally associated with residential use and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature;
d. There is no outside appearance of a business use including, but not limited to, parking,
signs or lights;
e. The business activity does not use any equipment or process which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference including
interference with radio or television reception which is detectable in the neighborhood;
f. The business activity does not generate any solid waste or sewage disposal, in volume or
type which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood;
g. The business activity is conducted within the dwelling and occupies no more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the habitable floor area;
h. The business activity does not involve any illegal activity;
III-5
i. The character or external appearance of the dwelling unit is that of a dwelling; and
j. The premises are at all times kept neat and orderly. Added 7/6/06
SECTION 304 DOMICILIARY CARE UNIT
This shall be permitted as accessory to use as a single family dwelling or to use as a multi-family
multiple family dwelling subject to the limitations which are applicable in this Ordinance with
respect to the location of single family dwelling and multi-family dwellings.
SECTION 305 FAMILY DAY CARE HOME
This shall be permitted as accessory to use as a single family dwelling or to use as a multiple
family dwelling subject to the limitations which are applicable in this Ordinance with respect to
the location of single family dwelling and multi-family dwellings.
SECTION 306 LIMITATION ON ACCESSORY USES
Excepting for "Home Occupation", "Domiciliary Care Unit" and "Family Day Care Home", there
may be no business use or other use involving monetary receipt to the property owner or operator
of the "use" accessory to the use of a tract for residential purposes.
SECTION 307 KEEPING OF ANIMALS –
This shall be permitted as an accessory use in all districts subject to the following:
1. Dogs - In the R and RII zones, there may not be more than three (3) dogs over six (6)
months of age on any lot or parcel.
2. Livestock - This shall include cattle, swine, sheep, goats, poultry, donkeys, mules, horses
and ponies, as well as other similar types of domestic animals but shall not include dogs
or cats or other small animals normally kept as pets.
a. The keeping of livestock over six (6) months of age on lots of five (5) three
(3) acres or less shall be limited in accordance with the provisions of
subsections 1 through 5 of this section.
(1) This use shall be accessory and clearly incidental to the primary use of
the property.
(2) Livestock shall, except while exercising, feeding, grazing, or pasturing,
be housed in a building erected and/or maintained for that purpose.
III-6
(3) All outdoor areas shall be enclosed with fencing to prevent the escape
of livestock; such fencing must be set back at least ten (10) feet
from any road right of way line.
Livestock may not be kept within 100 feet of a neighboring
dwelling or within 10 feet of a road right of way.
(4) The accumulation and storage of manure/waste shall be properly stored
and disposed of so as not to, by reason of odor, appearance or
otherwise, create a nuisance, hazard or other substantial adverse
effect upon the property value or reasonable enjoyment of
surrounding property.
(5) No ponds, pools of water, mud pools or wallows shall be permitted to
become stagnant nor shall any natural stream or body of water be
allowed to become an animal wallow. Animals must be fenced out
of wetlands and streams except for stabilized crossings.
Amended October 4, 2010, July 3, 2019
SECTION 308 RESIDENTIAL USES ACCESSORY TO COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL USES
An apartment permitted as an accessory use in conjunction with a commercial or industrial
establishment or a caretaker or watchman dwelling placed in conjunction with such use must be
discontinued and the residential use terminated immediately upon termination or cessation of the
commercial or industrial use.
SECTION 309 WINDMILLS, WIND WHEELS AND WIND ENERGY
CONVERSION SYSTEMS
1. This use shall be permitted in all zones as an accessory use.
2. The structure supporting the wind rotor unit, including any necessary guideposts and
supporting cables, must be located a minimum distance of the tower height, plus ten (10)
feet from an occupied structure other than a structure owned by the owner of the structure
supporting the wind rotor unit.
3. Any mechanical equipment associated and necessary for operation, including a
building for batteries and storage cells, must be enclosed with a six (6) foot fence unless
otherwise secured. The supporting tower shall also be enclosed with a six (6) foot fence,
unless the base of the tower is not climbable for a distance of twelve (12) feet.
4. The tower and generating unit must be kept in good repair and sound condition as
evidenced by an inspection performed at least once every five (5) years by an inspector
approved by the Township. Upon abandonment of use, the tower and related structures
shall be dismantled and removed from the property within sixty (60) days.
5. The applicant must demonstrate that any noise from the wind energy conversion
system shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels measured at the property line. Added 5/3/10
“SECTION 309A. ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS (ASES)
A. Regulations Applicable to All Accessory Solar Energy Systems:
1. ASES that have a maximum power rating of not more than 8 KW shall be permitted
as an accessory use by right in all zoning districts. ASES that have a power rating
more than 8KW shall comply with the requirements of Section 3 - Principal Solar
Energy Systems.
2. Exemptions
a. ASES constructed prior to the effective date of this Section shall not be
required to meet the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. Any physical
modification to an existing ASES whether or not existing prior to the
effective date of this Section that materially alters the ASES shall require
approval under this Ordinance. Routine maintenance or like-kind
Replacements do not require a permit.
3. The ASES layout, design, installation, and ongoing maintenance shall conform to
applicable industry standards, such as those of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Solar
Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), Electrical Testing Laboratory (ETL),
Florida Solar Energy Center (FSEC) or other similar certifying organizations, and
shall comply with the PA Uniform Construction Code as enforced by Peach Bottom
Township. Upon completion of installation, the ASES shall be maintained in good
working order in accordance with standards of the Peach bottom Township codes under
which the ASES was constructed.
4. ASES installers must certify they are listed as a certified installer on the PA
Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP) approved solar installer list or that
they meet the criteria to be a DEP approved installer by meeting or exceeding one of
the following requirements:
a. Is certified by the North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
(NABCEP).
b. Has completed an Interstate Renewable Energy Council (REC) Institute for
Sustainable Power Quality (ISPQJ accredited Photovoltaic training program or
a Photovoltaic manufacturer's training program and successfully installed a
minimum of three Photovoltaic systems).
c. For residential applications, a registered home improvement contractor with the
Attorney General's office.
5. All on-site utility, transmission lines, and plumbing shall be placed underground to
the extent feasible.
6. The owner of an ASES shall provide Peach Bottom Township wri t ten confirmation
that the public utility company to which the ASES will be connected has been
informed of the customer's intent to install a grid connected system and approved of
such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
7. The display of advertising is prohibited except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer of the system.
8. Glare
a. All ASES shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare does not
project onto nearby structures or roadways.
b. The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare produced does not have
significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through sighting
or mitigation.
9. Permit Requirements
a. Zoning /building permit applications shall document compliance with this
Section and shall be accompanied by drawings showing the location of the
system on the building or property, including property lines. Permits must be
kept on the premises where the ASES is constructed.
b. The zoning/building permit shall be revoked if the ASES, whether new or preexisting,
is moved or otherwise altered, either intentionally or by natural
forces, in a manner which causes the ASES not to be in conformity with this
Ordinance.
c. The ASES must be properly maintained and be kept free from all hazards,
including but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, being in an unsafe
condition or detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare. In the event
of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, the Zoning Officer shall give
written notice specifying the violation to the owner of the ASES to conform or to
remove the ASES.
B. Roof Mounted and Wall Mounted Accessory Solar Energy Systems:
1. A roof mounted or wall mounted ASES may be located on a principal or accessory
building.
2. ASES mounted on roofs or walls of any building shall be subject to the maximum
height regulations specified for principal and accessory buildings within each of
the underlying Zoning Districts.
3. Wall mounted ASES shall comply with the setbacks for principal and accessory
structures in the underlying zoning districts.
4. Solar panels shall not extend beyond any portion of the roof edge.
5. For roof and wall mounted systems, the applicant shall provide evidence that the plans
comply with the Uniform Construction Code and adopted building code of the township
that the roof or wall is capable of holding the load imposed on the structure.
C. Ground Mounted Accessory Solar Energy Systems:
1. Setbacks
a. The minimum yard setbacks from side and rear property lines shall be
equivalent to the accessory structure setback in the zoning district.
b. Ground mounted ASES are prohibited i n front yards, between the principal
bui lding and the public street .
2. Height
a. Freestanding ground mounted ASES shall not exceed the maximum accessory
structure height in the underlying zoning district.
3. Coverage
a. The area beneath the ground mounted ASES is considered pervious. However,
use of impervious construction materials under the system could cause the area to
be considered impervious and subject to the impervious surfaces limitations for
the applicable Zoning District.
b. The surface area of the arrays of a ground mounted ASES, regardless of the
mounted angle of any solar panels, shall be considered impervious and
calculated in the lot coverage of the lot on which the system is located.
c. The total surface area of the arrays of ground mounted ASES on the property shall
not exceed more than 15% of the lot area.
d. The applicant shall submit a Stormwater Management Plan that demonstrates
compliance with the Peach Bottom Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
4. Screening
a. Ground mounted ASES shall be screened from any adjacent property that is
residentially zoned or used/or residential purposes. The screen shall consist of plant
materials which provide a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative
fence meeting requirements of the zoning ordinance may be used
5. Appropriate safety/warning signage concerning voltage shall be placed at ground
mounted electrical devices, equipment, and structures. All electrical control devices
associated with the ASES shall be locked to prevent unauthorized access or entry.
6. Ground-mounted ASES shall not be placed within any legal easement or right-of-way
location, or be placed within any storm water conveyance system or in any other
manner that would alter or impede storm water runoff from collecting in a constructed
storm water conveyance system.
B. OUTDOOR SIGNS
SECTION 310 SIGNS PERMITTED AND EXTENT-OF-USE
a. Drive-in Business
For a Drive-in Business one (1) business sign not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area
is permitted on each street frontage. Additional signs are permitted as long as their
number does not exceed two (2) per street frontage and their combined area does not
exceed twenty (20) square feet per street frontage.
b. Other Uses
For other uses, one (1) sign is permitted on each street frontage of a lot for each
occupancy or purpose and an additional sign for each occupancy or purpose is permitted
for every one hundred (100) feet of street frontage or major fraction thereof all in
accordance with Subsection (d) below. However, for business signs, any number of signs
is permitted as long as their total area does not exceed the maximum under (d) below.
c. All Uses
For all uses, advertising and a business sign must be at least sixty (60) feet apart, and no
sign exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area may be located within seventy-five (75) feet
of a residential zone.
d. Type, Location and Size of Sign –
Type of Sign Where Permitted Maximum Size
Traffic Any zone .
Home Occupation or Bed and
Breakfast Inn
Any zone 8 sq. ft.
Trespassing Any zone 1 sq. ft.
Utility any zone 2 sq. ft.
For sale, rent, sold and rented Any zone 6 sq. ft.
Work sign of builders, painters
and other artisans while
performing work on the
premises
Any zone 6 sq. ft.
Directional any zone but R 6 sq. ft.
Identification and information
of churches, schools, and other
nonprofit institutions
Any zone 20 sq. ft.
Apartment bulletin board Same zone as apartments 20 sq. ft.
Temporary sign for sale of
agricultural and horticultural
products and for construction
projects (Section 315)
Any zone 20 sq. ft.
Temporary sign in new
subdivision advertising
products and services available
in area (Section 315(d))
Any Zone 32 sq. ft.
Business, except for
agricultural and horticultural
products
Any zone but R
A zone: Two signs neither to
exceed 30 sq. ft. in size. R and
RII zones: One sign not to
exceed 16 sq. ft. in size. C
zones, an I zone: 160 sq. ft. or
3 sq. ft. for each lineal foot of
building frontage whichever is
greater. Where the nature of the
business and its location
require such long-range
visibility of signs that the
above dimensions are
inadequate to reasonably attract
business, the max. size may be
increased by special exception
to the extent necessary to
provide reasonable visibility.
Advertising C, I Zones 300 sq. ft.
Industrial Park Subdivision,
Shipping Center, Tourist
Special permit must be
obtained from the Zoning
Hearing Board
.
Permanent residential
development signs, including
apartment/ townhouse complex
signs, at major entrances
designed to identify a
residential subdivision (no
commercial advertising shall be
permitted)
R, RII zones
Signs shall be designed
substantially consistent with
the drawing attached at the end
of this ordinance as Exhibit A
III-9
SECTION 311 SETBACK OF SIGNS
a. Attached Signs
No portion of an attached sign may extend beyond the building setback line.
b. Free-standing Signs
No portion of a freestanding sign may be closer to a street right-of-way line than a
distance equal to its height and in no event closer than fifteen (15) feet.
SECTION 312 BUNTINGS AND PENNANTS
Buntings and pennants are permitted only to announce the opening of a new business or industry
and must be removed after seven (7) days.
SECTION 313 PROJECTION OF SIGNS
No sign may project--
a. Over a public sidewalk area.
b. Over a public highway or street unless specifically authorized by other Township or State
regulations.
c. More than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground except for an attached sign which may
project ten (10) feet above the roof of a building providing the sign so placed does not
project more than thirty-five (35) feet above the ground.
SECTION 314 ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS
a. All Zones:
Flashing and intermittent lights are prohibited.
b. All Signs:
A sign may be illuminated only if the lighting is so screened that it is not directed or
reflected toward any adjacent residence within one hundred (100) feet.
c. Near Highway Traffic Lights:
111-10
Signs which are illuminated in the colors, red, green, or amber, either by colored bulbs or
tubing, or in high reflection by the use of special preparations such as florescent paint or
glass, may not be located within a radius of one hundred (100) feet of a highway traffic
light or similar safety device or in the center of any street intersection.
SECTION 315 TEMPORARY SIGNS
a. A temporary sign for the sale of agricultural and horticultural products may be erected for
a period not exceeding six (6) month.
b. A temporary sign for a construction project may be erected and maintained for as long as
the project is under construction.
c. A temporary sign such as those advertising activities of churches and nonprofit
organizations may be erected for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days.
d. Temporary signs in new subdivisions advertising products and services available in the
area are permitted subject to the following:
(1) The number of such signs shall be based upon the number of residential lots
approved for new residential construct within the subdivision as shown on
the approved final plan as follows:
Number of Approved Residential Lots Number of Permitted Temporary Signs
1-10 1
11-20 2
21-30 3
One sign for each additional ten approved
residential lots
(2) All signs must be removed one (1) year after the issuance of the first building
permit for new residential construction within the subdivision
(3) All signs must be located within the subdivision and must advertise a
product or service available within ten (10) miles of the subdivision.
SECTION 316____CONSTRUCTION & MAINTENANCE
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not allowed to
become dilapidated.
III-11
SECTION 317 TERMINATION OF ENTERPRISE
Upon termination or abandonment of a commercial or industrial use, all signs pertaining to the
enterprise must be removed.
C. OTHER USES WITH POSSIBLE NUISANCE EFFECT
SECTION 319 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY
a. In passing upon a special exception application for an adult entertainment facility, the
Zoning Hearing Board must require the following:
b. That the adult entertainment facility not be located within one thousand (1000) feet of
any other adult entertainment facility.
c. That the adult entertainment facility not be located within one thousand (1000) feet of
any public or private school, day care facility, public recreational facility, or house of
worship.
d. That no materials, merchandise, film, or service offered for sale, rent, lease, loan or for
view involving nudity shall be exhibited, displayed, or graphically represented outside of
a building or structure.
e. That no individual shall appear nude or in a state of nudity outside of a building or
structure or although inside a building or structure be visible in such state of nudity from
outside such building or structure.
f. That any building or structure used and occupied as an adult entertainment facility be
windowless or have an opaque covering over all windows or doors of any area in which
materials, merchandise, film, service or entertainment are exhibited or displayed and that
no sale of materials, merchandise, film or offered items of service or entertainment be
visible from outside the structure.
g. That no sign be erected upon the premises depicting or giving a visual representation of
the type of materials, merchandise, film, service or entertainment offered therein.
h. That each and every entrance to the structure be posted with a notice of at least four (4)
square feet that the use is an adult entertainment facility; and that persons under the age
of eighteen (18) are not permitted to enter; and warning all others that they may be
offended upon entry.
i. That parking be established at a minimum ratio of one (1) parking space for each one
hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) parking space for each
employee.
III-12
j. That no sexual conduct or sexual activity, prostitution, solicitation for prostitution or
gambling shall be permitted within or on the grounds of any adult entertainment facility;
provided, however, consensual sexual conduct and sexual activity shall be permitted in an
adult motel.
k. That any adult cabaret must:
i. Maintain a transparent barrier or a buffer of at least six (6) feet
between customers and employees who are in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity with a glow-in-the dark line marking the buffer area;
i. ensure that all employees in a state of nudity or seminudity
are separated from customers by being on an
elevated stage; and
ii. Prohibit direct customer payment to employees who are
or have in the past four (4) hours appeared publicly in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity.
l. An individual applicant or all of the officers and directors of a corporate applicant and all
partners, including limited partners of a partnership or limited liability partnership and
the proposed manager who will be in charge of operation of the business must establish
that they have not been convicted of any offense involving sexual misconduct within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania including, but not limited to, prostitution, obscenity,
possession of child pornography, solicitation for prostitution, rape, sexual abuse of
children, statutory sexual assault and indecent assault.
In the event that a special exception for a use permitted for an adult entertainment facility
is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board and a permit and use certificate are issued
therefor by the Township Zoning Officer and it is established to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that the use is in violation of any of the provisions of subsections
(c) through (i) above, or one of the owners, partners or managers has been convicted of
any offense described in subsection (g) above or has failed or refused to permit a
requested inspection, then and in such event the Township shall send a notice to the
permit holder pursuant to the provisions of Section 616.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, and if the notice is not appealed within the time set forth
in such notice or if the Zoning Hearing Board finds in favor of the Township, the
township shall revoke the permit and use certificate issued with respect to the adult
entertainment facility and the use shall terminate immediately.
In applying for a special exception and a use certificate for an "Adult Entertainment
facility", the applicant agrees to accept and be bound by the provisions of this Ordinance
and agrees that the Township Zoning Officer shall have the right to inspect the facility for
the purpose of insuring compliance with the zoning ordinance and other legal
requirements at any time the facility is occupied and open for business.
III-13
SECTION 320 GASOLINE STATIONS OR SERVICE STATIONS
A gasoline station or service station must comply with the additional extent-of-use and
improvements regulations following:
1. Minimum setbacks from street right-of-way lines
a. Pumps: fifteen (15) feet
b. Building: forty (40) feet
2. Access drives (see also part ii-b-3)
a. Minimum offset from intersection of street right-of-way lines: forty (40) feet.
b. Side lot line offset: ten (10) feet.
c. Minimum width: twelve (12) feet.
d. Maximum width: thirty-five (35) feet.
e. Minimum separation of drives on some lot: twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Curbing
Except along access drives, a concrete curb eight (8) inches in height must be placed
along all street right-of-way lines.
4. Lighting
All lights must be diverted inward and downward.
5. Storage
No outdoor stockpiling of tires or outdoor storage of trash is permitted. An area enclosed
by a wall or fence, screened from view of adjoining properties, shall be provided
whenever outdoor storage is required. No materials may be stored so as to create a fire
hazard.
6. Landscaping
At least ten (10) percent of the lot on which the gasoline station is situated must be
devoted to landscaping.
III-14
SECTION 321 MOBILE HOME PARKS
A mobile home park and extension thereof must conform with the additional extent-of-use and
improvement regulations following:
1. The minimum tract area shall be ten (10) acres.
2. Lot sizes must conform to the minimum lot size requirements for the zone in which the
mobile home park is to be located.
3. Regardless of lot size, the side yard distance measured from outside each mobile home to
the lot line shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in total and no one side yard distance less
than twelve (12) feet. Front yards not less than twenty (20) feet and rear yards shall not
be less than ten (10) feet and in no case, shall the distance between any two mobile
homes be less than thirty (30) feet.
4. The Zoning Hearing Board may require suitable screen planting, or may restrict the
proximity of mobile homes or other improvements to adjoining properties, or may attach
such other conditions or safeguard to the use of land for a mobile home park as the Board
may deem necessary to protect the general welfare.
5. A mobile home park and extension thereof shall also comply with all applicable State
and/or municipal regulations now in effect or hereafter enacted.
SECTION 322 GROUP HOME
1. The following requirements shall apply to all group homes.
a. A minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet of habitable floor space excluding
kitchen area shall be provided for each occupant.
b. A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided and no cooking or dining
facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or suites. This provision is not
intended to require such facilities if the affiliated institution provided them
elsewhere.
c. Off-street parking shall be provided for each group home based upon one (1)
parking space for each employee or supervisory person and one parking space for
each two (2) non-supervisory occupants or as set by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to subsection 3(g) hereof.
d. The group home must be licensed where required by an appropriate government
agency and a copy of any such license must be delivered to the township prior to
receipt of any Use Certificate.
III-15
e. The group home may not provide medical counseling or other service to persons
who do not reside in the facility.
f. If the group home will house more than five (5) occupants other than supervisory
personnel, there must be at least one (1) supervisory person residing at the
facility.
2. If the proposed group home meets all of the requirements for a “dwelling unit” in the
zone where it is proposed to be located and will house eight (8) or fewer persons, it shall
be permitted as a “dwelling unit” in any zone upon receipt of a Use Certificate to be
issued by the Zoning Officer. If such group home is in the Agricultural District the group
home shall reduce the number of dwelling units permitted the tract of land by Section
202.9(a) of this ordinance by one. Such group home may not make modifications to the
dwelling that would detract from its residential character, excepting modifications taken
in order to comply with the Fair Housing Act or with the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
3. If the proposed group home meets all of the requirements of subsection (1) hereof, but
will house more than eight (8) persons, it shall be permitted by special exception in the
Residential District and the Commercial District. As a special exception use, the proposal
must be reviewed by the Peach Bottom Township Planning Commission for
recommendations to the Zoning Hearing Board in addition to establishing compliance
with the general requirements of Section 443 of this ordinance and the requirements of
subsection (1) hereof, the applicant must establish the following:
a. The site has direct access to a collector road if the total number of
employees together with residents whose handicap will not preclude such
residents operating motor vehicles exceeds twenty (20). (Collector roads
are as designated in the Township's Comprehensive Plan).
b. A lot area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet per occupant
shall be provided, but in no case shall the lot area be reduced below that
required for the district in which such group home is to be located.
c. No newly constructed building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet
to any lot line.
d. The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall submit a report
confirming the adequacy of the proposed sewage facilities.
e. The group home must establish that it has received or can receive approval
for occupancy from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
where required.
f. There shall be at least one (1) supervisory person on the premises at all
times. The Zoning Hearing Board shall designate the number of additional
III-16
supervisory personnel to be on the premises at any one time depending on
the number of residents and the nature of the handicap involved and shall,
in addition, designate the number of required off-street parking spaces
depending upon the nature of the handicap of the residents and whether
such handicap will prevent their operation of motor vehicles. In the event
the residents, other than supervisory personnel, have handicaps which will
preclude their operation of motor vehicles, there must be at least as many
parking spaces as there are total number of employees on the two (2)
largest shifts combined and an off-street area where residents can be
dropped off and picked up plus a parking area for visitors. The parking
areas for visitors shall have at least one and one-half (1½) parking spaces
per non-employee resident. If the handicap involved does not preclude
operation of motor vehicles, there shall be at least one (1) off-street
parking space for each employee of the group and at least one (1) parking
space for each two (2) residents.
g. A fence or hedge must be placed sufficient to screen the use from any
location in a residential district and from any existing dwelling in any
district. The owner shall be required to maintain such fence or hedge,
replanting any plantings that have died.
Amended 3/1/04
SECTION 323 CHILD DAY CARE CENTER
This use is subject to the following requirements:
1. That there are covers over all electrical outlets.
2. That the location of the child day care center meets all of the requirements of this
Ordinance regarding the location of buildings.
3. In the event the facility requires certifications and/or licenses from Federal and/or State
agencies to permit its operation, the applicant must establish that he has secured or will
be able to secure such certifications and licenses.
4. There must be a fenced play area.
5. No portion of a residence may be used as a child day care center and no portion of a child
day care center may be used as a residence.
a. There must be one parking space for each employee of the center and an off-street area
where children can be dropped off and picked up.
Amended 8/6/12
III-17
SECTION 324 NURSERY SCHOOL
This use is subject to the following requirements
1. The lot must be at least two (2) acres in size.
2. The location of the nursery school meets all of the requirements of this Ordinance
regarding the location of buildings and in particular, if the building is located or to be
located within the Agricultural District, the applicant must establish that the requirements
of Section 202.2 regarding such location are complied with.
3. In the event the facility requires certifications and/or licenses from Federal and/or State
agencies to permit its operation, the applicant must establish that he has secured or will
be able to secure such certifications and licenses.
4. The facility must be inspected by the Building Inspector and receive use and occupancy
certificate under the Uniform Construction Code to insure compliance with all building
codes.
5. The sewage disposal system must be inspected and certified by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer and found to be adequate to serve the needs of the proposed use.
6. There must be a fenced play area which is located outside the front yard area.
7. No portion of a residence may be used as a child day care center and no portion of a child
day care center may be used as a residence.
8. Unless the application is to locate in the Commercial District, the applicant must establish
that it is a non-profit organization and exempt from Federal tax pursuant to the provisions
of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. Any use certificate or special exception
granted shall terminate immediately if the owner or operator loses its status as a nonprofit
corporation or as an exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
9. There must be one parking space for each employee of the nursery school in addition to
at least one parking space per five children served.
10. There must be a designated off-street area where children can be dropped off and picked
up.
Amended 8/6/12
III-18
SECTION 325 SHOPPING CENTER
In passing upon a special exception application for Shopping Centers, the Zoning Hearing Board
must require the following:
a. Location: have access to a major thoroughfare so as to avoid traffic on residential streets.
b. Parking: adequate site area, permitting parking space at the ratio of parking space to gross
floor area of 4 to 1
c. Design: Site and building design, in order to provide and maintain, where appropriate, a
proper "buffer" of unbuilt-on space between the shops and adjoining uses.
d. Control: control of uses to minimize disturbances to residential areas.
SECTION 326 INDUSTRIAL PARK STANDARDS
In passing upon a special exception application for a Industrial Parks, the Zoning Hearing Board
must require the following:
a. Streets & Highways: The industrial park site must have access to a major thoroughfare.
Traffic going to and from the industrial park will be permitted on non-residential streets
only; traffic routes and exits will be far enough away from houses so that truck noise and
vibration will not be perceived.
b. No harmful effects: Satisfactory provision will be made to minimize harmful or
unpleasant effects (noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors, gases, electrical
emissions, industrial waste, and discharge of chemical or other hazardous materials
which may pollute ground or surface water or soil).
c. Appearance is Harmonious: This feature includes but is not limited to: landscaping,
enclosure of principal and accessory uses, height control, sign control, low structural
density, and architectural controls.
d. Buffers: The distance separating all park uses and buildings from surrounding properties
will be great enough to constitute in fact a buffer: e.g., loading docks and truck
maneuvering areas and terminals must be further from residential areas than buildings. In
addition to the extent-of-use requirements in the Use Regulations, the Board must require
that from an R zone boundary—
1. A truck terminal or motor freight depot to be at least five hundred (500) feet
distant.
III-19
2. A shipping or receiving dock to be at least three hundred (300) feet distant.
In any case, a buffer yard of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet must be along any
Residential zone boundary line.
SECTION 327 TRAILER CAMPS AND CAMPGROUND
In passing upon a special exception application for a Trailer camp or campground, the Zoning
Hearing Board must require the following:
1. That none of the automobile trailers, cabins, travel trailers, motor homes, tents or
campers approved for location on the premises be utilized as a permanent place of abode,
or as a permanent dwelling. It shall be conclusively presumed that the automobile trailer,
cabin, travel trailer, motor home, tent, or camper is in fact being utilized as a permanent
dwelling or place of abode if:
a. Someone is going to work from the automobile trailer, cabin, travel trailer, motor
home, tent or camper or,
b. Someone is going to school from the automobile trailer, cabin, travel trailer,
motor home, tent, or camper.
2. Every trailer or campground shall have erected thereon at a distance not greater than four
hundred (400) feet from any cabin, tent site, or camper site which it is designed to serve,
a suitable building for housing toilets, showers and laundry facilities. Such building to be
known as the service building.
a. There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets shall be
provided with an adequate water supply in the ratio of one men's toilet and one
ladies' toilet for each eight cabins, trailer sites, tent sites, or camper sites or
fraction thereof. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with hot and cold water in
the ratio of one lavatory to every two or less water closets.
b. Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one shower
enclosed in a compartment at least four (4) feet square for each eight cabins, tent
sites, camper sites or trailer sites or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment
shall be supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least twelve
(12) feet square.
c. Floors of toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile, or similar
material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a floor drain.
3. All water from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, and lavatories shall drain into a
sewage disposal system meeting the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
III-20
4. In every trailer camp or tourist camp there shall be an office building in which shall be
located the office of the person in charge of the camp, which office building shall be
occupied by someone in charge of the camp facilities at all time the camp facility is
occupied or is open to the public for occupancy.
5. Each cabin, campsite, trailer site, or camper site, shall be accessible to a roadway or
driveway which shall have an improved cartway at least twenty (20) feet in width and
shall be improved with a six (6) inch stone base, and there shall be a roadway with an
improved cartway at least twenty-eight (28) feet in width improved by an eight (8) inch
stone base leading from a public road to the camp site.
6. The application for a special exception shall be accompanied by such plans as will enable
the Zoning Hearing Board to insure that the above requirements will be met and proof of
Department of Environmental Resources approval of proposed on-site sewage disposal
system and proof that the proposed water supply is sufficient to meet the water supply
needs of the proposed trailer camp or campground.
SECTION 328 OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL
Every outdoor swimming pool must conform to all applicable requirements of State law and in
addition, all outdoor swimming pools, weather public, club, or private must be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height, which shall be so constructed
as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger that four (4) inches in any dimension. However,
vertical picket fences whose picket members are not more that four (4) inches apart are permitted
as protection. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when
not in actual use, except that the door or any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need
not be so equipped. The walls or sides of above ground pools will be considered to be protective
fences or walls as required by this section provided they meet all requirements of this section as
to height. Farm ponds shall be excluded from the protective fence requirements of this Section.
No water may be placed in such outdoor swimming pool until all of the protective fence
requirements of this section have been complied with and all required fencing and safety
equipment has been constructed or installed, provided, however, if the nature of the pool is such
that the pool cannot be installed without water being placed in it, the Zoning Officer may permit
a “temporary fence” sufficient to prevent trespassers from entering the pool. In all
circumstances, the permanent protective fence must be completed within thirty (30) days
following the placement of water in the pool. Added 10/4/04
All swimming pools must be located either in the existing side yard area or the existing rear yard
area, excepting that this requirement shall not apply if the swimming pool is to be located at a
distance greater than one hundred (100) feet from the center of a public road.
III-21
SECTION 329 KENNELS
This use is subject to the following requirements:
1. The kennel must be located at least 1000 feet from any dwelling owned by someone other
than the owner of the kennel.
2. The kennel must be located at least 1000 500 feet away from any area which could
pursuant to the provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance, be approved as a location
for a dwelling on property now owned by someone other than the applicant.
3. The kennel must be located at least 100 feet from any adjacent property line.
4. That the environmental regulations set forth in Section 393 of the Zoning Ordinance will
be complied with.
Amended 8/6/12
SECTION 330 BED AND BREAKFAST INN
This use is subject to the following requirements:
1. The Bed and Breakfast Inn shall must be operated only by members of the immediate
family of the owner residing in the dwelling unit where the Bed and Breakfast Inn will
be located and a maximum of one (1) nonresident employee.
2. The character or external appearance of the dwelling unit must be that of a dwelling.
3. Only short-term overnight lodging is to be provided. Maximum guest stay shall be
limited to seven (7) consecutive days and must be limited to seven (7) days in each
calendar month.
4. In addition to required parking of the dwelling unit, additional parking is required as
follows:
a. One (1) space for the Bed and Breakfast Inn, one (1) space for each guest room
available for rent and one space for each employee not residing in the dwelling
unit.
5. One (1) sign shall be permitted with the nameplate not being larger than eight (8)
square feet, with such sign being illuminated only by indirect lighting.
6. The Bed and Breakfast Inn may not involve any dimensional alterations to any existing
building, use of any building constructed or placed after March 1, 1995 or construction
III-22
or placement of any new building except that such alteration, enlargement or
construction shall be permitted, if such building after alteration, enlargement or
construction, does not have a ground floor area in excess of two thousand (2000) square
feet and is not more than three (3) stories high. This limitation shall not apply if the
building is at least five hundred (500) feet from any neighboring residence.
7. The Bed and Breakfast Inn may not be used for any other business use or other use
involving monetary receipt to the property owner or operator of the Bed and Breakfast
Inn.
8. Any use certificate issued to permit a bed and breakfast inn shall terminate immediately
if the operation fails to comply with these requirements.
SECTION 331 NURSING HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME
In passing upon a special exception requirement for the establishment of a nursing home or
convalescent home, the Zoning Hearing Board must require that the applicant establish that:
a. The facility shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road;
b. The administrator of the nursing home must be licensed pursuant to the "Nursing Home
Administrator's License Act";
c. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all other state regulations respecting the
establishment and operation of nursing homes;
d. All general requirements imposed by section 443 of this ordinance must be complied
with.
SECTION 332 PERSONAL CARE HOME
In passing upon a special exception application for the establishment of a personal care home,
the Zoning Hearing Board must require that the application establish that:
a. The proposed home and operation are in compliance with all requirements of state law
and that the facility will meet all requirements imposed by Section 443 of this ordinance.
III-23
SECTION 333 HOSPITAL
In passing upon a special exception application for the establishment of a hospital, the Zoning
Hearing Board must require that the applicant establish that:
a. The facility shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road.
b. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with all state regulations respecting the
establishment and operation of hospitals.
c. All general requirements imposed by section 443 of this ordinance must be complied
with.
SECTION 334 SOCIAL OR RECREATION CLUB
In passing upon a special exception application for the establishment of a Social or Recreation
Club, the Zoning Hearing Board must require that the applicant establish that:
a. The use will be within a building which will have a ground floor area at least six hundred
(600) Square feet in size but not in excess of two thousand (2,000) Square feet in size;
b. The facility will be served by sanitary sewage facilities consistent with the requirements
of the Township Sewage Permit Ordinance;
c. The facility will be in compliance with the off street parking requirements of this
ordinance;
d. The facility will be in compliance with all the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry;
e. There will be no sale or illegal use of alcoholic beverages;
f. There will be no use of illegal drugs;
g. There will be no live entertainment by persons in a state of nudity or semi nudity, such as
topless dancing, nor will there be a showing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of sexual conduct, sexual activity, or nudity.
III-24
SECTION 335 COMMUNICATIONS, TRANSMITTING AND/OR
RECEIVING FACILITIES
In passing upon a special exception application for Communication, Transmitting and/or
Receiving Facilities, the Zoning Hearing Board must require that the applicant establish that:
1. If in the Agricultural District, all towers and facilities associated with its use must be
located on land of low quality for agricultural use as defined in section 202.9(e) of this
Ordinance.
2. If in the Agricultural District, the access to the facilities must be over an existing roadway
or through lands of low quality for agricultural use as defined in section 202.9(e) of this
Ordinance and be so as not to interfere with agricultural use of the tract of land through
which the access road or drive passes.
3. All facilities, including towers, constructed pursuant to this special exception use must be
removed within sixty (60) days after cessation of use.
4. Any tower or towers to be constructed must accommodate other users if possible
including local fire, police and ambulance companies.
5. The applicant must demonstrate a need for any proposed tower and demonstrate that the
proposed service cannot be reasonably located on existing towers.
6. The Applicant must demonstrate that the proposed antenna cannot be reasonably located
on existing structures and that the proposed tower or towers are necessary in order to
reasonably create needed communication service.
7. The lot to be purchased or leased for the use must not be larger than reasonably necessary
to accommodate the facilities to be located thereon.
8. The tower location must be such that if such tower should fall it will not fall onto
property other than that of the applicant or the grantor or leaser of the lands where the
proposed tower or towers will be located.
9. The proposed tower or towers must be at least one and one-half times the height of the
tower away from any dwelling other than a dwelling owned by the leaser or grantor of the
lands where the proposed tower or towers will be located.
10. Towers shall not be equipped with lights, shall not exceed one hundred ninety (190) feet
in height and shall not have advertising, attached signs, or be painted colors other than
non-contrast gray.
III-25
SECTION 336 - CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAOS) and
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS (CAFOS)
The requirements of this section shall apply to all Concentrated Animal Operations (CAOS) and
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs) and all operations that expand or
modify their operations so as to cause them to become CAOs or CAFOs. There shall be
no minimum lot size for this use.
a. Building Permit
Prior to receiving a building permit to construct any structures or other facilities
to be utilized in connection with a CAO or CAFO, the applicant must establish
and provide documentation to the Township of the following:
(1) Deleted
(2) That a land development plan including a storm water management plan
and an erosion and sediment control plan for the site meeting the
requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance has been approved by the Township. The land development
plan must establish that all manure storage facilities will be located in
accordance with the applicable setbacks set forth in 25 Pa. Code Chapter
83 and approved Nutrient and Odor Management Plans and all carcass
storage facilities or composting facilities and other structures or facilities
to be used in connection with the CAFO will be located in accordance
with an approved Odor Management Plan.
(3) That all animal concentration areas, manure storage facilities and/or
carcass storage or composting facilities and other buildings or structures
have been designed in accordance with all applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations including but not limited to those of the
Department of Environmental Protection set forth in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 83 and 91 and those of the Environmental Protection Agency set
forth in Volume 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations and that a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer has certified that the design
of the manure storage facilities are in accordance with such applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations and that all permits required
by such laws and regulations have been obtained.
(4) That if new or additional driveway access from a public road will be
utilized a driveway permit has been approved.
(5) That the proposed operation if a CAFO, has received an NPDES permit
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as agent
for the United States Environmental Protection Agency and has filed a
copy thereof with the Township.
III-26
(6) That an Operators Site Specific Nutrient Management Plan has been
approved by the State Conservation Commission or its designated agent
with a copy provided to the Township.
(7) That an Odor Management Plan and Odor Site Index Plan approved by the
State Conservation Commission or its designated agent has been
submitted to the Township.
(8) If not included within an approved nutrient management plan submitted
to the Township, the applicant must provide to the Township emergency
contact information.
(9) If the proposed manure storage facility is to incorporate a leak detection
system, the applicant must provide the Township with an identification
and description of the record keeping and inspection requirements with
respect to such system.
b. Use Certificate
Prior to issuance of a use certificate the applicant must provide to the Township
documentation establishing compliance with the following conditions:
(1) That the Township Engineer has certified that proposed storm water
management facilities have been constructed consistent with the
requirements of the approved land development plan and the storm water
management plan submitted in conjunction with the land development
plan.
(2) The owner/operator of a proposed CAO/CAFO shall be required to
provide the Township with copies of the design and construction plans and
certifications/verifications by the registered professional engineer at the
same time they are required to be submitted to DEP or SCC (or count
conservation district), so the Township engineer may review the plans at
the expense of the Township.
Added 9/3/14
(3) All requirements imposed by any NPDES permit have been completed and
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) That the applicant has filed with the Township a plan for the disposal of
dead animals consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Domestic Animal Law, 3
Pa. C.S.A. §2352.
(5) That there has been provided to the Township copies of all waivers,
permits, approved plans or other documentation required by the
III-27
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency prior to commencement of
operations.
(6) Any use certificate shall be specifically conditioned upon continued
compliance with all the requirements of this Section (336), and all other
relevant provisions of this Ordinance and with the representations set forth
in the application. Amended 9/3/14
c. Operation
Following issuance of the use certificate:
(1) The holder of the use certificate must insure that the documentation filed
with the Township to meet the requirements of Sections 336(a)(b) and (c)
are maintained current to permit continuing operation of the use. Copies of
modifications, amendments and/or termination of any of those documents
must be forwarded to the Township within thirty (30) days following
modification, termination or approval of such amended plans or permits.
(2) The owner of the parcel where the CAFO is located must insure that all
provisions of this Ordinance, all provisions of the nutrient management
plan, all provisions of the NPDES permit, all provisions of the Odor
Control Plan and all provisions of the approved land development plan
including storm water management plan and erosion and sediment control
plan are complied with.
(3) The owner must, before the first day of any calendar year, provide to the
Township copies of all reports of any state inspections of any leak
detection system during the prior calendar year.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property where any CAFO
is located to demonstrate to the Township continuous compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and supply such documentation as is
reasonably requested by the Township in order to verify such compliance.
SECTION 337 SMALL SCHOOL
A small school (school designed to provide for less than fifty (50) students) shall
be permitted in the Agricultural District subject to all of the site requirements for
a single family dwelling as set forth in Section 202.9 of this ordinance. Such small
school shall utilize one of the tract's allocation of dwelling units permitted by
Section 202.9(a) of this ordinance.
III-28
SECTION 338 RETAIL STORE
This use is subject to the following:
1. A buffer yard fifty (50) feet wide must be located and maintained on the site in all
instances where the site adjoins a residential zone. The buffer yard shall be naturally
landscaped, have no impervious cover, and shall not be used for building, parking,
loading, or storage.
2. Access shall be via an arterial or collector street as designated by the township's
Comprehensive Plan.
3. Any outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a wall or fence sufficient in height to
screen any items stored from view of adjoining properties. No materials may be stored to
create a public health hazard or a public nuisance. No toxic or hazardous materials may
be stored on any property, except in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
4. Canopies shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the street right-of-way.
5. Only merchandise vended by the retail facility may be displayed outside the building.
6. All lights must be diverted inward or downward and comply with Section 390(d) of
this ordinance.
7. If gas pumps or drive through purchase facilities are proposed access to same must be
designed to prevent vehicle backups onto adjoining roads.
8. Traffic calming provisions will be identified to protect pedestrian ways, gasoline
dispensing and/or service area.
9. Where motor fuel sales are proposed the use must in addition comply with all of the
requirements of Section 320 of this Ordinance.
10. The maximum building footprint of any single building shall be 87,120 square feet (2
acres). An applicant may not evade this provision by proposing to locate its business in
multiple building within two hundred (200) feet of one another if the gross footprint of
such buildings will exceed 87,120 square feet.
SECTION 339 LIGHT MANUFACTURING
This use is subject to a finding by the Zoning Hearing Board that this use will achieve
compliance with all of the performance standards set forth in Section 204.7 of the
ordinance. Added 8/5/13
III-29
SECTION 339A PRINCIPAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS (PSES)
A. Regulations Applicable to All Principal Solar Energy Systems:
1. Primary Solar Energy Systems shall be permitted by special exception only in the
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. In addition to the special exception criteria as
listed in this Ordinance, all of the following criteria must be met in order for a PSES owner to
receive approval for a special exception use.
2. Exemptions
a. PSES constructed prior to the effective date of this Section shall not be required
to meet the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. Any physical modification to
an existing PSES, whether or not existing prior to the effective date of this
Section that materially alters the PSES shall require approval under this
Ordinance. Routine maintenance or like-kind replacements do not require a
permit.
3. A Building Permit shall be required before the installation of any PSES and a
Use Certificate shall be received before commencement of any operation of a
PSES.
4. The owner of a PSES and the owner of the of the property where the PSES
shall be constructed shall, prior to the issuance of any Building Permit
permitting the installation of a PSES, enter into an Agreement with the
Township requiring and committing the owner to pay to the Township an annual
sum of $2,000 per megawatt of capacity, payable in a lump sum before January
15th of each calendar year during commercial operation of the PSES with the
first payment due in full upon the Township’s issuance of a Use Certificate ate
permitting the operation of such PSES and subsequent payments payable on or
before January 15th of each succeeding calendar year, with such payment to be
adjusted at the end of each five (5) year period to reflect changes in the
Consumer Price Index-Seasonally Adjusted U.S. City Average, For All Items,
For All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as published by the U.S. Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics during the previous five (5) year period to
reflect changes in the index since the year the Use Certificate was issued. Thus
if there is a ten (10%) percent increase in the “CPI-U between the year in which
the Use Certificate was issued and the end of the five (5) year period, the
amount of required payment shall be increased by ten (10%) percent.
5. The PSES layout, design and installation shall conform to applicable industry
standards, such as those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing and Material s
(ASTM), ), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Solar Rati ng
and Certification Corporation (SRCC), Electrical Testing Laboratory (ETL), Florida
Solar Energy Center (FSEC) or other similar certifying organizations, and shall
comply with the PA Uniform Construction Code as enforced by Peach Bottom
Township and with all other applicable fire and life safety requirements.
6. PSES installers must demonstrate they are listed as a certified installer on the PA
Department of Environmental Protection 's (DEP) approved solar installer list or
that they meet the criteria to be a DEP approved installer by meeting or exceeding
one of the following requirements:
a. Is certified by the North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
(NABCEP).
b. Has completed an Interstate Renewable Energy Council (!REC) Institute/or
Sustainable Power Quality (JSPQ) accredited Photovoltaic training program or a
Photovoltaic manufacturer 's training program and successfully installed a
minimum of three Photovoltaic systems.
7. All on-site transmission and plumbing lines shall be placed underground to the extent
feasible.
8. The owner of a PSES shall provide the Township written confirmation that the
public utility company to which the PSES will be connected has been informed of
the customer's intent to install a grid connected system and approved of such
connection.
9. No portion of the PSES shall contain or be used to display advertising. The
manufacturer's name and equipment information or indication of ownership shall be
allowed on any equipment of the PSES provided they comply with the prevailing
sign regulations.
10. Glare
a. All PSES shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare does not
projectonto
nearby structures or roadways.
b. The applicant has the burden of proving that any glare produced does not have
significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through sighting
or mitigation.
11. The PSES owner and/or operator shall maintain a phone number and identify a person
responsible for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the
life of the project and provide this number and name to the Township. The PSES
owner and/or operator shall make reasonable efforts to respond to the public's
inquiries and complaints.
12. Decommissioning
a. The PSES owner is required to notify the Township immediately upon cessation or
abandonment of the operation. The PSES shall be presumed to be discontinued or
abandoned if no electricity is generated by such system for a period of twelve ( 12)
continuous months.
b. The PSES owner shall then have twelve ( 12) months in which to dismantle and
remove the PSES including all solar related equipment or appurtenances related
thereto, including but not limited to buildings, cabling, electrical components,
roads, foundations and other associated facilities from the property.
c. At the time of issuance of the permit/or the construction of the PSES, the owner
shall provide financial security in the form and amount acceptable to
the/Township to secure the expense of dismantling and removing said PSES and
restoration of the land to its original condition, including forestry plantings of the
same type/variety and density as the original.
d. If the PSES owner fails to complete the decommissioning within the 12 months, as is
required in this Ordinance, then the Township may take measures as is necessary to
complete decommissioning. To the extent that the Township incurs costs to rightfully
perform any act to and furtherance decommissioning, it may draw on the financial
security to pay for all costs and expenses. If the decommissioning costs and expenses
are greater than the financial security, then the Township may charge the PSES owner
for the excess costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees for collection
and such amounts shall be a special assessment/municipal lien against the property for
the amount of the assessment plus an additional penalty of 10% of the assessment.
e. Upon completion of decommissioning to the satisfaction of the Township, any
remaining financial security shall be released to the PSES owner.
13. Prior to the issuance of a Use Permit, PSES applicants must acknowledge in writing
that the issuing of said permit shall not and does not create in the property owner, its,
his, her or their successors and assigns in title or, create in the property itself : (a) the
right to remain free of shadows and/or obstructions to solar energy caused by
development of adjoining or other property or the growth of any trees or vegetation
on such property; or (b) the right to prohibit the development on or growth of any
trees or vegetation on such property .
14. Solar Easements
a. Where a subdivision or land development proposes a PSES, solar easements may be
provided. Said easements shall be in writing, and shall be subject to the same
conveyance and instrument recording requirements as other easements.
b. Any such easements shall be appurtenant; shall run with the land benefited and
burdened; and shall be defined and limited by conditions stated in the instrument of
conveyance. Instruments creating solar easement shall include but not be limited
to:
i. A description of the dimensions of the easement including vertical and
horizontal angles measured in the degrees or the hours of the day, on specified
dates, during which direct sunlight to a specified surface or structural design
feature may not be obstructed;
ii. Restrictions on the placement of vegetation, structures, and other objects which
may impair or obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement;
iii Enumerate terms and conditions, if any, under which the easement may be
revised or terminated;
iv Explain the compensation for the owner of the real property subject to the solar
easement for maintaining the easement and/or the owner of the real property
benefiting from the solar easement in the event of interference with the
easement.
c. If necessary, a PSES owner and/or operator must obtain any solar easements
necessary to guarantee unobstructed solar access by separate civil agreement(s)
with adjacent property owner(s).
15. Permit Requirements
a. PSES shall comply with the Township subdivision and land development
requirements. The installation of PSES shall be in compliance with all applicable
permit requirements, codes, and regulations.
b. The PSES owner and/or operator shall repair, maintain and replace the PSES
and related solar equipment during the term of the permit in a manner
consistent with industry standards as needed to keep the PSES in good repair
and operating condition.
B. Ground Mounted Principal Solar Energy Systems:
1. Minimum lot size
a. The PSES shall meet the lot size requirement of the underlying zoning district.
2. Setbacks
a. PSES shall comply with the setbacks of the underlying zoning districts for
principal structures.
3. Height
a. Ground mounted PSES shall comply with the accessory building height restrictions for
the underlying zoning district.
4. Impervious Coverage
a. The applicant shall submit a Stormwater Management Plan that demonstrates
compliance with the Peach Bottom Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
b. PSES owners are encouraged to use low maintenance and low growing vegetative
surfaces under the system as a best management practice for storm water
management.
5. Ground mounted PSES shall be screened from adjoining residential uses or zones
according to the standards found in Section 2 of this ordinance.
6. Ground-mounted PSES shall not be placed within any legal easement or right-of-way
location, or be placed within any storm water conveyance system or in any other
manner that would alter or impede storm water runoff from collecting in a
constructed storm water conveyance system.
7. Security
a. All ground-mounted PSES shall be completely enclosed by a minimum eight (8)
foot high fence with a self-locking gate.
b. clearly visible warning sign shall be placed at the base of all pad-mounted
transformers and substations and on the fence surrounding the PSES informing
individuals of potential voltage hazards.
8. Access
a. At a minimum, a 25' wide access road must be provided from a state or township
roadway into the site.
b. At a minimum, a 20' wide cart way shall be provided between the solar arrays to
allow access for maintenance vehicles and emergency management vehicles
including fire apparatus and emergency vehicles. Cart way width is the distance
between the bottom edges of a solar panel to the top edge of the solar panel directly
across from it.
c. Access to the PSES shall comply with the municipal access requirements in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
9. The ground mounted PSES shall not be artificially lighted except to the extent required
for safety or applicable federal, state, or local authority.
10. If a ground mounted PSES is removed, any earth disturbance resulting from the
removal must be graded and reseeded.
C. Roof and Wall Mounted Principal Solar Energy Systems:
1. For roof and wall mounted systems, the applicant shall provide evidence that the plans
comply with the Uniform Construction Code and adopted b u i l d i n g code of the
township that the roof or wall is capable of holding the load imposed on the structure.
2. PSES mounted on the roof or wall of any building shall be subject to the maximum
height regulations of the underlying zoning district.
D. PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS
SECTION 340 REQUIREMENTS
Public utility buildings and facilities shall be approved in any District, provided however, that
buildings or structures erected for these utilities shall be subject to the following regulations:
a. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of the
District in which the building is located.
b. Height of building shall be as required by the District regulations.
c. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a chain-link fence six (6) feet in height,
topped with barbed wire.
d. Housed equipment--When the equipment is totally enclosed within a building no fence or
screen planting shall be required and the yard shall be maintained in conformity with the
District in which the facility is located.
e. Screen planting in Residential Districts--The required fence for unhoused equipment shall
be surrounded by an evergreen planting.
f. The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the buildings in the
District.
g. Access for unhoused equipment--Where vehicular access is across the front yard, the gate
shall be constructed of solid materials having not less than fifty (50) percent solid in ratio
to open space. In Residential Districts, the permitted public facilities shall not include the
storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance of any utility and no equipment
causing unreasonable noise, vibration, smoke, odor, or hazardous effect shall be installed.
h. If in Agricultural District the building or facility must be located on land of low quality
for agricultural uses as defined in section 202.9(e) of this Ordinance.
i. Unless in the Commercial or Industrial district, vehicles or equipment used in the
maintenance of any utility shall not be stored in the public utility building or on the lot
where such building is located.
j. No equipment causing unreasonable noise, vibration, smoke, odor, hazardous effect or
discharge of chemicals or other hazardous materials which may pollute ground or surface
water or soil shall be installed or stored in such building.
III-36
E. STORAGE
SECTION 350 TRAILERS AND TRUCKS
In a residential zone, trailers used for a business or commercial purpose and trucks licensed for
17,000 lbs. or more gross vehicle weight must be parked or stored within a garage, or an
enclosed storage structure.
SECTION 351 WHEN PERMITTED
Storage is permitted as a principal use in the Commercial District and is permitted as an
accessory use in all districts, provided that no part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or
other area intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required parking areas and no part of the
front yard shall be occupied by outdoor storage or display. The permitted storage of items as an
accessory use must involve the storage of items used on the lot or tract where stored in
connection with a principal permitted use of such lot or tract of land.
SECTION 353 JUNKYARD
This use is permitted in the Industrial District by special exception subject to the following:
a. Any area used for this purpose must be at least thirty (30) feet from any property line and
fifty (50) feet from any street line.
b. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored on such premises.
c. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities on the
premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water and to facilitate
access for inspection purposes and fire fighting.
d. Every structure other than a caretaker house or an office shall be of fireproof
construction.
e. The area used in connection with the junkyard shall be enclosed by a metal chain link
fence constructed of good heavy duty steel and supported upon steel posts or, in lieu
thereof, a solid masonry or metal wall of a uniform design, texture and structure. The
erection of such fence or wall shall be controlled by the setback provisions of this
ordinance. Such fence or wall shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height. If a chain link
fence is utilized, it shall be constructed so as to make it sight tight. The erection of said
fence shall be completed within six (6) months after obtaining a permit for the use.
f. The land area between the fence required above and the public highway or street and the
area between the fence and any neighboring property line shall be planted with evergreen
trees or other vegetation approved by the township as equivalent in growth and shading
characteristics. Trees shall be planted in two (2) rows twenty (20) feet apart in each row
III-37
and alternated eight (8) feet apart on center except for Hemlocks which shall be eight (8)
feet apart and four (4) feet on center. The trees, when planted, shall be at least five (5)
feet in height from the ground. The trees shall be maintained in good health and replaced
as required in order to achieve a full screening effect within five (5) years.
g. Irrespective of paragraph 6 above, the access drive and area required to provide adequate
sight distance to the access drive shall be kept free of plantings which interfere with such
sight distance.
h. All burning in connection with any junkyard shall be in full and complete compliance
with the Peach Bottom Township Outdoor Burning Ordinance as well as any and all
applicable county, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations.
i. All junk contained in a junkyard shall be arranged and maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion. All junk vehicles and other junk shall be arranged in rows with a minimum of
twenty (20) feet of clear space between rows with each row to be no greater in width than
forty (40) feet. Vehicles shall not be stored on top of one another so as to be visible
beyond the fence or wall constructed pursuant to subsection 5 of this ordinance.
j. No junk shall be stored or located within any river, watercourse, run, creek, irrigation
ditch, designated wetland or any other natural watercourse.
k. There shall be at least five (5) off street parking spaces inside the fenced area.
l. The applicant shall submit and demonstrate the ability to implement an operations plan
that shall include the following:
1. The unloading, transfer, and disposition of material shall be continuously
supervised.
2. There shall be no access permitted to the site when an attendant is not on
duty.
3. Access drives shall be secured by fences, gates, locks, and other means to
deny access at unauthorized times.
4. There shall be a plan for the prompt removal of all hazardous materials.
Drainage of fluids shall be conducted only on a township approved
reinforced concrete drainage pad with a thickness of at least six (6) inches.
The drainage pad must be under roof and drain to catch basins or storage
tanks with at least a two hundred fifty (250) gallon capacity. It shall be the
duty of the permittee to insure that all fluids drain to such catch basin or
storage tank and that such catch basins or storage tanks do not overflow.
Any violation of this requirement shall result in immediate revocation of
any permit issued.
III-38
5. The applicant shall submit quarterly proof to the township of proper and
authorized disposal of all petroleum and other products including oil, gas,
freon, and antifreeze.
6. The applicant shall create sufficient drainage swales so as to preclude
water from lands at higher grade than the applicant's from washing over
the area used in the junkyard operation.
7. Motor vehicles shall not be stacked so as to become visible from adjoining
properties.
8. Crushing of automobiles and operation of a crusher shall occur only
during Monday through Friday and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. No crushing of vehicles shall take place on federal or state
holidays.
m. The applicant must establish that the environmental requirements of Section 390 of this
ordinance will be complied with.
n. Every junkyard in Peach Bottom Township shall, at all times, be subject to inspection by
the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, or its duly designated and
authorized agent or representative for the purpose of determining whether said licensee
has established and maintained its premises in full compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
Added 8/6/12
SECTION 354 OUTDOOR STORAGE
The following items must be stored in a completely enclosed structure excepting that if in the
industrial zone they may be stored in an approved "junkyard".
1. Automobiles, busses, vans, recreational vehicles and other vehicles of the type required
to be registered for highway operation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13 of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code but not so registered.
2. Automobiles, busses, vans, recreational vehicles and other vehicles of the type required
to be registered for highway operation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13 of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and so registered but not displaying a currently valid
certificate of inspection and approval issued pursuant to Chapter 47 of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.
3. Tire stockpiles.
4. Motor vehicle parts, appliances, appliance parts, pieces of iron, steel, cans or other such
materials.
5. Junk as defined in this Ordinance.
III-39
F. QUARRIES
1. Quarrying Standards
SECTION 360 QUARRYING STANDARDS
Quarrying operations may be approved by special exception in the Industrial District. In passing
upon special exception applications for quarrying operations, the Zoning Hearing Board must
consider the following factors:
a. Location of quarrying pit, buildings, stockpiles, waste piles, in relation to other existing
or planned uses in the area.
b.
Physical factors:
1. Soil--nature and characteristics, including possible erosion by water and wind.
2. Drainage
3. Prevailing wind
c. Abutting land and streets--lateral support slopes and grades.
d. The special exception application shall not be granted unless a satisfactory reclamation
plan is proposed by the applicant and the applicant demonstrates his capacity to carry out
the reclamation plan and comply with environmental requirements of section 393 of this
Ordinance and the general standards for special exceptions as set forth in section 443 of
this Ordinance. The reclamation plan shall be a complete and detailed Plan for the
reclamation of the land affected, include the following:
1. The plan shall set forth the use made of the land as of July 1, 1990 and any
change in use between that date and the date of the filing of the plan.
2. A statement of the soil types of the land and the topography of the land.
3. Where the proposed land use so requires, the manner in which compaction of the
soil and fill will be accomplished.
4. The proposed land use upon completion of the quarrying operation, if the land
was in agricultural use on July 1, 1990, it must be restored to agricultural use.
5. A description of the manner in which the operation will segregate and conserve
topsoil and, if necessary, suitable subsoil to restore the area to agricultural use if
6. such restoration is required pursuant to subsection (4) above or if such restoration
is not required, to establish a diverse, effective and permanent vegetative cover of
the same seasonal variety native to the area of land to be affected and capable of
self-regeneration in planned succession at least equal in extent of cover to the
III-40
natural vegetation of the area. To prevent erosion of silt or other loose material,
all-surface drainage existing or developed through the topsoil site must be
controlled by dikes, barriers or drainage structures. All measures to control
natural drainage or floodwater must be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
7. A detailed timetable for the accomplishment of each major step and the
reclamation plan and the operator’s estimate of the cost of each said step and the
total cost of the reclamation plan.
8. The reclamation plan shall provide for contouring as defined in Title 52 P.S.
$396.3 (Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act) excepting that the
Zoning Hearing Board may permit terracing in lieu of contouring if approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, if the land is not
required to be restored to agricultural use, pursuant to sub paragraph 4 of this
paragraph and the area proposed to be affected had previously been quarried and,
cannot be reclaimed by contouring and reaffecting the area is likely to produce an
environmental benefit.
9. The manner in which the operator plans to control surface water drainage
including a practicable method of preventing or avoiding surface and ground
water contamination.
10. The reclamation plan must propose the restoration of the affected areas within two
years following the termination of quarrying operations in that particular area. It
is not intended that reclamation await the completion of quarrying operations on
the entire tract.
e. The Zoning Hearing Board shall in addition require that the applicant post sufficient
security by Performance Bond or Letter of Credit to guarantee compliance with all
aspects of the reclamation plan, provided however that the amount of this obligation may
be reduced by the amount of any effective security which the Zoning Hearing Board finds
has been posted with the Commonwealth pursuant to the Surface Mining Act.
f. The Zoning Hearing Board shall require that the applicant establish that there will be no
discharge of chemicals or other hazardous material, which may pollute ground or surface
water or soil.
2. Operational Requirements
SECTION 361 MACHINERY EQUIPMENT; OPERATIONS
All machinery, equipment and materials used in quarrying; all processing and manufacturing
operations; and all hauling of quarrying products must be maintained, operated, or conducted in
such a manner that in a Residential Zone—
III-41
a. Flying objects and debris are not thrown.
b. Noxious gases are not disseminated.
c. There is no appreciable noise, vibration, dust or mist
SECTION 362 BARRIERS
a. Fencing
A six (6)-foot substantial fence or other suitable barrier six (6)-feet high must surround
the area of actual quarrying, unless such requirement is waived by Special Permit issued
by the Zoning Hearing Board. If guarded at all times, the entrance of the pit where
adjacent to the quarry office may be left unfenced.
b. Screens
Where the quarry operations will substantially impair the beauty and character of the
surrounding countryside, trees or shrubs must be planted, or attractive earth barriers
erected, to screen the operation as far as practical from normal view.
SECTION 363 WASHING
The washing of any earth material is permitted except—
a. Where the quantity of water required will seriously affect the supply for residential uses
in the area.
b. Where in the written opinion of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, disposal of water will result in contamination, pollution, or excessive silting.
SECTION 364 SETBACKS FROM RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Where the lot or parcel of land which is the focus of quarrying operations is adjacent to a
Residential Zone:
a. No stockpiles, waste piles, processing or manufacturing equipment, may be closer than
1,000 feet to the Residential Zone.
b. No part of the quarrying pit, private access road, truck parking area, scales, or operational
equipment, may be closer than five hundred (500) feet to the Residential Zone.
III-42
SECTION 365 STREET SETBACKS
From the right-of-way line of a public street or highway, no part of the quarrying pit, stockpiles,
waste piles, processing or manufacturing equipment, scales, or operational equipment, may be
closer than one hundred (100) feet.
SECTION 366 PROPERTY LINE SETBACKS
From a property line, except for those following:
a. No part of the quarrying pit, stockpiles, waste piles, processing or manufacturing
equipment, may be closer than two hundred (200) feet.
b. No private access road, truck parking area, scales, or operational equipment, may be
closer than one hundred (100) feet.
Where a quarry property abuts another quarry property, an operating railroad's right-of-way
property or a property in an Agricultural Zone, no part of the quarrying operation except an
access road may be closer than fifty (50) feet.
3. Rehabilitation Requirements
SECTION 370 REHABILITATION REQUIRED
The operator must implement the reclamation plan approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards and time frame set forth in such plan.
SECTION 371 REMOVAL OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Within two years after termination of operations all plant and equipment must be removed except
where the plant and equipment is still used for processing earth material from other properties. In
the event it continues to be used for processing earth material from other properties it must be
removed within two years after it stops being used for such purpose. If covered, foundations and
piers may be left in the ground.
III-43
SECTION 372 REPORTING OF OPERATIONAL REHABILITATION
INFORMATION
In order to keep the Zoning Officer abreast of impending termination of quarrying operations and
plans for rehabilitation as well as operational activities which he has a duty to check, each quarry
owner or operator must submit to the Zoning Officer, annually in the month of October, the
information following:
a. Operational Data.
1. Ownership and acreage of the land which is the situs of quarrying operations,
including all land held under contract or lease.
2. Type of earth resources quarried.
3. Present depth of quarrying operations.
b. Location map, at a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, or such other scale acceptable to the
Township, showing—
1. All land owned or under option, contract or lease.
2. Lot or land quarried
3. As practical, contours at twenty (20)-feet intervals extending beyond the site to
the nearest public street or highway.
4. Private access roads and abutting streets and highways.
5. Existing structures
6. Existing stockpiles and waste piles
7. Title, scale, north point, and date.
8. Fencing and screen planting. If fencing is vegetation, give details of size and type.
c. Reclamation Plan
1. The extent to which the reclamation plan has been implemented.
2. The planned reclamation during the succeeding year.
3. The exact dimensions of the land, which is currently used for quarrying and has
not been reclaimed. III-44
G. ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 390 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
In all Districts all non-agricultural uses and activities established after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall comply with the following performance standards; all existing non-agricultural
uses and activities in compliance with the following performance standards on the effective date
of this Ordinance shall continue in compliance; and all existing non-agricultural uses and
activities not in compliance with Section 390(a) through 390(e) regarding environmental
standards shall, within two (2) years following the effective date of this Ordinance, bring
themselves into compliance.
a. The sound level of any operation shall not exceed the decibel levels of the preferred
frequencies cited below or as modified or exempted. The sound pressure level shall be
measured with an octave bank analyzer calibrated in the preferred frequencies
conforming to the specifications published by the American Standard Association
(preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements, SI 6-1960 American Standards
Association, New York, New York)
1. Standards - At no point on the District boundary of or at any point within any
District shall the sound-pressure level resulting from any operation in any District
exceed the maximum permitted sound levels set forth below expressly or waived
in paragraph 2 below.
Center Frequency Maximum Sound-Pressure Level
(Cycles per second) (Decibels)
31.5 65
63 67
125 66
250 59
500 52
1,000 46
2,000 37
4,000 26
8,000 17
(Sound pressure level in decibels equals 020002 dynes/cm)
2. Waivers - The following sources of noise are exempt.
a. ) Transportation vehicles not under the control of an on-site use.
III-45
b. ) Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves.
c. ) Temporary construction activity between 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M.
b. Vibration
No use shall cause vibrations exceeding the maximum values specified in this section.
The maximum vibration is given as particles velocity, which may be measured directly
with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency.
When computed the following formula shall be used.
PV=6.28 F X D where
PV=Particle velocity, inches per second
F=Vibration frequency, cycles per second
D=Single amplitude displacement of the vibration inches.
Particle velocity shall be the vector sum of three individual components measured
simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular directions.
Maximum Ground Transmitted Vibration
Particle Velocity (Inches/Second)
Adjacent Residential
Zoning District (Lot Line) District
Conservation, Agricultural & Residential 0.05 0.02
Commercial & Industrial 0.10 0.02
Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses and such impulses do not exceed a
frequency of sixty (60) per minute, then the values in this table may be multiplied by two.
c. Heat
No heat from any use shall be sensed at any property line to the extent of raising the
temperature of air or materials more than one degree F.
d. Glare
In Commercial or Industrial Districts, any operation or activity-producing glare shall be
conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause illumination in
excess of 0.5 foot candles when measured in any district other than a Commercial or
Industrial.
e. Air Pollution
III-46
1. A person, partnership, corporation, or association may not cause or permit on land
owned by him the emission into the outdoor atmosphere or any malodorous
contaminates from any source in such manner that the malodors are detectable
outside of the property of the person on whose land the source is being operated.
For purpose of this section, malodor is an odor which causes annoyance or
discomfort to the public and which the Township determines to be objectionable
to the public.
2. A person, partnership, corporation or association may not cause or permit on land
owned by him the emission into the outdoor atmosphere of any particulate air
contaminates from any source in such manner that the particulates are detectable
by human senses outside of the property of the person on whose land the source is
being operated.
3. The discharge of any substance into the atmosphere shall be in strict compliance
with the provisions of the Federal Clean Air Act and the Pennsylvania Air
Pollution Control Act (35 P.S. S4005) and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, all of which regulations are incorporated herein by reference.
Amended 2/4/02
SECTION 391 APPLICATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
If, in the considered judgment of the Zoning Officer, there is a probable violation of the
performance standards set forth herein, the following procedures shall be followed:
1. The Zoning Officer shall give written notice, by certified mail, to the person or persons
responsible for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the
alleged violation and the reasons why the Zoning Officer believes there is a violation and
shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer within a time limit set by the Zoning Officer. The notice shall state, and it
is hereby declared, that failure to reply or correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer within the time set constitutes admission of violation of the terms
of this Ordinance.
Except in connection with alleged violations of section 390(e) regarding air pollution, the
notice shall state that, on request of those to whom it is directed, technical determinations
shall be made as to the existence of the alleged violation and if a violation is determined
to exist the cost of such determination shall be charged against those responsible for the
violation, in addition to other penalties as may be appropriate, but that, if it is determined
that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the Township.
2. If there is no reply within the time limit set but the alleged violation is corrected to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, he shall note "Violation Corrected" on his copy of the
notice and shall retain it among his official records, taking such other action as may be
warranted.
III-47
3. If there is no reply within the time limit set and the violation is not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer within the time limit set, he shall take of cause to be
taken such action as is warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
4. If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the alleged violation will be
corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer but requesting additional time, the
Zoning Officer may grant an extension of time if he deems it warranted in the
circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life, health or property.
5. If a reply is received within the time set requesting technical determination as provided in
this Ordinance and if the alleged violation continues, the Zoning Officer may call in
property qualified experts to make the determinations. If such determinations indicate
violation of the performance standards, the cost of the determinations shall be assessed,
against the person or persons responsible for the violation, in addition to such other
penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of Section 417 of this Ordinance.
If no violation is found, the cost of the determinations shall be paid by the Township
without assessment against person or persons involved.
SECTION 392 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
The following uses and activities are prohibited if located completely or partially within any of
the areas identified as being subject to the one hundred (100) year flood in the Flood Insurance
Study prepared for Peach Bottom Township by the Federal Insurance Administration in March,
1981:
1. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the construction, enlargement,
or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following
activities:
a. Hospitals
b. Nursing homes
c. Jails or prisons
2. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision.
3. Any new or substantially approved structure which:
a. Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances; or
III-48
b. Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
five hundred fifty (550) gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
c. Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances.
The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:
1. ) Acetone
2. ) Ammonia
3. ) Benzene
4. ) Calcium carbide
5. ) Carbon disulfide
6. ) Celluloid
7. ) Chlorine
8. ) Hydrochloric acid
9. ) Hydro cyanic
10. ) Magnesium
11. ) Nitric acid and Oxides of nitrogen
12. ) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
13. ) Phosphorus
14. ) Potassium
15. ) Sodium
16. ) Sulfur and sulfur products
17. ) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
18. ) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
SECTION 393 SEWAGE
1. Hereafter no sewage system of any kind shall be erected, constructed, installed, altered,
or extended within the limits of Peach Bottom Township except as set forth in Section 1
of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance, unless a permit to do so shall
first be secured in accordance with the provisions of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage
Permit Ordinance and unless such erection, construction, installation, alteration, or
extension is in strict accordance with the application submitted pursuant to the Peach
Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance and with the permit issued pursuant thereto
and in accordance with the procedures set forth in such ordinance.
2. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall maintain or use any sewage disposal
system of any kind so that vectors (insects or rodents capable of carrying disease) may
have access to the excrementitious matter contained therein or so that the sewage disposal
system directly or indirectly drains or discharges over or upon the surface of the ground
III-49
3. or into any waters of the Township. It shall also be unlawful for any person, firm,
association, or corporation to fail to comply with the requirements as set forth in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Section 2 of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit
Ordinance.
4. All the provisions of the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance are
incorporated herein by reference. Any violation of any provision of that ordinance shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 394 CEMETERY
The applicant must establish that water supplies will not be contaminated by burial activity
within the proposed cemetery. All interments must utilize a sealed concrete burial vault.
SECTION 395 FUNERAL HOME
The applicant must establish that all bio-hazardous materials will be disposed of in accordance
with all applicable state, federal, and local regulations.
SECTION 396 MEDICAL CLINIC, LABORATORIES
The applicant must establish that all bio-hazardous materials will be disposed of in accordance
with all applicable state, federal, and local regulations.
SECTION 397 TREE REMOVAL IN ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
1. For purpose of this section, areas which contain slopes in excess of eighteen percent
(18%) and/or areas which are located within fifty (50) feet of a stream measured
horizontally are declared to be environmentally sensitive areas.
2. No person, firm, association or corporation shall cause or permit more than fifty per cent
(50%) of trees in excess of twenty (20) feet in height to be cut or removed from an
environmentally sensitive area without a plan approved by the Township. For purpose of
calculating the percentage of trees removed from any area, the area shall include the
location where any particular tree is cut or removed and all locations within fifty (50) feet
of such point. The fifty percent (50%) limitation shall be based upon the number of trees
within the “area” as of one year prior the commencement of cutting or removal of trees.
3. Irrespective of whether a plan is required, a property owner shall not permit erosion to
occur on the property where trees are being cut, or permit storm water flow from such
property to damage neighboring properties.
III-50
4. Plan Requirements -
The plan, which must be submitted and approved in the event more than fifty per cent
(50%) of trees in excess of twenty (20) feet in height are proposed to be removed from an
area, shall include the following:
a. Design of the access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and
landings;
b. Design of water control measures and structures, such as culverts, broad base
dips, filter strips and water bars;
c. Design of stream and wetland crossings; and all necessary federal and state
permits which accompany such crossings;
d. An erosion and sediment control plan;
e. A plan for use of the area following tree removal. If the plan is for forest
regeneration, the plan must clearly delineate how the forest will in fact be
regenerated and provide assurance that such regeneration will in fact occur. If the
plan does not propose regeneration of the forest, it must establish how the area
will be stabilized on a long term basis so that erosion does not occur and that there
will not be increased water flow onto neighboring properties;
f. Each plan shall include a site map which shall include the following information:
(1) Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property
on which tree removal is to occur and the area within the property on
which tree removal will occur;
(2) Significant topographic features located within the area where tree
removal is proposed to occur;
(3) The location of all proposed earth disturbance activities such as roads and
landings;
(4) The location of all proposed water control measures and structures and all
proposed stream crossings;
(5) The location of the access system including haul roads, skid roads and
trails; and
(6) The location of any wetlands which will be disturbed by tree removal
activity.
5. Plan Review -
a. The erosion and sediment control plan must be reviewed and approved by
the York County Conservation District.
b. The plan will be approved by the Township only if it finds that the
environmentally sensitive areas will be protected both during and
following the tree removal process, and that excess water flow will not
occur on neighboring properties so as to cause damage to such property.
6. Following approval of the plan, the property owner shall take all measures to fully
implement the approved plan including, but not limited to, all of the provisions of
such plan designed to prevent erosion and prevent damage to neighboring
properties
7. In the event the implementation of the measures set forth on an approved plan fail
to prevent erosion or damage to neighboring properties, the owner where such
tree removal has occurred shall take such further measures as the Township finds
reasonably necessary to prevent further erosion, remedy the effects of prior
erosion caused by the tree removal and to repair damage which occurred to
neighboring properties and to prevent further damage to such properties.
8. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the removal of trees to permit
the construction of new buildings, driveways, wells or sewage disposal systems
following the issuance of permits permitting the construction of such facilities at
the proposed location.
9. In addition to the other penalties provided in this ordinance, anyone cutting or
removing trees or permitting trees to be cut or removed in violation of this
ordinance shall replant trees in the area where such trees were cut or removed.
Trees shall be varieties approved by the Township, be of a minimum diameter of
one and one half (1-1/2) inches, be at least six (6) feet in height and be planted not
further than twenty (20) feet apart. Any of the replanted trees which die within
five (5) years from being planted shall be removed and replaced within six (6)
months following the time such tree died by the then owner of the property. The
replanting requirement shall not apply to areas where permits have been issued to
permit the construction of new buildings, driveways, wells or sewage disposal
systems.
Added 4/1/13
PART IV
ADMINISTRATION
A. APPLICANT-PERMITS, VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
AND PENALTIES
SECTION 400 BUILDING PERMITS
Hereafter no building or structure shall be erected, moved, placed, constructed or enlarged within
the limits of Peach Bottom Township unless a permit to do so shall first be secured in accordance
with the provisions of the Township Building Permit Ordinance, all of which are incorporated
herein by reference and unless a permit is secured in accordance with the provisions of the
Construction Code Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township if such permit is required by the
provisions of that ordinance, all of which provisions are incorporated herein by reference.
Hereafter no building or structure shall be altered, repaired, demolished or removed within the
limits of Peach Bottom Township unless a permit to do so shall first be secured in accordance
with the provisions of the Construction Code Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township if a permit is
required by that ordinance for such alteration. All erection, movement, placement, construction
and enlargement must be performed in strict accordance with the application submitted pursuant
to the Peach Bottom Township Building Permit Ordinance, any application submitted pursuant
to the Construction Code Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township and with the permit issued
pursuant thereto and in accordance with the procedures set forth in such ordinance. Any violation
of the provisions of the Township Building Permit Ordinance and any violation of the
Construction Code Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance. All building permits expire twelve (12) months following date of issuance but may be
renewed for two additional nine (9) month periods as more fully set forth in the Township
Building Permit Ordinance.
Amended 3/1/10
SECTION 401 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
For any use permitted by special exception, a special exception must be obtained from the
Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the information required on the building permit
application, the special exception application must show—
a. Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structure.
b. Names and addresses of adjoining owners. Unless otherwise specified or extended by the
Zoning Hearing Board a special exception authorized by the Board expires if the
applicant fails to obtain, where required to do so a building permit within six (6) months
of the date of the authorization of the special exception.
IV-1
SECTION 402 TEMPORARY PERMITS
1. A temporary permit may be obtained from the Zoning Officer to permit a construction
trailer or storage shed to be located on a property provided a building permit has been
issued to permit construction of a dwelling on the property. Such construction trailer or
storage shed must be removed prior to issuance of a use certificate to permit use and
occupancy of such dwelling.
2. A temporary permit may be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board for a
nonconforming structure or use which is or will be seasonal or is or will be in the public
interest (See Section 453)
SECTION 403 HARDSHIP PERMIT
The Board of Supervisors may grant a hardship permit to place a mobile home or other
residential unit on a lot where the same would not otherwise be permitted by the terms of this
Ordinance provided the applicant establishes that:
1. All of the residential units located on the tract of land where the mobile home or other
residential unit is proposed to be located are occupied by the landowner or a member of
his family, Family to include only ancestors and direct descendants of the landowner.
This condition shall not apply if the residential unit not occupied by a member of the
family is at such a distance from the residence of the owner of the tract of land so as not
to permit the owner of the tract of land to render the personal care to a member of the
family as contemplated by this section or alternatively to receive the care contemplated
by this section; and
2. No rent or other consideration will be received for the use of the mobile home or other
residential unit or the space which the same occupies; and
3. There is a genuine medical hardship involved which requires that the occupant of the
mobile home or other residential unit for which the permit is issued live in close
proximity to the owner of the tract of land on which the mobile home or other residential
unit is to be placed so as to enable the occupant of the mobile home or other residential
unit to give or alternatively receive the personal care contemplated by this section of the
Ordinance.
In addition the applicant must establish that:
4. The occupant of the mobile home or other residential unit to be permitted will provide
care to one or more of the landowners who reside on the tract of land in question and own
the mobile home or other residential unit; or
IV-2
5. The occupant of the mobile home or other residential unit is a parent or grandparent of
one or more of the landowners who reside on the tract of land in question and will receive
care from one or more of such landowners.
The hardship permit shall be for such period of time as all of the conditions permitting its
issuance continue to exist and shall automatically terminate when any of those conditions
are no longer met. Such mobile home or other residential unit must be removed from the
premises within ninety (90) days following the expiration of the permit.
SECTION 405 USE CERTIFICATES
Before commencing
(a) Any use of a structure erected, constructed, placed, moved or altered after the
effective date of this ordinance;
(b) Any use of any portion of a structure which has been altered, repaired,
demolished or removed in such manner as to require a permit under the
Construction Code Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township;
(c) Any use of vacant land except for agricultural purposes; or
(d) Any change of use of any land or structure
The owner must have the intended use certified by the Zoning Officer as being in compliance
with this ordinance and all other relevant township ordinances. Before any use certificate or
certificate of use and occupancy is issued for any structure or portion of a structure erected,
constructed, placed, moved, altered, repaired, demolished or removed after the effective date of
this ordinance, the Zoning Officer must verify that the structure is in compliance with all
requirements of the Township Building Permit Ordinance and that the Building Code Official
has verified that the structure is in compliance with all requirements of the Construction Code
Ordinance of Peach Bottom Township. The application for a use certificate or a certificate of use
and occupancy must include a statement of the intended use and any existing use of the structure
or land. The certificate continues in effect as long as the use of the structure or land for which it
is granted conforms with this ordinance. Added 9/7/11
SECTION 410 VARIANCES
where (a) the strict application of a regulation of this Ordinance would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulty to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of
property and (b) this difficulty or hardship is due to unique physical circumstances or physical
conditions of the owner’s property, he may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance
from the regulation. The application must be on a form provided for that purpose by the Zoning
IV-3
Officer. It must be filed with the Board and copies given to the Zoning Officer and Planning
Commission. The applicant must provide all the information requested on the form, together
with any other information and data that may be required to advise the Board on the variance,
whether such information is called for by the official form or not.
Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance authorized by it expires if the
applicant fails to obtain a building permit within (6) months from the date of authorization of the
variance.
SECTION 412 APPEALS - ZONING HEARING BOARD
Any person aggrieved or affected by provision of this Ordinance or decision of the Zoning
Officer, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The appeal must be on a form provided for
that purpose by the Zoning Officer. It must be filed with the Board and a copy given the Zoning
Officer. The appellant must provide all the information requested on the form, together with any
other information and data that may be required to advise to the Board on the appeal, whether
such information is called for by the official form or not.
SECTION 413 APPEALS--COURTS OF LAW
Within thirty (30) days after a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board—
a. a person aggrieved by the decision
b. a taxpayer, or
c. the Board of Township Supervisors
may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of the County, by petition, setting forth that the
decision is arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law,
and specifying the ground upon which he relies.
SECTION 415 FEES
For each application, permit, or appeal, the applicant or appellant must pay the Township a fee as
set by the Township Supervisors.
SECTION 416 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this Ordinance, the
IV-4
Township Board of Supervisors or with the approval of the Township Broad of Supervisors, as
officer of the Township, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially effected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping, or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by
landowner, or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Township at least thirty (30)
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Township
Board of Supervisors. No such action shall be maintained until such notice has been given.
SECTION 417 PENALTIES
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance shall upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment in the amount of Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the Defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determines that there has been a violation and
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating the Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation, until the fifth day following the date of
determination of violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs or reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid over the Township.
SECTION 418 PUBLIC HEARINGS
At public hearings, the applicant or appellant is entitled to the rights set forth in Part IV-C-4, and
must conform to the procedures set forth there.
IV-5
B. ZONING OFFICER
SECTION 420 APPOINTMENT AND POWERS
For the administration of this Ordinance, a Zoning Officer, who may hold other office in the
Township, shall be appointed. The Zoning Officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance in
accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any
use or change of use, which does not conform to the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Officer is
the enforcement officer for this Ordinance. He issues all building permits, use certificates, and at
direction of the Zoning Hearing Board, special permits and variances.
SECTION 421 FORMS
The Zoning Officer must provide a form or forms prepared by the Township Solicitor for—
a. Building permits
b. Special permits
c. Use certificates
d. Appeals
e. Variances
SECTION 422 TRANSMITTAL OF PAPERS
Upon a receipt of an application for a special permit, variance or a notice of appeal, the Zoning
Officer must transmit to the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board and to the Planning
Commission, copies of all papers constituting the record upon the special permit, variance, or
appeal.
SECTION 423 ACTION ON BUILDING PERMITS
Within ninety (90) days, except for holidays, after receipt of an application for a building permit,
the Zoning Officer must grant or refuse the permit. If the application conforms to the applicable
requirements of the building permit Ordinance and this Ordinance, the Zoning Officer must grant
a permit. If the permit is not granted he must state in writing the grounds for his refusal and the
manner in which the application can be corrected and/or modified to obtain the required approval
if such correction and/or modification is possible.
IV-6
SECTION 424 ACTION ON USE CERTIFICATES
Within 90 days, except for holidays, after receipt of an application for a use certificate, the
Zoning Officer must grant or refuse the certificate. If the specifications and intended use
conform in all respects with the provisions of this Ordinance, he must issue a certificate to that
effect. Otherwise, he must state in writing the grounds of his refusal.
If the permit is not granted, he must state in writing the grounds for his refusal and the manner in
which the application can be corrected and/or modified to obtain the required approval if such
correction and/or modification is possible.
SECTION 426 RECORDS
The Zoning Officer must keep a record of—
a. All applications for building permits, use certificates, special permits and variances and
all actions taken on them, together with any conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
b. All plans submitted.
All records and plans are available for public inspection.
SECTION 427 REPORTS
At intervals of not greater than six (6) months, the Zoning Officer should report to the Township
Supervisors--
a. The number of building permits and use certificates issued.
b. The number of complaints of violations received and the action taken on these
complaints.
IV-7
C.__ZONING HEARING BOARD - POWERS & DUTIES
1. General
SECTION 430 MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD
The membership of the Board shall consist of three residents of the Township appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. Their terms of office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the
Township Supervisors of any vacancies, which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be
only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the Township.
SECTION 431 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such
and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may
appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct the hearing on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in Part IV-C-4. The Board may make,
alter, and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with Ordinances of the Township
and laws of the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and
shall submit a report of its activities to the governing body once a year.
SECTION 432 POWERS
The Zoning Hearing Board has the following powers:
a. Interpretation: to interpret any provision of this Ordinance including zone boundaries.
b. Special Exceptions: to hear and decide special exceptions upon which the Board is
required to pass under this Ordinance as per PartIV-C-2 following.
c. Appeals: to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or
interpretation of this Ordinance.
d. Variances: to authorize, upon application, in specific cases a variance from the terms of
the Ordinance as per Part IV-C-3 following.
e. Rehearing: to grant the rehearing of a case if it appears there has been a substantial
change in the facts as evidence of the case as presented at the initial hearing.
IV-8
In exercising the powers above, the Board, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance,
may reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from
or requested, and may make any order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made.
SECTION 433 BOARD CALENDAR
Each application or appeal filed in the proper form with the required data, must be numbered
serially, and be placed upon the calendar of the Board by the Zoning Officer. Applications and
appeals must be assigned for hearing in order in which they appear on the calendar. However, for
good reason, the Board may order the advance of the application or appeal. The Board must fix a
reasonable time of the hearings.
2. Special Exceptions
SECTION 440 REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION
All applications for a special exception shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a report.
The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall insure that a copy of its report is delivered to
the Township Secretary for inclusion in the permanent record of the application, to the Zoning
Officer and to the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 441 CONDITIONS
The Zoning Hearing Board in passing upon special exception applications may attach conditions
considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the comprehensive plan, including
conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone.
SECTION 442 APPLICATION OF EXTENT-OF-USE REGULATIONS
The extent-of-use regulations as set forth in this Ordinance must be followed by the Zoning
Hearing Board. Where no extent-of-use regulations are set forth for the particular use, the Board
must impose extent-of-use requirements as necessary to protect the public welfare and the
Comprehensive Plan.
IV-9
SECTION 443 GENERAL STANDARDS
The Zoning Hearing Board, before granting a special exception for any use, must find that the
use and the operations in connection with it would be in harmony with the orderly and
appropriate development of the zone. In particular, the Board must make the findings following
in writing:
a. Use: that the items below are in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development
of the zone;
1. Location of the use, including location with respect to the existing or future streets
giving access to it.
2. Nature and intensity of the operations involved.
b. The applicant must establish that the drainage requirements of Section 270 through 275
of this Ordinance will be complied with.
c. Buildings, Walls, and Fences: that the use of adjacent land and buildings will not be
discouraged and the value of adjacent land and buildings will not be impaired by the
location, nature, and height of buildings, walls, and fences.
d. Traffic: that the use will not create traffic congestion or cause commercial or industrial
traffic to use residential streets.
e. The applicant must establish that adequate provision can and will be made to dispose of
the sewerage created by the proposed use consistent with the requirements set forth in the
regulations promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
and with the requirements of the Township Sewage Permit Ordinance.
f. If connection to an existing public water supply system is proposed, the applicant must
submit an agreement committing the public water system to provide such water as will be
utilized by the proposed special exception use for such period of time and under such
terms and conditions as the public water supply system provides water service elsewhere
in its service area. If the water supply system proposed involves the utilization of water
obtained from the tract proposed for the location of the special exception use, or from a
nearby tract, the applicant must establish that the ground water recharge on the tract
where the water supply system is located, after development, computed during draught
conditions (when the precipitation is forty (40) percent below normal) will exceed
projected water usage. The Zoning Hearing Board may require as a condition of the
approval that the applicant execute an agreement with the Township committing the
proposed special exception use not to utilize more ground water on a daily basis than the
ground water recharge computed during drought conditions and to establish procedures
pursuant to which the usage can be verified.
IV-10
g. The applicant must establish that the environmental standards set forth in Section 390 of
this Ordinance will be complied with.
Additional findings or considerations to weigh for particular uses follow in the remainder of this
Part IV-C-2 or in Part III.
The applicant shall have the burden of proof with respect to each and every standard and
requirement for the obtaining of a special permit as set forth in Part III, in this section, the
following Sections of this Part IV-C-2, and with respect to the drainage requirements as
specifically set forth in Sections 270, 271, 272, 273, 274 and 275 of this Ordinance.
The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof, which shall include the
burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact
which are to be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special exception
authorized by the Board expires if the applicant fails to, where required to do so, obtain a
building permit or use certificate within six (6) month of the date of the authorization of the
special exception or fails to complete the work in the one (1) year next following the issuing of
the building permit; excepting that in cases where the granting of a building permit or use
certificate must be preceded by Township approval of a subdivision or land development plan,
the special exception authorized by the Board expires if:
1. The applicant fails to file with the Township a preliminary subdivision or land
development plan meeting applicable subdivision and zoning requirements within six (6)
month of the date of the authorization of the special exception; or
2. Fails to file with the Township a final subdivision or land development plan meeting
applicable subdivision and zoning requirements within six (6) months of the date of the
approval by the Township of the preliminary plan; or
3. Fails to obtain a building permit or use certificate within six (6) month of the date of the
approval by the Township of the final plan; or
4. Fails to complete the work within one (1) year of the issuing of the building permit.
SECTION 444 STANDARDS FOR EXPANSION OF
NONCONFORMING USES
In passing upon a special exception application for the expansion of nonconforming uses the
Zoning Hearing Board must require the following:
a. Expansion Confined to Lot: that expansion of the nonconforming use be confined to the
lot on which the use is located on the effective date of this Ordinance.
IV-11
b. Access, Parking & Loading: provision of access drives, off-street parking and off-street
loading consistent with standards required by this Ordinance.
c. Yards, Height & Building Area: provision of yards, building height and building area
consistent with the standards required for permitted uses in the same zone in which the
nonconforming use in question is located.
d. Appearance: that appearance is harmonious with surrounding properties. This feature
includes but is not limited to: landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses,
height control, sign control, architectural control and maintenance in good condition of
all improvements and open spaces.
e. Buffers and Screens: buffers and screens as necessary to adequately protect neighboring
properties, including, but not limited to fences, walls, planting and open space.
f. Additional Requirements: such additional requirements as may be necessary to assure
that the proposed expansion will not impair the use or development of neighboring
properties.
SECTION 445 STANDARDS FOR REPLACEMENT OF ONE
NONCONFORMING USE BY ANOTHER NONCONFORMING USE
Before granting a special exception for the replacement of one nonconforming use by another,
the Zoning Hearing Board must determine that the proposed nonconforming use will have no
more adverse effect upon adjacent property than the existing nonconforming use. In making this
determination, the Board should consider particularly the effect upon adjacent property of the
following:
a. Signs and lighting
b. Extent and appearance of structures
c. Traffic generation and movement
d. Parking and loading
e. Emission of noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors, gases, wastes or storm
water runoff
f. Fire, explosion or other hazards
g. Discharge of chemicals or other hazardous materials, which may pollute ground or
surface water or soil
IV-12
3. Variances
SECTION 450 REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION
All applications for a type-of-use variance shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a
report.
The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall insure that a copy of its report is delivered to
the Township Secretary for inclusion in the permanent record of the application, to the Zoning
Officer and to the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 451 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES
Where there is unnecessary hardship, the Board may grant a variance in the application of the
Provisions of this Ordinance only if all the findings following, in writing, are made:
a. There are unique physical circumstances or conditions including (1) irregularity,
narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape or (2) exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to a particular property, and is not due to circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the
neighborhood or zone in which the property is located.
b. Because of these physical circumstances or conditions, the property cannot reasonably be
used in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
c. The unnecessary hardship is not financial in nature and has not been created by the
appellant.
d. The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or
zone in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
e. The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief
and will represent the last modification possible of the regulation in issue.
SECTION 452 CONDITIONS
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
considers necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance.
IV-13
SECTION 453 TEMPORARY PERMITS--GRANTING OF
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a temporary permit for a nonconforming use or structure,
existing or new, which—
a. is beneficial to the public health or general welfare, or
b. is necessary to promote the proper development of the community, or
c. is seasonal in nature
The permit may be issued for a period not exceeding one (1) year, and may be renewed for an
aggregate period not exceeding three (3) years. The nonconforming structure or use must be
completely removed upon the expiration of the permit without cost to the Township.
4. Public Hearings
SECTION 460 PROCEDURES
a. Notice
The notice required by this section of the Ordinance shall be given by the official
designated by the Board of Supervisors to give such notice. Such official shall give
public notice which for purposes of this section shall mean notice published one each
week for two successive weeks in the Delta Star. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. In addition
such official shall give written notice to anyone designated to receive such written notice
by the rules of the Zoning Hearing Board and in addition, written notice shall be given to
the applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any persons who have made timely requests for
the same. In addition to the written notice provided herein, the officer designated by the
Board of Supervisors to give the notice as required by this section shall at least one week
prior to the hearing post written notice of said hearing at a conspicuous location on the
affected tract of land.
b. Fees
The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before
the Zoning Hearing Board. Such fees shall be deficient to defray the cost of said hearing
including compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board,
notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the
hearing. Such fees shall not be intended to defray the legal expenses of the Zoning
Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness fees.
IV-14
c. Hearings
1. The hearings shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's
request unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
2. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may appoint any
member as a Hearing Officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for,
the findings shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant,
as the case may be, in addition to the municipality, may, prior to the decision of
the hearing, waive the decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision
or findings of the hearing officer as final.
3. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board, and any
other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Board. The Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board
for that purpose.
4. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer presiding
shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers,
including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
5. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded
the opportunity to respond to present evidence and argument and cross examine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
6. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence may be excluded.
7. The Board or the Hearing Officer as the case may be shall keep a stenographic
record of the proceedings.
8. The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate directly or indirectly
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except
9. upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of
any communication, report, staff memorandum or other materials except advice
from their solicitor unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties
are given an opportunity to be present.
10. The Board or the Hearing Officer as the case may be shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for; make written findings on the
application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Board or
Hearing Officer. When the application is contested or denied, each decision shall
be accompanied by finding of fact and conclusions based thereon together with
the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any
Ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the faces
found. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final the Board shall make his report
and recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days and the
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior
to the final decision or entry of findings and the Board’s decision shall be entered
no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the Hearing Officer. When the
Board fails to render a decision within the period required by this subsection, or
fails to hold the required hearings within sixty (60) days from the date of the
applicant’s request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to be rendered in
favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record
to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within
ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in subsection “a” of this section. If the Board shall fail to
provide such notice the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to
a court of competent jurisdiction.
11. A copy of the final decision or where no decision is called for, the findings shall
be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day
following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address
with the Board no later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by
mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings may be examined.
d. Records
1. The Zoning Officer shall retain records of all applications and notices given
pursuant to this section and shall make a record of the date any notice is sent or
posting performed pursuant to this section of the Ordinance.
2. He shall retain such records in a permanent file together with a copy of the
decision rendered in each case.
3. He shall in addition ensure that the Township secretary receives a copy of each
application and the decision rendered in connection therewith.
IV-15
SECTION 461 REPRESENTATION; STATEMENTS
The parties to the hearing shall be any person who is entitled to notice under Section 460 without
special request therefore who has made timely appearance of record before the Board and any
other person permitted to appear by the Board.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses
on all relevant issues.
Statements are to be made in the following order as the Chairman may direct:
a. Applicant or appellant
b. Zoning Officer and other officials
c. Any private citizens
The applicant or appellant must be given an opportunity for rebuttal.
SECTION 462 WITNESSES
The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer presiding shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
SECTION 463 DECISION PROCEDURE
The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for; make written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days. Each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based on any provisions of
this act or of any Ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on
and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the
hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings. Where the Board has power to render a decision and the Board or
the Gearing Officer, as the case may be, fails to render the same within the period required by
this clause, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, the finding shall be delivered to
the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other
persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the lost day of the
IV-16
hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and
a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
Whenever the Board imposes a condition or conditions with respect to the granting of an
application or appeal, this condition must be stated in the order of the Board and in the permit
issued pursuant to the order by the Zoning Officer. This permit remains valid only as long as the
condition or conditions upon which it was granted or the conditions imposed by this Ordinance
are adhered to.
SECTION 464 RECORDS
The Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a record of the proceedings,
either steno graphically or by sound recording, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of
graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any party cost.
D. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - POWERS AND DUTIES
SECTION 470 DRAINAGE
At the request of the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board the Township Engineer must
review site plans or other data to ascertain that provision for surface water drainage will be
adequate (Part II-B-5).
SECTION 471 BUILDING ADJACENT TO DRAINAGE CHANNELS
AND WATERCOURSES
The Township Engineer shall review plans for buildings adjacent to drainage channels or
watercourses to ascertain that the buildings will be an adequate distance from the high water line
(Part II-B-5).
SECTION 472 ZONING HEARING BOARD CASES
Where the exercise of the above powers and duties involves an application or appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Township Engineer shall make recommendations to the Board. The
approving authority in such cases shall be the Zoning Hearing Board and not the Township
Engineer.
IV-18
E.__PLANNING COMMISSION - POWERS AND DUTIES
SECTION 480 ZONING HEARING BOARD CASES
Within thirty (30) days of receiving an application for a special permit or variance from the
zoning Hearing Board, the Planning Commission must give a written report on it to the Board.
The Commission is governed by the same standards as the Board in making its recommendations
plus its special knowledge gathered from planning of the Township.
SECTION 481 AMENDMENTS
The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to the regulations and provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance to the Township Supervisors. For a proposed amendment stemming from
other sources, the Commission must review it ant make a recommendation regarding it to the
Township Supervisors within 45 days after receipt of the proposal.
SECTION 482 SCREEN WHERE C AND I ZONES ABUT R ZONES
In reviewing plans for fences or hedges where a C or I Zone abuts an R Zone, the Planning
Commission must accept or refuse the plans, depending on their adequacy for this purpose (see
Section 221).
SECTION 483 CONDITIONAL USES
All applications for conditional uses shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for
recommendation.
IV-19
F. TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS - POWERS AND DUTIES
SECTION 490 ZONING HEARING BOARD - APPOINTMENT
The Township Supervisors must appoint three (3) residents of the Township to a Zoning Hearing
Board. The Townships Supervisors must designate one (1) member to serve until the first day of
January following the effective date, one (1) member to serve until the first day of the second
January thereafter, and one (1) member to serve until the first day of the third January thereafter.
Successors must be appointed on the expiration of the respective terms above to serve three (3)
years. Appointments to fill vacancies must be only for the unexpired portion of the terms.
SECTION 491 CHANGES
The Township Supervisors may from time to time on its own motion, or on petition or on
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission, amend, supplement, or repeal any of
the regulations and provisions of this Ordinance after public notice and hearing. Before the
public hearing, a proposed change, except those coming from the Commission, must be referred
to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. If the Commission fails to make a
recommendation within forty-five (45) days the Township Supervisors may act without the
Commission’s recommendation.
SECTION 492 FEES
The Township Supervisors shall set fees for all applications, permits, variances, or appeals
provided for by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or by this Ordinance. Fees
shall be set to defray the costs of advertising, mailing notices, processing, inspecting, and
copying applications, permits, use certificates. In addition, fees shall be set to defray legal,
engineering, stenographic, professional service and member compensation for the Zoning
Hearing Board and Board of Supervisors if the action is brought before the Boards. The
payment of all fees and costs as set by the Board of Supervisors shall be prerequisite to the
validity of any permit, variance, ruling or decision issued in favor of an applicant pursuant to any
of the applicants set forth above. Amended 1/3/12
IV-20
PART V
GENERAL INTERPRETATION
A. DEFINITION
SECTION 500 GENERAL INTERPRETATION
In this Ordinance when not inconsistent with the context--
1. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"
2. Words in the present tense imply also to the future tense
3. The singular includes the plural
4. The male gender includes the female gender
5. The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory
6. The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as an individual
SECTION 501____SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES
ACCESSORY USE - A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure on
a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal structure.
ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An area of land or other area used for a solar
collection system used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or thermal power and
supply electrical or thermal power primarily for on-site use. An accessory solar energy system
consists of one (1) or more freestanding ground, or roof mounted solar arrays or modules, or solar
related equipment and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power or
fuels.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A subordinate structure or a portion of the principal structure
on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal structure.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY - An establishment open to the general public or a
private club open to members that is used and occupied for one or more of the following
activities:
Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coinoperated
or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing "sexual
conduct or sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas".
V-1
Adult Book Store or Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment which, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration
any one or more of the following:
A. books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which depict or describe "sexual conduct or sexual activity"or
"specified anatomical areas"; or
B. instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with "sexual conduct or sexual activity". A commercial establishment may have
other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental
of material depicting or describing "sexual conduct or sexual activity" or
"specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as "Adult Book Store" or
"Adult Video Store". Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishment from being categorized as an "Adult Book Store" or
"Adult Video Store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict
or describe "sexual conduct or "sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas."
Adult Cabaret means any facility which features dancers or similar entertainers who
perform with less than completely and opaquely covered all of the "specified anatomical
areas".
Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of "sexual conduct or sexual activity" or "specified
anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
B. offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours; or
C. allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "sexual conduct or sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or
by "sexual conduct or sexual activity".
AGRICULTURE - The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for
packing, treating or storing the produce and equipment and for housing and feeding the animals
and housing the equipment. The use of land as a place for the location of a dwelling is not an
agricultural use. This definition specifically excludes "CONCENTRATED ANIMAL
OPERATION", "CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION" and "LARGE
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION" which are defined separately herein.
ALTERATIONS - As applied to a building or structure, any change or rearrangement in the
total floor area, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location or position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL - Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
ANIMAL CONCENTRATION AREAS - Feedlots, loafing areas, or similar areas where
animals are confined without access to pasture. The term excludes areas managed as pastures or
cropland. The term also excludes pasture access ways if they do not cause direct flow of
nutrients to surface water or ground water.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL - A building used for the treatment, housing, or boarding of small
domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian.
APARTMENT, CONVERSION - A multi-family dwelling constructed by converting an
existing building into apartments for more than one family, without substantially altering the
exterior of the building.
APARTMENT HOUSE - A building occupied by three (3) or more dwelling units.
BASEMENT - A story having a part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade.
A basement shall be considered in determining building height.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN - A dwelling unit where, in exchange for compensation, the
owner, who resides on the premises, provides lodging and at least one meal for guests.
BELOW GROUND STORAGE FACILITY- Any one, or a combination of tanks or structures
(including underground pipes connected thereto) the volume of which (including underground
pipes connected thereto) is ten percent (10%) or more beneath the surface of the ground.
BOARDING HOUSE - A building, where for compensation, provisions are made for lodging
and meals for at least three (3) but not more than fifteen (15) persons.
BUILDING - Any structure or edifice designed or intended for use as an enclosure, a shelter, or
protection of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING AREA - The total area of outside dimensions on a horizontal plan at ground level
of the principal building and all accessory buildings.
BUILDING LINE - The required setback (front, side or rear) of a building from the property or
street line.
CAMPGROUND - Any park, tourist park, tourist camp, court, site, lot, parcel or tract of land
upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins are located and maintained for the
accommodations of transients by the day, week or month or upon which tents, recreational
vehicles or other temporary accommodations may be placed by transient occupants. It shall not
include mobile home parks.
CARETAKER OR WATCHMEN DWELLING - A temporary single-family dwelling placed
on property in either the "commercial" or in the "industrial" district as accessory to a commercial
or industrial business.
CELLAR - A story partly underground and having more than one-half (1/2) of it's clear heights
below the finished grade.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER - A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
that provides a wide range of formal day care services outside of a residence to children who are
not relatives of the caregiver.
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAO) - An agricultural operation that meets
both of the following criteria:
1. Contains 8.00 or more Animal Equivalent Units, and
2. Has an animal density in excess of two (2.00) animal equivalent units (or 2,000 lbs). on
an annualized basis. per acre of land suitable for manure application.
The number of animal equivalent units per acre is to be determined by application of the
provisions of Chapter 25, Pa. Code §262 to determine the total number of animal
equivalent units and dividing the total animal equivalent units by the total number
of acres of land suitable for application of manure for the Concentrated Animal
Operation. Land suitable for the application of manure can be identified by
referring to 25 Pa. Code §83.262(a)(2)(i)-(ii).
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO) – Any animal operation
that meets any of the following criteria:
1. A total of more than 1,000 Animal Equivalent Units (AEUs) on the operation; or
2. Any Concentrated Animal Operation with a total of more than 300 AEUs on the
operation; or
3. Any animal operation with more than the following numbers of animals specified in
any of the following categories:
a. 700 mature dairy cows, whether milked or dry;
b. 1,000 veal calves;
c. 1,000 cattle other than mature dairy cows or veal calves. Cattle includes, but is
not limited to heifers, steers, bulls and cow/calf pairs;
d. 2,500 swine each weighing 55 pounds or more;
e. 10,000 swine each weighing less than 55 pounds;
f. 500 horses;
g. 10,000 sheep or lambs;
h. 55,000 turkeys;
i. 30,000 laying hens or broilers, if the operation uses a liquid manure handling
system;
j. 125,000 chickens (other than laying hens), if the operation uses other than a liquid
manure handling system;
k. 82,000 laying hens, if the operation uses other than liquid manure handling
system;
l. 30,000 ducks (if the operation uses other than liquid manure handling system); or
m. 5,000 ducks (if the operation uses a liquid manure handling system).
Added 2/4/13
CORNER LOT - A lot having a frontage on two roads or streets which intersect each other at an
angle of less than one hundred twenty degrees (120 ) at a location either within or adjacent to the
lot, excepting that if one of the two roads or streets is a private road with a right-of-way of not
more than twenty-five (25) feet, such private road or street shall not cause the lot to be
considered a corner lot and the frontage on such private road or street shall not be considered a
front yard.
CROPLAND – Land planted in cultivated agriculture plants such as grain, vegetables fruit,
nursery plants, grass or legumes if utilized for hay or haylage as opposed to pasture or Christmas
trees. Added 6/2/08
DOMICILIARY CARE UNIT - A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or
more families which in addition to providing living quarters for one or more families, provides,
on a state or federally licensed and supervised basis twenty-four (24) hour supervised, protective
living arrangements by the families residing therein for not more than three (3) persons eighteen
(18) years of age and above who are disabled physically, mentally, emotionally or as a result of
old age and are unrelated to the family providing the care.
DRIVEWAY - A paved surface other than a street, which provides vehicular access from a
street or a private road to a lot
DWELLING - A building or structure designed for living quarters for one (1) or more families,
including mobile homes, but shall not include hotels, rooming houses, convalescent homes, or
other accommodations used for transient occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT - A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation. Added 5/3/10
FAMILY - A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household; two (2) or
more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption occupying a dwelling unit, living together
and maintaining a common household, or not more than three (3) unrelated persons occupying a
dwelling unit, living together, and maintaining a common household. Family may include court
appointed wards and foster children but not occupants of a club, fraternal lodging, rooming
house, boarding house, institutional care facility, personal care facility, or any other arrangement
pursuant to which compensation is paid in exchange for the right to reside in such facility, to
receive meals, supervision and/or care. Added 8/6/12
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - A facility located in a single family residence which provides
supervised care for remuneration to not more than ten (10) children at any one time who are not
relatives of the caregiver.
FARM - A tract of land containing at least fifty (50) acres which is used in the raising of
agricultural crops, fruit, livestock, poultry, fish, bees, or dairy products and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce and improved with a single family
dwelling, barns, sheds, and/or other farm buildings or structures normally utilized for housing
and feeding farm animals and storing farm equipment. This definition specifically excludes
"CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION", "CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING
OPERATION" and "LARGE CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION" which
are defined separately herein. (See Section 298 for non-conforming farm.) added 4/1/13
FOREST AND WILDLIFE PRESERVE - A tract of land containing at least ten (10) acres
utilized in its entirety for the production of forest products and/or the maintenance of a sanctuary
for wildlife (non-domesticated animals).
GLARE: The effect produced by light with intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or
loss in visual performance and visibility.
GROUP HOME - A building or structure used by a parent charitable, religious, educational,
philanthropic institution to provide a supportive living arrangement for individuals where special
care is needed by the individuals served due to age, emotional, mental, or physical handicap.
This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care of developmentally
disabled persons, those under treatment for alcohol abuse, drug abuse, or both, unwed parents,
and those who have been physically abused.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA - The aggregate of the horizontal areas of rooms used for
habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen, bed rooms, and bathrooms, but not
including hallways, stairways, cellars, basements, attics, service rooms or utility rooms, closets,
areas intended for the parking of motor vehicles, areas intended for storage of lawn and garden
equipment, areas intended for location of heating or ventilating equipment, or other similar
spaces, nor unheated such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or
skylight opening unto an outside yard or court. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet and the floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part
of the habitable floor area. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, shall be
ten (10%) percent of the habitable floor area of such room.
HEAVY COMMERCIAL USE - A commercial use, with a predominantly manufacturing or
industrial character due to the extent of production, repairing, or storing of goods such as
contractor's yards or storage tanks.
HOME OCCUPATIONS OR PROFESSION - A special type of accessory use. It is an
occupation or profession which--
1. Is carried on in a dwelling unit or in a structure accessory to a dwelling unit.
2. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit, and
3. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.
HOSPITAL - An institution having an organized medical staff which is primarily engaged in
providing to in patients, by or under the supervision of physicians, diagnostic and therapeutic
services for the care of injured, disabled, pregnant, diseased, sick or mentally ill persons, or
rehabilitation services of the rehabilitation of injured, disabled, pregnant, diseased, sick or
mentally ill persons. The term includes facilities of the diagnosis and treatment of disorders
within the scope of specific medical specialties, but not facilities caring exclusively for the
mentally ill.
HOUSING UNIT - A group of rooms or a single room occupied or intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters; that is, when the occupants do not live and eat with any other persons in
the building, and when there is either --
1. Direct access from the outside or through a common hall, or
2. A kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the occupants.
INDUSTRIAL PARK - An industrial park is an industrial area--
1. Organized and laid out in accordance with an overall plan for a community of industries
including the servicing of these industries, and
2. Designed to insure compatibility between the industrial operations in the park and the
surrounding area through such devices as landscaping, architectural control, setbacks, and
use requirements.
JUNK - Any discarded material or article including, but not limited to, scrap metal, scrapped,
abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers, and
structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the
purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNKYARD - A lot, land or structure, or part thereof used primarily for the collecting, storage
and sale of waste paper rags, scrap metal or discarded material, or for the abandonment,
collecting, dismantling, demolition, storage and salvaging of machinery, or vehicles not in
running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
KENNEL - A facility for keeping of dogs for breeding; boarding or other purpose involving
remuneration to the owner.
LARGE CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION - Any operation involving
the keeping of livestock of the types listed in Volume 40, Code of Federal Regulations (July 1,
2003 revision) Part 122, Subpart A, §122.23(b)(4)(i through xiii) in excess of the threshold
numbers identified in subsections i through xiii for such type of livestock.
LANDSCAPING – The planting of turf, trees, shrubs and other appropriate vegetative materials
and ground cover within the open areas of a lot other than for agricultural purposes, and
including the maintenance and replacement thereof, for the purposes of erosion control, retention
of precipitation, protection against the elements and promotion of human comfort and welfare.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING – Manufacturing uses which do not involve objectionable odors,
fumes, dirt, vibrations, noise or glare. Added 8/5/13
LOADING SPACE - An off-street space suitable for the loading or unloading of goods and
having direct usable access to a street or alley.
LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise permitted by
law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. "lot" shall include all land included within
the definition of a "tract" unless division of such tract has been approved by the Township after
January 5, 1976, by reason of approval of a subdivision plan approving such division.
LOT COVERAGE – That portion of a lot covered by impervious surfaces such as, but not
limited to, buildings, parking areas, driveways, ect. This definition does not include impervious
surfaces within a street right-of-way
LOT WIDTH - The lot width of a lot measured at the street right-of-way line.
MANUFACTURING – The making, processing or fabrication of raw material into a finished or
partially finished product. Added 8/5/13
MANURE STORAGE FACILITY - Any area where manure produced by animals is stored
including lagoons, runoff ponds, stockpiles, under house or pit storage, liquid impoundments,
static piles and composting piles. It does not include fields where such manure is ultimately
disposed.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT - Any establishment or business which provides the services
of massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body in
all forms and methods of psychotherapy. This definition does not include establishments where
sexual conduct or sexual activity occurs nor does it include an establishment where massage
services are performed by individuals in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
MOBILE HOME - A single family dwelling designed for transportation after fabrication on
streets and highways on its own wheels or on flat bed or other trailers and arriving at the site
where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations,
connections to utilities and the like. Not to include mobile dwelling units.
MOBILE HOME PARK - Any lot, parcel, tract, or contiguous tracts or lots, whether or not
separated by public or private roads, and whether or not separated by parcels adversed from the
original tract or parcel, owned by the same person or persons or corporation, (for this purpose
any person shall be considered to own all tracts or lots owned by himself, his spouse, or by a
corporation or partnership in which he and/or his spouse together own at least fifty percent
(50%) of the outstanding voting stock of the corporation or at least fifty percent (50%) of the
ownership equity in the partnership), and designed, maintained, or used for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodation for two or more mobile homes, or upon which two or
more mobile homes are parked or located; and the owner of the property in question receives
consideration directly or indirectly for the use of the space occupied by the mobile home; and
shall include all buildings and structures used or intended for use as a part of the equipment
thereof. The term “mobile home park” shall not include any automobile, mobile home, or trailer
sales lot on which any unoccupied mobile home is parked for the purpose of inspection and sale
and shall not include a mobile home occupied by a family headed by an individual employed as a
farm worker on a full-time basis by the owner of the property in question.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING - A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units (such
as apartment houses and garden apartments) or two (2) dwelling units arranged so that one unit is
above the other rather than side by side. All dwelling units are located on a single lot and share
with other units a common yard area.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS - A special type of home occupation administered
or conducted as an accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling
and which involves neither customer, client or patient traffic nor pickup, delivery or removal
functions, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The activity must further
satisfy the requirements of Section 303A of this ordinance.
NONCONFORMITY - A use, structure, or lot (1) existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance, or (2) existing at any subsequent amendment of this Ordinance, or (3) created by
variance, and in conflict with the regulations of this Ordinance. Specifically, the following types
of nonconformities are distinguished:
NONCONFORMING LOT - A lot which does not conform to a dimensional regulation
prescribed by this ordinance for the district in which it is located but which lot, if in any district
excepting the Residential II District, was lawfully in existence in its present configuration prior
to January 5, 1976, and the owner or owners of same did not on January 5, 1976,own adjacent
land which could be added to the lot to make it conforming, and if in the Residential II District
was lawfully in existence in its present configuration on December 6, 1976, and the owner or
owners of same did not on December 6, 1976, own adjacent land which could be added to the lot
to make it conforming. If the owner or owners of such lot owned adjacent land, the lot includes
such additional adjacent land and is not a nonconforming lot.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - A structure not designed for a use permitted in the zone
in which the structure is located.
NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDING - A use carried on within any building, which is
not a type of use permitted in the zone in which the building is located.
NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND - A use of open land (e.g.; junk yards) which is not a
use permitted in the zone in which the land is located. The openness of land is to be gauged by
the substantiality of structures affixed to the ground.
DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY - A lot or structure, which is nonconforming because it
is not in compliance with the extent-of-use or dimensional regulations of this Ordinance.
VARIANCE - A modification of any provision of this Ordinance granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY - The showing of the human male or female genital, pubic
area; or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breasts with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, public hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region, or pubic hair region; or
the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breasts,
which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
NURSERY SCHOOL - A facility designed and operated to provide regular instruction and
daytime care for two (2) or more children under the age of elementary school students. No
portion of a nursery school or of a building, which is used as a nursery school shall be used as a
family residence.
NURSING HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME - A building or structure in which nursing
care and related medical or other health services are provided for a period exceeding twenty-four
(24) hours for two (2) or more individuals who are not relatives of the operator, who are not
acutely ill and not in need of hospitalization, but who, because of age, illness, disease, injury,
convalescence or physical or medical infirmity need such care.
OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL USE - A use of open land for leisure time activities such as a
beach, swimming pool, tennis court, riding stable, golf course, or a drive-in theater.
PARCEL - All contiguous land owned by the same land owner and all land owned by the same
land owner that is contiguous except for the presence of public or private roads, the presence of
lots or parcels adversed from the original tract since January 5, 1976, and/or by utility rights of
way irrespective of whether the right of way is owned in fee or is an easement. Amended 8/6/12
PARKING GARAGE - A building where passenger vehicles may be stored for short-term,
daily or overnight off-street parking.
PARKING LOT - An open lot where passenger vehicles may be stored for short-term, daily or
overnight off-street parking.
PARKING SPACE - An off-street space available for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle and
having direct usable access to a street or alley.
PASTURE – Land in grass and/or legumes primarily used or formerly used primarily for
grazing. Pasture land includes land which is occasionally used for field crops less than one year
in seven or which has been periodically renovated with rye grass, wheat, oats, ect. for grazing.
Such land may contain shade trees or scattered timber trees with less than ten percent 10%
canopy, but principal plant cover identifies its use as permanent grazing land. Added 6/2/08
PERSONAL CARE HOME - A building or structure in which food, shelter, and personal
assistance and/or supervision are provided for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours for four
(4) or more adults who are not relatives of the operator and who do not require the services in,
or, of a "nursing home" but do require assistance or supervision in matters such a dressing,
bathing, diet, financial matters, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency or
medication prescribed for self-administration.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND- Land containing soils in Soil Capability Units classified as
Class 1, 2, or 3 as depicted on maps prepared by the York County Planning Commission for
Peach Bottom Township, which maps are based on the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Soil Survey of York County dated 2002. Amended 1/7/08
PRINCIPAL USE - The main or primary use of property or structures, measured in terms of net
floor area.
PRINCIPAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (PSES): An area of land or other area used for a
solar collection system principally used to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy or
thermal power, and supply electrical or thermal power primarily for off-site use. Principal solar
energy systems consist of one (1) or more free-standing ground, or roof mounted solar collector
devices, solar related equipment and other accessory structures and buildings including light
reflectors, concentrators, and heat exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission
lines and other appurtenant structures.
PUBLIC SEWER - A municipal sanitary sewer system or a comparable common or package
sanitary facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
PUBLIC WATER - A municipal water supply system or a comparable common water facility
approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
RELATIVES - For purposes of this Ordinance, relatives shall include ancestors, direct
descendants, first cousins, nephews, nieces, grandnephews and grandnieces.
ROOMING HOUSE - A building containing a single dwelling unit and guest rooms, where
lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
SCHOOL - A place of instruction, either public or private, other than a commercial school.
School, Commercial - A school conducted for profit for such special instruction as business, art,
music, trades, handicraft, dancing or riding.
SCREEN PLANTING - A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to conceal from
the view of property owners in adjoining zones the structures and uses on the premises on which
the screen planting is located.
SEMI-NUDITY - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic
region, and areola of the female breasts together with portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.
SETBACK - The horizontal distance between a building and a property or street line.
Setback, Front - The distance between the street line and the front building line projected the
full width of the lot, Commonly called "front yard."
Setback, rear - The distance between the rear lot line and the rear building line projected the
full width of the lot. Commonly called "rear yard."
Setback, Side - The distance between the side lot line and the side building line projected
from the front yard to the rear yard. Commonly called "side yard."
SEXUAL CONDUCT OR SEXUAL ACTIVITY - This includes any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts;
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy;
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
SHOPPING CENTER - A group of stores planned and designed for the site on which it is built,
functioning as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property as an integral part of the
unit.
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING - A portion of a building containing one (1)
dwelling unit and having two (2) party walls in common with other dwelling units (such as row
houses or townhouses). Each dwelling unit is located on a single lot. End units which have one
(1) party wall in common are included and are subject to the lot area requirements for other
single family attached units but must meet setback requirements on the open side.
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING - A building containing only one (1) dwelling
unit and having two (2) side yards.
SINGLE FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING - A portion of a building containing one
(1) dwelling unit, having one (1) side yard, and one (1) party wall in common with another
dwelling unit. Amended 3/5/12
SIGN - A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject to the attention of the
public, but not including lettering or symbols that are an integral part of another structure or flags
or other insignia of any government, government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious,
fraternal, or similar organization.
SIGN, ADVERTISING - A sign whose major purpose is for directing attention to a business
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same
lot, such as billboards.
SIGN, BUSINESS - a sign directing attention to a business or profession conducted on the same
lot or, as incidental to a business, to products sold upon the same lot.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL - A sign which is for directing patrons or attendants to an establishment
off the main-traveled highway or to service clubs, churches, or other nonprofit organizations.
SIGN, FREESTANDING - A sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground and
not attached to a building.
SIGN, PROJECTING - A sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends
beyond the line of a building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or
structure to which it is attached.
SOLAR EASEMENT: A solar easement means a right, expressed as an easement, restriction,
covenant, or condition contained in any deed, contract, or other written instrument executed by or
on behalf of any landowner for assuring adequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and/or reflective) received from the sun.
SOLAR PANEL: That part or portion of a solar energy system containing one or more receptive
cells or modules, the purpose of which is to convert solar energy for use in space heating or
cooling, for water heating and/or for electricity.
SOLAR RELATED EQUIPMENT: Items including a solar photovoltaic cell, module, panel, or
array, or solar hot air or water collector device panels, lines, pumps, batteries, mounting
brackets, framing and possibly foundations or other structures used for or intended to be used for
collection of solar energy.
1. SOLAR ARRAY: A grouping of multiple solar modules with purpose of harvesting
solar energy.
2. SOLAR CELL: The smallest basic solar electric device that generates electricity
when exposed to light.
3. SOLAR MODULE: A grouping of solar cells with the purpose of harvesting solar
energy.
Module
Module
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS –
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered: (1) human genitals, pubic regions; (2)
buttock; and (3) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
STORY - That portion of a building, excluding cellars, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space
between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
T
,_
!
l
STORY, HALF - A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least
two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor.
STREET - A public or private way, excluding driveways, which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
STREET GRADES - The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts or in
its absence established grade of other streets upon which the lot abuts, at the mid way of the
frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the
street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE - The dividing line between the street and lot, also known as right-of-way line.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - Any change in or addition to the supporting members of a
structure.
STRUCTURE - Any combination of materials forming any construction, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL - A body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other
container eighteen (18) inches or more in depth, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic
or privet swimming by adults or children.
TRACT - As applied to land in all districts excepting the Residential II District, "tract" shall
include all land which was owned by the same owner or owners on January 5, 1976, and is
contiguous. As applied to land in the Residential II District, "tract" shall include all land which
was owned by the same owner or owners on December 6, 1976, and is contiguous. Land shall be
considered contiguous even though separated by public or private roads, by utility rights-of-way
irrespective of whether the right-of-way is owned in fee or is an easement, and/or by land
adversed from the original tract since June 15, 1964.
TRAILER CAMP - A tract of land:
a. Where two (2) or more travel trailers, motor home or campers are parked, or
b. Which is used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for
two (2) or more travel trailers, motor homes or campers.
TRAVEL TRAILER - A vehicle, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses permanently identified "Travel
Trailer" by the manufacturer on the trailer. Unoccupied travel trailers do not constitute mobile
homes, as used in this Ordinance.
TRIANGULAR LOT - A lot which when surveyed has only three sides and three bearings and
distances.
USE - The specific purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended,
occupied or maintained.
1. Accessory Use - A subordinate use listed in Part ll under the use regulations for each
Zoning District, normally located on the same lot with a principal use.
2. Principal Use - The primary purpose or purposes for which a lot is occupied as listed in
the use regulations for each Zoning and District and contained in Part ll. If more than one
principal use occupies a single lot, each such use must positioned so that the lot on which
uses are located could subsequently be subdivided, separating each use yet meeting all
applicable District dimensional requirements.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM - A device or system of components and
apparatus which converts wind energy into mechanical or electrical energy. Added 5/3/10
WOODLAND –
A. Land at least ten percent (10%) stocked by forest trees of any size capable of
producing timber, pulpwood or other wood products;
B. Land from which trees have been cut but the land has not been prepared for other
use; or
C. Afforested (planted) areas. Land freshly clear cut and smoothed for crops or
pasture or prepared for development, is considered development for other use and
is included within the definition of such anticipated use. Added 6/2/08
YARD - The portions of a lot not occupied by a dwelling.
Front Yard - The open unoccupied space on the same lot with the dwelling extending the full
width of the dwelling projected to the sidelines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be
measured between the street line and the most proximate point on the dwelling. For purposes
of defining a front yard, porches, uncovered stairs and landings to the main floor shall be
considered as part of the dwelling.
Rear Yard - The open unoccupied space on the same lot with the dwelling extending the full
width of the dwelling projected to the sidelines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be
measured between the rear lot line and the most proximate point of the dwelling. This
definition shall not include attached unenclosed structures as defined in this Ordinance.
Side Yard - The open unoccupied space on the same lot with the dwelling, situated between
the dwelling and the side lot line, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot
line not a front lot line or a rear lot line shall be deemed a side lot line.
V-15
B. BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION
SECTION 502
If the construction is completed by one (1) year after effective date, a building, the foundation of
which was completed before effective date, may be constructed without being bound by the
requirements of this Ordinance. In like manner, a building, the foundation of which was
completed before an amendment, may be constructed if the construction is completed within one
(1) year after the amendment.
C. DIVISION OF BUILT-ON LOTS
SECTION 503
No lot may be formed from part of a lot occupied by a building unless each newly-created lot
will meet all the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
D. ERRONEOUS PERMIT
SECTION 504
A building permit or other permit or authorization issued or approved in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance, is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation.
Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such a permit or other authorization is
unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency, or employee of the Township purporting
to validate such a violation.
E. INTERPRETATION
SECTION 505
In their interpretation and application the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, Ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing
the higher standards shall govern.
V-16
F. REPEALER
SECTION 506
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance or inconsistent with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this
Ordinance full force and effect.
G. VALIDITY
SECTION 507
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole
or any part whereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
H. EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 508
This Ordinance shall take effect five days after enactment.
Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township York County, Pennsylvania
and enacted and ordained into an Ordinance this 6th day of May, 1991.
Board of Supervisors_____
Peach Bottom Township____
York County, Pennsylvania
By: /s/ S. David Stewart, Chairman____
/s/ John V. Johnson, Vice-Chairman
/s/ Joseph F. Ailes_______________
Updated to January 1, 2019 to the best of my knowledge – Catherine M. Bilger, Secretary
V-17
AN ORDINANCE TO PROHIBIT LITTERING IN PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP,
YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania that:
1. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to throw or place
any waste paper, sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass, metal, refuse, rubbish or any
dangerous or detrimental substances into or upon any road, street, highway or alley or
upon the land of another or into or upon any stream in Peach Bottom Township.
2. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any individual, corporation,
partnership, firm or other business entity to authorize or permit any individual to place or
throw any waste paper, sweeping, ashes, household waste, glass, metal, refuse, rubbish,
or any dangerous or detrimental substance owned by such person, corporation, firm, or
business entity into or upon any street, highway or alley or upon the land of another or
into or upon any stream in Peach Bottom Township.
3. Any person, partnership, firm, or other business entity violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of six hundred ($600.00) dollars,
which penalty may be collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the name of
the Township before any District Justice. Each day in which any waste paper, sweeping,
ashes, household waste, glass, metal, refuse, rubbish, or any dangerous or detrimental
substance remains upon any road, street, highway or alley or upon the land of another or
into or upon any stream in Peach Bottom Township after having been placed there in
violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to
separate and distinct penalties.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania on this 4th day of September, 1979
Amended: April 6, 1992
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE OF
THE TOWNSHIP OF PEACH BOTTOM, YORK COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, BY
REGULATING STORAGE PRACTICES, MANNER OF COLLECTION, AND
METHODS OF DISPOSAL OF REFUSE; REQUIRING THAT ALL REFUSE
COLLECTORS BE LICENSED; AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR ANY
VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Short Title This Ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township
Refuse Ordinance”
SECTION 2. Definitions
A. The term “garbage” shall mean all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
B. The term “ashes” shall mean the residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal,
coke or other combustible material.
C. The term “rubbish” shall include glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood, or nonputrescrible
solid waste.
D. The term “refuse” shall mean all solid wastes except body waste and shall include
garbage, ashes and rubbish.
E. The term “disposal” shall include the storage, collection, disposal or handling of
refuse.
F. The term “person” shall include any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
G. The term “bulky rubbish” shall include discarded furniture, large household
appliances such as refrigerator, washing machines, bathtubs, sinks and commodes.
H. The term “dwelling unit” shall mean any house, apartment, group of rooms or part
of a building occupied or suitable for occupancy by a single family unit.
I. The term “business establishment” shall mean any office, hotel, motel, boarding
house, and any building, group of buildings or part of a building occupied or capable of
being used for the conduct of a business, commercial, industrial or institutional
purpose.
J. Other: the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
SECTION 3. Preparation of Refuse and Storage Practices
Refuse Preparation
A. Garbage shall be drained and stored in durable, rust-resisting, nonabsorbent,
watertight, easily washable containers, equipped with handles and tight-fitting covers.
B. Ashes shall be stored in fire-resistant containers equipped with handles and tightfitting
covers. Ashes containing hot embers shall not be collected until they have been
adequately quenched.
C. Rubbish shall be stored in durable containers with tight-fitting covers. Tree trimming,
hedge clippings, old newspapers and similar materials, which cannot be conveniently
placed in the aforementioned containers shall be baled, tied or stacked in compact
bundles less than three (3) feet in length and placed in a location easily accessible to the
collector.
D. Bulky rubbish shall not be allowed to accumulate on any premises except in
containers which are approved by the Township Supervisors in accordance with the
specifications contained in the Ordinance.
E. No person shall place refuse in a street, alley, or other public place, or upon any
private property within the limits of the Township of Peach Bottom, unless it is placed in
a proper refuse container for collection. No person shall place refuse in a container not
owned by him without permission from the owner of the container. Likewise, no person
shall throw or deposit refuse in any stream or any body of water.
F. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within
three (3) days after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed a violation of
same.
G. Certain material, such as scrap lumber and fire wood, may be stored and kept on the
premises, but they shall be stored so that a minimum clear space of twelve (12) inches
above the ground surface is provided.
Refuse Collection
All refuse storage shall conform to the following standards:
A. General
1. All refuse receptacles shall be provided by the owners, tenant, or occupant of
the premises, unless otherwise specified.
2. The storage of all refuse by residents of Peach Bottom Township shall be
practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects and/or
rodents and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create
safety hazards, odors, unsightliness, and public nuisance.
3. A sufficient number of containers necessary to meet the intent of paragraph 2
shall be provided to contain all waste materials generated between regularly
scheduled collections.
B. Individual Containers
1. Individual containers utilized for the storage of refuse at household and other
premises shall have the following physical characteristics:
a. Constructed in such a manner as to be easily handled for collection.
1) Not greater than fifteen (15) gallons capacity for garbage
storage.
2) Not greater than thirty-two (32) gallons capacity for refuse
storage.
b. Constructed of rust and corrosion resistant materials.
c. Be equipped with tight-fitting lids.
d. Constructed in such a manner as to be watertight, leak-proof,
weatherproof, insect-proof and rodent-proof.
e. Shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight when filled.
2. Methods of use of individual containers.
a. Containers shall not be filled to the point where the lid will not fit
properly.
b. The area around the container(s) shall be kept clean.
C. Disposable Containers
1. Disposable containers such as paper and polyethylene bags shall be acceptable
for storage of refuse provided the following conditions are met:
a. Only those bags specially designed for storage and collection shall be
used.
b. Bags are protected against precipitation, animal damage and
overloading to prevent littering or attracting of vectors.
c. Bags have holding strength capable of withstanding stresses until they
are collected.
d. Bag opening is securely closed prior to setting out for collection.
D. Bulk Containers
1. Bulk containers for multiple apartment units or for commercial, industrial and
institutional refuse shall meet the General and Individual Container Requirements
previously set forth except for size limitations. Bulk containers shall be sized
according to the type and quantity of waste production, equipment handling
capabilities, and the frequency of collection.
E. Open Storage
1. Certain wastes of a non-decomposable nature may be stored temporarily
between dates of scheduled refuse collection in a manner other than
containerization.
a. In order to minimize littering, magazines, newspapers, waste paper, tree
prunings, brush and yard trimmings, when stored outside of containers
shall be tied securely in bundles of such size as to be readily handled by
the collection system.
SECTION 4. Collection Practices
Place of Collection
A. For collection purposes, except where there is an agreement with the collector to the
contrary, refuse containers shall be placed at ground level, on the property, not within the
cartway of a street or alley and easily accessible from the side of the street or alley from
which collection is made.
Frequency of Collection
Refuse shall be collected in accordance with a regular schedule.
SECTION 5. Licensing of Refuse Collectors and Refuse Collection Vehicles
A. Only a person licensed by the Township of Peach Bottom may collect or transport
refuse within territorial limits of the said Township.
B. Only a vehicle licensed by the Township of Peach Bottom may be used for the
transportation of refuse within the territorial limits of said Township.
C. Any one applying for a license to collect and/or transport refuse within the territorial
limits of Peach Bottom Township shall submit an application to the official designated by
the Board of Supervisors as the “Licensing Official.” The application shall set forth:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The identity of each vehicle for which the applicant wishes to obtain licenses
(including license plate number);
3. Include a fee of fifteen ($15.00) dollars for each vehicle for which a license is
sought;
4. Include a proposed collection schedule; and
5. Designate the place where refuse collected will be disposed.
D. The Licensing Official shall inspect each vehicle for which a license is sought and if
the requirements of this Ordinance are complied with, issue a license to the applicant and
issue a license for each vehicle which meets the requirements of Section 6 of this
Ordinance.
E. The licensed collector shall place and maintain in each licensed vehicle the license for
that vehicle.
F. The licensed collector shall inform the Licensing Official of any change in license
plate numbers or other changes in identification of any licensed vehicle.
G. All licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issue unless
earlier revoked.
H. Failure of a licensed collector to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall
result in the revocation of his license.
I. The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to prevent a person from
collecting and transporting refuse originating on his property provided that such person
prevents such refuse from blowing or falling from his vehicle.
SECTION 6. Collection Vehicles
A. Except for the collection of bulky rubbish as defined in Section 2(G) of this
Ordinance, all vehicles used for the collection of refuse shall:
1. Be suitably enclosed so as to prevent refuse from blowing or falling from the
vehicle. The fact that refuse does blow or fall from the vehicle shall be
considered evidence that it is in violation of this section;
2. At all times display a currently valid Pennsylvania certificate of inspection.
SECTION 7. Penalties Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this Ordinance
shall upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate be subject to a penalty in the amount of
three hundred ($300) one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each and every offense. Each and
every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
SECTION 8. Effective Date This Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after enactment.
Ordained and Enacted by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township, York
County Pennsylvania, on the 3rd day of September, 1985
Amended April 6, 1992
ATTEST: BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF
PEACH BOTTOM
J Rush Baldwin Albert M Steele
Secretary Chairman
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE REGISTRATION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS IN
PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP AND OF THE OCCUPANTS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
I. This Ordinance shall be known as the Peach Bottom Township Rental Dwelling
Ordinance.
II. Definitions:
A. Landlord is defined as the record owner, as indicated by the records in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for York County, Pennsylvania, of
any real estate located in the Township of Peach Bottom, which real estate
is being utilized as the residence of one or more persons other than the
landlord and his immediate household. The term landlord shall include
natural persons, partnerships, associations, and corporations.
B. Tenant is defined as any individual eighteen (18) years of age or older
residing in premises owned by a “landlord” as defined in this section. One
may be a tenant if residing in premises owned by a “landlord” even if no
rent or other consideration has been paid.
III. Landlord’s Obligation
A. Within ten (10) days after any tenant has moved into a landlord’s
premises, the landlord shall inform the Secretary of Peach Bottom
Township, in writing, of the name and address of such tenant or tenants, as
well as the date on which such tenant or tenants moved into the premises.
B. Within ten (10) days after any tenant has vacated a landlord’s
premises, the landlord shall inform the Secretary of Peach Bottom
Township, in writing, of the name and address of such tenant or
tenants, as well as the date on which such tenant or tenants vacated
the premises.
C. Each landlord shall insure that a contract exists with a refuse
collector approved pursuant to the Peach Bottom Township Refuse
Ordinance to remove refuse originating from each dwelling
occupied by one or more tenants as defined in this ordinance, at
least weekly with such landlord being ultimately responsible to
such refuse collector for payment.
IV. Current Tenants
A. Landlord shall notify the Secretary of Peach Bottom Township, in
writing within ten (10) days after the effective date of this ordinance of the
names, addresses, and approximate dates of entry of tenants currently
residing in the landlord’s premises.
V. Penalties
A. Any person, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars which penalty may be collected by suit or
summary proceedings brought in the name of the Township before any
District Justice.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania, on the ____3____ day of __March___, 1980.
ATTEST: PEACH BOTTOM TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
_______________________________ By___________________________
Secretary Chairman
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE TRANSFER OF DWELLING LOTS IN PEACH
BOTTOM TOWNSHIP; REQUIRING THE PUMPING OF ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEMS; PROVIDING FOR THE INSPECTION OF ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEMS; AND PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom
Township, York County, Pennsylvania as follows:
SECTION I. DEFINITIONS:
A. Dwelling Lot – A lot, tract, or parcel of land containing one or more dwelling
units or commercial or industrial structures.
B. Dwelling Unit – A building or structure containing one or more rooms arranged
for the use of one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
C. Commercial or Industrial Structure – A structure designed for use as a place
from which to manufacture, fabricate, work with, store or sell any items.
D. Title to Real Estate:
(1) Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including, without
limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
(2) Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but,
which, either by reason of the length of the term of the grant of a right to extend the term by
renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of thirty (30) days or more or a
leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
(3) Any interest in real estate which will upon satisfaction of obligations
contained in a certain agreement will entitle the purchaser to obtain an interest in the real estate
described in subparagraphs (1) or (2) above provided possession is or is to be transferred pursuant
to such agreement and prior to the completion of the obligations set forth in such agreement.
E. On-Site Sewage Disposal System – Any system of sewage disposal other than a
public sewer system.
F. Public Sewer System – A municipal sanitary sewer system approved and
permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
G. Transfer – Any grant or conveyance of legal or equitable title to real estate,
excepting, that all transactions excluded from real estate transfer taxes by reason of the provisions
of Section 1102-C (3) of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Law (72 P.S. &8102-C(3)) shall be
excluded.
H. Real Estate Agent – Any “broker” or “sales person” as defined in the Real
Estate Licensing Act. (63 P.S. &455.201) who receives a fee, commission, or other valuable
consideration by reason of the transfer.
I. Settlement Agent – Any person, firm, or corporation including an attorney, title
abstractor, or title company as defined in the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C.
&.2602), who performs settlement services as defined in the Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act (12 U.S.C. &.2602).
SECTION II. UNLAWFUL ACTS - It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer title to
real estate upon which is located either a dwelling unit or a commercial or industrial structure, and
it shall be unlawful for a real estate agent or settlement agent to receive any commission, fee or
other compensation on account of such transfer unless within one hundred twenty (120) day
period immediately preceding such transfer the Peach Bottom Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer has executed a document certifying that within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding
such certification he has verified that the on-site sewage disposal system serving the property
being transferred has been pumped, and that such sewage disposal system was not on the date of
his inspection, which must be within thirty (30) days of the date of his certification,
malfunctioning so as to permit sewage effluent, gray water or other materials to flow to the surface
of the ground or into the waters of the Commonwealth in violation of the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the regulations issued pursuant thereto and that all parts
and components of the system are present and functioning as designed, or in the alternative a new
sewage disposal system meeting current Pennsylvania and Township regulations has been
installed or alternatively that this property being transferred is not supplied with water under
pressure and any facility providing for the sewage needs of the property is in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, the regulations issued pursuant thereto and with applicable
Township Ordinances.
SECTION III. MALFUNCTIONS - In the event the inspection by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer reveals any on-site sewage disposal system malfunctioning to the surface of
the ground or into the waters of the Commonwealth in violation of the previous section, prior to
transferring the tract, parcel or lot of ground served by the malfunctioning sewage system, the
owner thereof shall perform such tests as may be required, and shall follow all of the procedures
and time schedules for repair or replacement of such system as are set forth in Section II of the
Peach Bottom Township Sewage Permit Ordinance. In the event the inspection reveals that parts
or components of the system are not present or not functioning as designed, prior to transferring
the tract, parcel or lot of ground, the owners shall cause such repairs and/or replacements to be
completed as are necessary to cause all parts and components of the system to be present and the
system to function as designed.
SECTION IV. OBLIGATION OF PURCHASER OF LOT, TRACT OR PARCEL
CONVEYED IN VIOLATION OF SECTION II - In the event a lot, tract or parcel shall be
transferred in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the owner or owners thereof shall
within ten (10) days of being notified of the illegal transfer cause the sewage disposal system
serving such property to be pumped and cause the system to be inspected by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
SECTION V. FEES – The owner of any lot, tract or parcel required to be inspected
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance shall, prior to such inspection, pay to Peach Bottom
Township an inspection fee in an amount as shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
SECTION VI. PENALTIES - Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of
any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars for each and every violation. Any transfer in violation of the requirements of
this Ordinance may involve a violation by one or more real estate agents, one or more settlement
agents, and or one or more sellers, each of whom shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of
One Thousand ($ 1,000.00) Dollars.
SECTION VII. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as the “Peach Bottom Township
Sewage Inspection and Pumping Ordinance”.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Peach Bottom Township,
York County, Pennsylvania on this 3 day of August , 1998.
AMENDED this 7 day of April , 2003.
ATTEST:
Amended March 4, 2013